









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Marke: Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 28, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Cha.rman 
Balderston 
Daane 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Irons, Alternate for Mr. Bryan

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, and Clay, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Holland, Koch, and 

Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Associate Advisor, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors



9/28/65

Mr. Patterson, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Link, Eastburn, Mann, Parthemos, Brandt, 
Jones, Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. MacLaury, Manager, Foreign Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings 
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 
August 31 and September 8, 1965, were approved.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the action was ratified that 
had been taken by members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee on September 14, 1965, authoriz
ing use of the authority for covered purchases of 
sterling in a manner involving combined System
Treasury participation in the program of assistance 
to Britain in the amount of $400 million, shared 
equally by the System and the Treasury, rather 
than the lesser of this sum or 40 per cent of the 
total amount of assistance to Britain.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

August 31 through September 22, 1965, and a supplemental report for 

September 23 through 27, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed

in the files of the Committee.

-2-



9/28/65

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said the gold stock would remain unchanged again this week, and the 

Stabilization Fund was expected to finish the month with holdings of 

about $70 million. France would be buying about $50 million in gold 

on September 30, on the basis of its adjusted reserve gains in August.  

The effecc of that French purchase on U.S. reserves would be offset, 

however, by a sale of $50 million of gold by the Bank of England. The 

British sale was arranged toward the end of August to help keep U.S.  

gold losses at a minimum during a period of more than usual uncertanties.  

It looked as though the International Monetary Fund gold mitiga

tion arrangement would be put in operation very shortly, Mr. MacLaury 

said. As the Committee would recall, that arrangement involved the 

deposit with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York by the IMF of gold 

purchased from .he U.S. by countries making their gold subscription to 

the IMF as part of their quota increases. That deposited gold would 

continue to be shown as part of the total U.S. gold stock, but the 

amount due to the IMF on demand would be identified in monthly data in 

much the same manner as was the $800 million sold to the U.S. several 

years ago under repurchase option by the IMF to obtain investment income.  

In the London gold market, Mr. MacLaury continued, the price had 

remained in a fairly narrow range during September--$35.11-1/2 to $35.15-

with Russia continuing on the sidelines. The gold pool, which was able 

to distribute $74 million to its members early this month on the basis



9/28/65 -4

of August's operations, had on balance lost about $30 million so far 

in September. The cumulative deficit thus had risen again to about 

$155 million. That decline reflected not only the absence of Russia, 

but also a smaller volume of gold coming on the market from new 

production and from South African reserves; and, as had been learned 

just yesterday, some renewed buying by Communist China through 

Switzerland, starting last week. The Chinese purchases helped explain 

why turnover had remained at higher levels than had been expected 

after quieting down following the Pakistan-India hostilities.  

Since the last meeting, Mr. MacLaury went on, the focus of 

attention in the exchange markets had been, more than ever, on 

sterling. To date, at least, there was every reason to be encouraged 

by the market response to the central bank operation that had been 

put into action on September 10. Since that date, the Bank of England 

had taken in more than $350 million from the market while the spot 

rate had been bid up--at first by official intervention, and then by 

the market itself--some 80 points, from 2.7918 to nearly parity, des,ite 

the announcement of mediocre U.K. trade figures for August and the 

unsettling effects of the Pakistan-India war. In view of the importance 

of events in the sterling market, the day-to-day (and, during the first 

day, the hour-to-hour) account of that operation and the market's 

response had been spelled out in more detail than usual in the written 

reports submitted to the Committee.



9/28/65

In general outline, Mr. MacLaury said, the sequence was this: 

On Friday, September 10, following negotiaticns of which the Committee 

was aware, the Bank of England announced at 2:00 p.m. London time 

(9:00 a.m. New York time) that it had entered into new arrangements, 

in various--unspecified--forms, with all of the banks that had 

cooperated in support of sterling last November except the Bank of 

France. The announcement, which the New York Bank read immediately 

to the exchange trading rooms of banks in the New York market, said 

that the arrangements would enable appropriate action to be taken in 

the exchange markets. As soon as all of the banks had been advised, 

the System Account began to bid the fourteen banks simultaneously for 

a total of £ 10 million on each round of bids, gradually raising the 

bid in corsultation with the Bank of England as the market backed away, 

and buying only a small amount. By the close in New York that Friday, 

the System had bought only $13 million equivalent of sterling while 

raising the market price some 25 points.  

With the European markets already moving toward their pre-weekend 

close by the time the announcement by the Bank of England was released 

on Friday, Mr. MacLaury said, it was not to be expected that there would 

be any sudden move to cover in size that day. The following week, however, 

there was a surge of buying, mainly from London and the continent, as the 

markets became persuaded that the cooperating central banks had the means 

and the determination to make speculation against sterling costly. During



9/28/65 -6

the week following the announcement the Bank of England took in 

$230 million as the rate rose another 40 points without official 

intervention. The initial rush to cover near-term commitments was 

quite naturally most evident during the first week following the ini

tiation of the operation. Last week, the week of September 20, the 

markets were much less hectic, and on a few occasions the rate started 

to drift off in light trading. However, it took only a small amount 

of intervention by the Federal Reserve in New York and the Bank of 

England in London to turn the market around again, and by the end of 

last week the spot rate was up another 10 points and the Bank of 

England on balance had taken in almost $50 million. Yesterday that 

Bank took in $35 million and today another $40 million, raising their 

total acquisitions since the announcement to about $350 million. That 

figure did not include some amounts taken in prior to the current 

operation.  

Mr. MacLaury went on to say that the ;olt administered to the 

market by the central bank operation carried over into the forward 

market as well, although no intervention was undertaken in that area.  

The discount on three-month sterling, which had been about 2-1/2 per 

cent at the beginning of September, narrowed to less than 1-3/4 per 

cent, cutting the theoretical arbitrage advantage in favor of New York 

considerably, to about 1/4 per cent today. While that strengthening 

of sterling forwards undoubtedly reflected some covering of open



9/28/65 -7

positions, his impression was that the covering done so far had been 

largely by outright speculators or by those with near-term commitments.  

The vast bulk of the hedging and commercial covering operations still 

remained to be reversed, and while there was every reason to believe 

that if economic conditions in the U.K. continued to improve those 

positions would be closed out, it was difficult to gauge the timing 

of the covering. There was no doubt, however, that market sentiment 

regarding the short-run prospects for sterling had changed completely 

within just a little over a month. That change, based partly on the 

technical strength resulting from the oversold position of sterling 

and partly on the measures dealing with prices and incomes announced 

by the U.K. government, was beginning to take place even before the 

central bank operation was put into effect. However, it was the 

announcement of new central bank arrangements, followed up immediately 

by forceful concerted action in the market, that provided the catalyst 

to translate changed sentiment into market response.  

For the longer run, Mr. MacLaury remarked, it was clear that 

many hurdles still remained to be cleared and it was essential, 

therefore, that the U.K. authorities not let up their efforts to achieve 

their stated balance of payments objectives. Whatever the developments 

during succeeding weeks might be, however, the operation, as he had 

said at the outset, had clearly been very useful and had cost very 

little. It had not been necessary for the Bank of England to call



9/28/65 -8

upon any of the facilities made available by the other participating 

central banks and the Bank for International Settlements, and the 

total amount of sterling acquired by the System in the operation to 

date--and thus subject to the exchange guarantee--had been only a 

little over $20 million equivalent, as against $350 million taken 

in by the Bank of England.  

As far as other currencies were concerned, Mr. MacLaury said, 

the turnaround in sterling had had less effect on continental rates 

against the dollar than might have been expected. In the cases of 

the French and Belgian francs, there definitely had been some easing 

against the dollar which could be ascribed to covering into sterling.  

Although it was difficult to keep track of changes in French reserves, 

it appeared that they had risen by perhaps $35 million so far this 

month with almost all of the increase occurring in the first few clays 

of the month prior to the announcement of the sterling arrangements.  

The flow of dollars into Italy, while continuing to be sizable, had 

tapered off noticeably, but the change was due less to the recovery 

of sterling than to the tapering off of seasonal inflows. The Italian 

authorities were continuing to increase their dollar swaps with the 

commercial banks, thus reducing published reserve gains. In Germany 

and the Netherlands, any tendency toward easing had been offset by 

some tightening in the domestic money markets associated with tax 

dates. The rise in German reserves during September reflected mainly,



9/28/65 -9

if not entirely, the unwinding of previous central bank swaps with the 

German commercial banks, not new inflows of funds. In general, changes 

in continental currency rates and, for that matter, in the rate on the 

Canadian dol:ar had been limited.  

Mr. MacLaury noted that Mr. Sanford had reported at the August 31 

meeting that the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada had agreed to use 

90-day U.S. Treasury bill rates as the basis for interest rate charges 

under swap drawings. Since then the Bank of Japan also had agreed to 

that procedure, thus putting all of the arrangements except that with 

the National Bank of Belgium on the same footing in that respect.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
System open market transactions in foreign 
currencies during the period August 31 
through September 27, 1965, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury then asked the Committee's approval of renewal 

for a further period of one year of the $450 million standby swap 

arrangement with the Bank of Italy, which was due to mature October 20, 

1965. He noted that the System's drawings under that arrangement 

currently amounted to $100 million.  

Renewal for a further period of 
one year of the $450 million standby 
swap arrangement with the Bank of Italy, 
as recommended by Mr. MacLaury, was 
approved.



9/28/65 -10

Mr. MacLaury then noted that a drawing of $275 million by the 

Bank of England under its swap arrangement with the System was due 

to mature September 30 and was likely to be renewed in whole or in 

part. That would be a first renewal.  

Possible renewal for a further 
period of three months of part or all 
of the $275 million drawing by the Bank 
of England under its standby swap arrange
ment with the System was noted without 
objection, 

Mr. MacLaury reported that a Federal Reserve drawing of $48 

million under tne arrangement with the Swiss National Bank, represent

ing the remaining balance of a drawing of $60 million originally made 

in January 1965, was due to mature October 20, 1965. From the market 

point of view prospects were not good at the moment for repaying the 

drawing before maturity, and it appeared that it would have to be 

renewed for a third time.  

Mr. Shepardson observed that a third renewal would put the 

drawing into the 9-12 month category, bringing it close to the limit 

of one year the Committee had placed on drawings under the swap lines.  

He hoped that there were definite plans to repay the drawing within 

the next three months.  

Mr. MacLaury commented that there was no question in his mind 

but that the drawing would be repaid in the coming period, in accordance 

with the Committee's guidelines.



9/28/65

Renewal of the $48 million drawing 
under the standby swap arrangement with 
the Swiss National Bank for a further 
period of three months was noted without 
objection.  

Finally, Mr. MacLaury noted that it was expected that the 

System's swap with the Bank for International Settlements of German 

marks for Swiss francs in the amount of $40 million equivalent would 

be rolled over for a second three-month period on October 8, 1965.  

Renewal of the German mark-Swiss 
franc swap with the Bank for International 
Settlements for a further period of three 
months was noted without objection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period August 31 through September 

22, 1965, and a supplemental report for September 23 through 27, 1965, 

Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follo.s: 

Viewed from our current vantage point, and without the 
benefit of perspective that only a longer period of time can 

provide, the highlight of the period since the last meeting 

of the Committee has been the performance of short-term rates, 

particularly bill rates, in just the past few days. For the 

first three weeks of the period since August 30, Treasury bill 

rates showed comparatively little change--the three-month rate 

hovering around 3.88 to 3.90 per cent and the six-month rate 

slowly inching up from about 4 per cent to 4.04 per cent. One

year bills were bid at rates close to the six-month level.

-11-



9/28/65

During the past week, in contrast, the three-month rate has 
moved to 3.99 per cent and the six-month rate to 4.13 per 
cent, and the one-year bill (which was bid at 4.03 per cent 
at the time of the last meeting) closed at 4.20 per cent bid 
in market trading yesterday after having, been auctioned last 
Friday at no less than 4.24 per cent.  

For the most part, the rate rise seems to be traceable 
to market apprehension about increased supplies of Treasury 
bills as the Treasury raises new cash in the closing months 
of the year. The Treasury's announcemert last Wednesday of 
a $4 billion borrowing through the issuance of two tax antic
ipation bills seemed to surprise the market both by its size 
and specific content--although certainly the market had expected 
some cash borrowing at this time. Adding to the unreceptive 
atmosphere was a rather tight money market in the wake of the 
September dividend and tax dates, particularly as reflected 
in higher dealer financing costs. Also in the background, 
various investor groups that are normally active in the bill 
market, including corporations and various State and local 
funds, appear to have had relatively light demands. Indeed, 
it would appear that many of the same factors which, a few 
months ago, were tending to produce a relatively low level 
of bill rates compared with other money market conditions are 
now being felt in reverse with resultant upward yield adjust
ments. In yesterday's regular auction for three- and six-month 
bills the average issuing rates were about 3.98 and 4.13 per 
cent, with rather cautious bidding for each bill so that some 
three-month bills were bought as high as 4.02 per cent in rate 
while the six-month issue tailed out to a rate of 4.15 per cent.  

For the recent period as a whole such measures of the general 
condition of the money market as member bank borrowing, net 
borrowed reserves, and the Federal funds rate were about unchanged 
from the level of recent months, but as already indicated there 
was a tendency toward a tighter atmosphere in the latter part of 
the period, when required reserves were running strongly above 
seasonal levels. The weight of heavy credit demands and the 
redistribution of other financial assets associated with the tax 

date pressed heavily on the central money market at the time. In 

part this seemed to result from Treasury fiscal operations, as 

balances built up to meet quarterly tax payments remained only 

briefly with money center banks and were soon channeled through

out the country to meet Treasury outpayments. The fact that the 
tax date coincided with the end of a country bank reserve period, 

after which there is typically a flow of funds from the money 

centers to country banks, tended to exaggerate the process.

-12-



9/28/65

The combination of these factors produced a substantial 
demand for reserve balances, from banks both in New York and 
out of town. Demands for Federal funds expanded; the supply 
diminished and there was a gradual increase in the willingness 
of banks to pay the 4-1/4 per cent rate for Federal funds.  
It was in this atmosphere that the market experienced, last 
Friday, the first occurrence of a 4-1/4 per cent effective 
Federal funds rate with slightly more money moving at that 
rate than at 4-1/8 per cent. Another factor in the banks' 
willingness to pay up for Federal funds. in a few instances 
at least, has apparently been the desire to avoid repeated 
borrowing at the discount window. Majo banks have also been 
more aggressive in their efforts to replace the large volume 
of certificates of deposit which matured over the dividend and 
tax dates. In this connection rates of 4-1/2 per cent have 
been offered by New York City banks for maturities of six months 
or less. In the last day or two some of these special influ
ences have been reversed--notably, the basic reserve deficiency 
of the major New York City banks has declined substantially-
but some effects of the recent tightness, have lingered on.  

Through most of September, the market for Treasury notes 
and bonds tended to fluctuate indecisively after moving lower 
in price during the previous month. With an assist from System 
purchases in the early part of September and intermittent 
buying by Treasury accounts throughout the month, prices 
steadied in the intermediate area, although longer bonds 
continued to drift downward--apparently reflecting some con
tinued supplies from investors switching into corporate 
securities. The corporate market itself tended to develop 
some greater assurance, as a $100 million Aaa-rated telephone 
utility offering sold out quickly on September 15, and several 
other slow-moving corporate bond offerings were distributed 
in the wake of that sale. Toward the close of the period, 
however, some of the weakness developing in the short-term 
area also permeated the markets for longer issues, and some 
further price declines occurred in the Treasury bond market; 
corporate issues held fairly steady in price but tended to 
lose the glow that had begun to develop after the successful 
sale of Aaa-rated bonds on September 15. In the meantime, 
the market in tax-exempt bonds, which had come through 
August comparatively unscathed, adjusted higher in rate 
during September as sizable price concessions were needed to 
move recent and current offerings into the portfolios of more 
reluctant buyers.  

For the past four weeks taken together, System operations 
were pretty much offsetting, as reserve absorption in the first

-13-



9/28/65 -14

three weeks was nearly counterbalanced in the last week by 
large-scale provisions to meet current month-end needs.  
Projections indicate that further reserve provisions will be 
needed in the next few weeks; it would appear appropriate at 
some point to meet a part of this need with purchases of coupon 
issues, as well as with more purchases of bills and acquisitions 
under shoct-term repurchase agreements.  

Next Tuesday the Treasury will auction the aforementioned 
$4 billion of tax anticipation bills--$3 billion March bills 
and $1 billion June bills--with payment to be made on October 11.  
Payment may be made in full by direct crediting of Treasury 
tax and loan accounts, and it is accordingly to be expected 
that commercial banks will initially underwrite the entire 
offering. At the same time, given the limited availability 
of bank reserves and the prospective demands for credit 
ahead, it seems likely that banks would want to resell a 
sizable part of their takings in fairly short order. The 
substantial volume of bills to be redistributed would certainly 
suggest that upward pressures on short-term rates may persist 
during this period. Moreover, in late October the Treasury will 
be announcing the terms of its November refinancing, which is 
expected to raise some additional cash in the relatively short
term area. Then, an additional offering of tax bills is expected 
in late November. Technical factors, then, are apt to be exerting 
some upwa-d pressure on rates for some time to come.  

Mr. Hickman observed that, in view of the recent sharp rise in 

bill rates, during the next few weeks the Desk might use the repurchase 

agreement technique less frequently than usually to supply reserves, and 

rely mainly on market purchases. Mr. Holmes agreed, noting that there 

certainly was no reason to avoid bill purchases in supplying reserves 

at present. Repurchase agreements would continue to be useful when it 

was expected that operations to supply reserves would have to be reversed 

shortly.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that according to Mr. Holmes' description 

of the events of the past week there had been a change in market conditions,



9/28/65 -15

whereas the directive issued at the meeting of August 31 in effect had 

called for no change. He asked what particular circumstances had led 

to the Desk's decision not to operate more aggressively in an effort 

to ease the tighter market conditions.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the period in question had been a most 

difficult one for the Desk, partly because the reserve estimates were 

much less consistent than usual with the tone of the market. One 

morning about a week ago, for example, the estimate for net borrowed 

reserves was at the relatively low level of $68 million. There was 

an opportunity to sell some bills to foreign accounts, and at the 

time of the eleven o'clock call he had felt that some additional bills 

might advantageously be sold in the market. During the day, however, 

it had been decided not to sell bills in view of the pressures in the 

market, and that turned out to be the right decision. The reserves 

were in the banking system, but they seemed to be concentrated mainly 

at country banks. Net borrowed reserves recently had been running 

lower, not higher, than earlier, except for the latest week when they 

were back within the previous range. Required reserves apparently had 

been rising much more than seasonally, particularly in the last two 

reserve periods. The combination of the psychology that had been 

developing in the bill market, the desire of many banks to avoid 

discounting at the Federal Reserve, and the willingness of many to 

pay 4-1/4 per cent for Federal funds produced a situation that was



9/28/65 -16

extremely difficult to deal with if very low levels of net borrowed 

reserves were to be avoided.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that evidently the Desk was watching 

the figures on net borrowed reserves closely, and the fact that they 

were running below the range that Committee members had mentioned at 

the August 31 meeting was the reason it had not intervened more 

aggressively.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the level of net borrowed reserves 

was one consideration the Desk had taken into account. The market 

reaction to the Treasury financing was another; psychological factors 

such as were involved in that reaction were hard to deal with by the 

provision of a few more reserves.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Gov
ernment securities and bankers' accept
ances during the period August 31 through 
September 27, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

At the time of our last meeting the two main uncertanties 
on the domestic economic scene were the likely future effects 
of Vietnam on military spending and the prolonged wage bargaining



9/28/65

in the steel industry with its potential disrupting effects 
on wages, prices, and inventory investment.  

It now seems highly likely that some early talk about 

the size of military expenditures in the near-term future 

was exaggerated. Last spring, defense spending for the 1966 
fiscal year had been projected at about $1-1/2 billion above 

fiscal 1965. Vietnam may have increased this figure to 
perhaps $3 to $4 billion. The net expansionary effects of 
the second stage of income tax reductions, excise tax re

ductions, and the new social security program will perhaps add 

up to ano:her $5 to $6 billion. Other forms of Federal spending 

are also likely to go up a little, but the net effects of all 
this expansionary Federal activity could be only moderately 
larger than the normal revenue growth associated with current 

tax rates and the expected growth in corporate and individual 
incomes.  

As for the likely effects of the ultimate wage settlement 

in the steel industry, and looking at inventories first, the 

prospects for further economic growth--both overall and more 

specifically in the steel-using industries--suggest that steel 

inventories will be reduced less than had been anticipated 

earlier. Nevertheless, the net effect of such decumulation 

could decrease total business inventory growth from the third 

to the fourth quarter by $2 to $3 billion on an annual rate 

basis. Inventory accumulation in most lines other than steel, 

however, will no doubt continue, so that the total inventory 

change will still be positive.  

Time permits only brief mention of the likely future 

course of other major elements of the GNP, but they are 

expected either to expand or to show little change. Total 

consumer spending, which has increased sharply and steadily 
throughout the current long expansion, will no doubt con

tinue to be strong. The relationship between such spending 

and personal incomes is relatively stable, and incomes have 

recently teen augmented by a large lump-sum social security 

benefit peyment as well as by an increase in current payments.  

The spending propensities of the aged are no doubt higher than 

those of other segments of the population.  

Total retail sales in the third quarter are likely to be 

up 2 per cent from the second. New auto sales, after declining 

in the spring months, have risen again this summer, perhaps 
aided by the excise tax cut. High recent sales and the latest 

surveys of consumer buying intentions suggest a fourth consecutive 

good auto year.

-17-



9/28/65

Turning to business spending, increased outlays for 
new plant and equipment have been another important factor 
in the continuing economic expansion. The latest Commerce
SEC survey projects further strength in this area during 
the remaining months of 1965. Capital appropriations data 
covering manufacturing firms suggest a continuation of high 
investment by business well into 1966. Rounding out the 
picture, State and local government spending will certainly 
continue its long, strong rise, net exports will at least 
remain stable and possibly rise further, and residential 
construction may continue at current levels, somewhat 
below earlier highs.  

Adding all these elements together suggests to me a 
GNP of perhaps $680 billion or even a little larger in the 
fourth quarter and about $670 billion or so for the year 
as a whole, or a year-to-year gain of a little over $40 
billion. These figures are at the top-end of the range we 
had projected earlier in the year, after adjustment for the 
recent basic revisions in the GNP accounts.  

There is still too little evidence available to frame 
a defensible outlook for next year, but many forecasters 
are now projecting a dollar rise in GNP of about $40 billion, 
little changed from that this year, and a rate of increase 
in constant dollars of about 4 per cent, a little less than 
this year. All I think one can say with any assurance at 
this time is that recent developments, including those on 
the international front, now make it very likely that the 
current, long-lived expansion will continue well into 1966.  
In the foreseeable future we still have a good chance of 
steering the middle course of maintaining our current rate 
of expansion without veering off into the ditches of either 
inflation or recession.  

The relevance of this discussion about the likely future 
course of the GNP to monetary policy lies mainly in its 
probable effects on resource utilization and prices. As for 

resource utilization, the unemployment rate has now been at 
4.5 per cent for 2 months, while the utilization rate of 
manufacturing capacity was at about 90 per cent through the 
first half of the year. The utilization rate may have crept 
up another point in July and August, but it no doubt dropped 
again in September with an expected decline in the industrial 
production index of about 1 point resulting mainly from the 
reduction in steel output.  

Of course, this utilization rate is an aggregate measure 
for total manufacturing; some lines are at practical capacity

-18-



9/28/65

and others are significantly below it, including now the 
key steel industry. The important fact for policy, however, 
is that a projected further leveling off or even decline 
in industrial production and increase in business plant and 
equipment spending do not suggest any large further decline 
in the unemployment rate and probably imply some decrease in 
the capitol utilization rate for manufacturing in the near 
future.  

Recent price developments have indicated no tendency 
for "overheating." The total wholesale price index has been 
stable during the past 8 weeks, with industrial prices rising 
less than earlier and foodstuffs actually declining following 
earlier marked increases. Wages have continued to rise at 
the approximately 3 per cent annual rate characteristic of 
earlier months. Unit labor costs in manufacturing as a whole 
have probably risen slightly in recent weeks as the pace of 
output slackened, but this should be temporary.  

These recent price developments, plus the fact that the 
wage settlement in the steel industry was moderate, should 
keep further price increases selective and small. Of course, 
business optimism and corporate profits are high, and the 
stock market is strong. Selective price increases will no 
doubt continue. Some such price increases will stick but 
others will not, for competition among domestic producers, 
as well as foreign importers, continues strong.  

Despite the lagged effects of monetary policy, the 
current domestic economic situation still does not seem to 
me to call for a further restraining monetary policy move, 
particularly since more buoyant business expectations, 
increased actual demands for financing, and the cumulating 
effects of declining bank and corporate liquidity, as I'm 
sure Mr. Partee will point out, have led to a significant 
firming of interest rates and other credit conditions in 
the Last 2 months. This has come about in part accidentally, 
as a result of a steel strike threat and international ten
sions. But for whatever reasons, we've been able to make 
welcome inroads into the sticky unemployment and capital 
utilization problems. I see no reason to risk curbing such 
economic progress unless the inflationary thrust becomes 
more evident or present efforts at improving the balance 
of payments become less effective.  

Mr. Hickman noted that in the statement just made--which he 

thought was an excellent one--Mr. Koch had expressed the view that net

-19-



9/28/65

exports would be stable or rising. He (Mr. Hickman) had been under 

the impression that the trade surplus was expected to decline.  

Mr. Koch replied that there already had been some decline in 

net exports this year and his comment had been based on the assumption 

that the adjustment had been completed, He added that even a relatively 

large change in net exports would have little effect on GNP since it 

was a small item in the total, and Mr. Hickman agreed.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Financial markets since the last meeting of the Committee 
have been in transition to a higher yield structure. Mr. Holmes 
has discussed the succession of market events contributing to 
this movement. Now I would like to focus on the development 
in a somewhat broader perspective, since it seems to me that 
the changes occurring in recent weeks represent a sizable and 
significart upward movement in interest rates. Since mid-year, 
3-month bill yields have risen 20 basis points, 6-month bills 
30 basis points, yields on intermediate Governments around 20 
basis points, and long-term private and public bonds 10 to 15 
basis points. All of these adjustments have taken place 
during a period when there was no overt change in monetary 
policy, and when net borrowed reserves--though fluctuating 
between $100 million and $200 million on a weekly basis-
have centered fairly closely on $150 million or a little more.  

It is evident, therefore, that earlier relationships 
among financial market variables have been altered by other 
factors. Principal among these has been the improvement in 
business expectations, based largely on increased Federal 
spending, the continuing boom in plant and equipment, and 
the constructive wage settlement in steel. Improved business 
expectations have been transmitted to financial markets--most 
obviously in stocks, where prices have recovered to their 
spring highs on very heavy trading volume, but also in the 
credit area, where the implications for financing volume 
and possibly for interest rates are widely interpreted as 
bullish by the financial community. The large current

-20-



9/28/65 -21

Treasury financing, with the indication that $3 billion more 
will be coming in November, has tended to reinforce this 
view, even though the total for the half year apparently 
will not be much larger than had been expected earlier.  

Heavy financing demands during the summer, particularly 
by businesses, also have contributed to the pressures in 
financial markets. Public offerings of corporate bonds since 
the beginning of June have exceeded the year--earlier volume 
by $1 billion, or 80 per cent; about half of this increase 
was in bank capital issues, which remained in the investment 
stream but nevertheless enlarged demands for long-term funds 
in the corporate market. Bank business loan expansion, at a 
17 per cent annual rate in the June-July-August period, was 
nearly double that of a year ago. Loan demand weakened 
temporarily after mid-August, but tax date borrowing was 
very large--one-fifth more than a year ago and nearly twice 
the average of the three preceding years, at weekly reporting 
banks.  

Inventory accumulation in steel and steel-using products 
has been a significant factor in loan expansion this year, 
and a working down of these stocks now will doubtless permit 
some loan repayment. But the prospects still seem to be for 
substantially more than seasonal loan expansion this fall.  
Similarly, looking beyond the immediate calendar, the pros
pect seems to be for a continued large volume of bond flotations.  
The extent to which external financing of business will be 
from banks or in the market depends on a variety of factors, 
including yield relationships and expectations. Taking into 
account Treasury needs, however, no significant reduction in 
aggregate financing demands seems indicated.  

Tightening in financial markets also appears attributable 
in part to the cumulative effects of decreasing liquidity in 
key sectors of the economy. Corporate holdings of liquid 
assets have been declining since last fall; the reduction in 
the second quarter was unusually sharp and it seems unlikely 
that there was any appreciable rebuilding in holdings during 
the summer. This has special relevance for banks both in 
terms of loan demand and in potentials for further expansion 
in CD sales. Banks have relied heavily on these instruments 
to finance loan expansion this year, as some corporations 
apparently shifted liquidity holdings from bills to CDs; a 
less expansive and more volatile market now could influence 
both supplies of loanable funds and bank views as to minimum 
liquidity needs. This, in turn, has implications for bank 
buying of municipals and mortgages, as well as for the 
availability of bank credit to businesses and consumers.



9/28/65 -22

Under the circumstances, it is not surprising that we 
have been hearing increased banker comment lately about 
efforts to ration credit. And our systematic roundup of 
such comments, from the September lending practices survey, 
seems to confirm a marked further shift toward firmer lending 
policies in the business credit and finance company areas.  
Similarly, there have been fragmentary indications from 
other sources of some firming in attitudes regarding mortgage 
and consumer lending standards.  

Thus, it appears that an appreciable firming in financial 
conditions has been in process, not only in market yields but 
also in terms of the availability of bank credit. The very 
large bank credit increase reported for August, it seems to 
me, should be discounted. The series is volatile and presents 
serious seasonal adjustment problems; moreover, the member 
bank credit proxy--essential, total deposits--declined in 
August and apparently again in September to rates of increase 
well below the average for this year and last. Similarly, 
the very large increase for the money supply indicated for 
September reflected an even sharper decline in Government 
deposits; partial restoration of unusually low September 
balances may exert a depressing effect on private money 
holdings over the next few weeks.  

In view of the present ebullience of business and finan
cial sentiment, it may well be appropriate that the combination 
of strong demand, declining liquidity, and anticipation has 
been permitted to exert some self-tightening influence on 
credit markets. Further increases in the structure of rates, 
however, would bring into question the viability of the dis
count rate and Regulation Q ceilings. At present market 
rates, many banks are likely to have trouble competing for 
CDs under the existing ceilings; farther firming in rates 
would almost certainly bring correspondingly greater pressure 
to bear on use of the discount window.  

For the present, it seems to me that any indication of 
further moves toward monetary restraint should be avoided.  
The size and sensitivity of the Treasury cash financing, and 
the need to avoid additional upsets to the market while new 
rate relationships are being worked out and tested, would 
seem to dictate an "even keel" policy stance.  

Should the Committee decide that "no change" for this 
meeting is the appropriate course, there are two further 
aspects to the problem on which I think the Manager deserves 
some direction. First is whether primary emphasis should be 
placed on marginal reserves or on money market rates, since



9/28/65

these relationships have changed in recent weeks. Second, 
in view of the changes that have taken place in both rates 
and reserves, there is the problem of whether a "no change" 
policy means maintaining money market conditions as taut as 
they have been most recently, or as they have been on average 
since the last meeting of the Committee. Even if "even keel" 
is taken to mean maintenance of current conditions, the term 
probably should contemplate permitting some rates that have 
advanced most sharply to back down a few basis points, while 
laggard rates are still in process of adjusting upward.  

Mr. Reynolds presented the following statement on the balance 

of payments: 

It now appears that the third-quarter payments deficit 
on "regular transactions" may work out at an annual rate of 
about $1-1/2 billion, a little above the rate for the first 
half year. Probably $1-1/2 billion is also still a reasonable 
guess for the year as a whole, assuming that the United Kingdom 
will not draw on its credit line with the Export-Import Bank or 
postpone its year-end debt service payments; but earlier hopes 
that we might do better than that this year have waned.  

Detaled data for July, or July-August, suggest that the 
trade balance has improved a little compared with the first 
half, but that net U.S. private capital outflows may have 
increased more. Earlier reflows of U.S bank credit and of 
nonbank liquid funds have diminished on a seasonally adjusted 
basis (the seasonals being large at this time of year), and 
outflows through new foreign security sales to U.S. residents, 
for which third-quarter data are fairly complete, increased.  
Also, net foreign sales of U.S. corporate securities, mainly 
for British account, totaled $110 million in July alone, 
three times the average rate of the first half year.  

Since the last meeting, we have learned that in the 
second quarter there was another very large outflow of direct 
investment capital. Most analysts had earlier braced them
selves for somewhat larger outflows this year than last, 
despite some attempts at voluntary restraint. But no one, 
I think, had imagined that such outflows would shoot up to 
more than $2 billion in a single half year, compared with 

$2.4 billion for the full year 1964, which was itself a record.  
There has been a larger than usual quota of identifiable 

special elements in this year's outflow. International petro
leum companies made large retroactive tax payments, following

-23-



9/28/65

renegotiation of agreements, and also leased some new conces
sions. The counterpart of these payments is clearly seen in 
the statistics of Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Libya, whose 
combined gold and foreign exchange reserves increased by 
$450 million, or more than 25 per cent, during the first 7 
months of this year. When people say that primary producing 
countries are doing badly this year, they should be careful 
to exclude the oil countries.  

Another special transaction was the conversion of a 
$100 million U.S. investment in Canada from loans to a direct 
investment, without net effect on the balance of payments.  
Finally, there appear to have been some anticipatory transfers 
of funds early in the year for later use. Altogether, the 
transactions I have listed may have accounted for $1/2 billion 
of the direct investment outflow in the first half year. But 
even without these, the outflow in the first half would have 
been well above last year's rate.  

It seems clear that voluntary restraint has not yet 
amounted to much in this area, and that direct investment 
should still be thought of as being on a strongly rising trend, 
sustained by large U.S. corporate profits, cash flows, and 
credit availability, and by rapid economic growth abroad.  

Direct investment outflows will almost certainly be lower 
in the second half year than in the first. Indeed, despite 
the special oil payments, such outflows diminished by nearly 
$300 million in the second quarter. Even if for the full year 
they are up by as much as 40 per cent over last year, as 
Government analysts are now guessing, they would decline by 
$700 million between the first and second halves. Within 
total capital flow, this decline could offset--and is perhaps 
already offsetting--much of the adverse impact of renewed bank 
lending and of the cessation of reflows of liquid corporate 
funds.  

For the long run, direct investment outflows may not pose 
very serious problems. They pay out in about 8 years on the 
average, so that recent large outflows may only briefly interrupt 
the faster rise of income than of outflow, while later contributing 
to it. But they raise awkward problems for the middle-range period 
of these two or three years during which the United States is 
trying decisively to reestablish payments equilibrium. In particular, 
it is difficult to keep banks on a tight leash when corporations 
making direct investments appear to be running free. Therefore, 
one may now reasonably expect the Commerce Department to try to 
stiffen its restraint program, difficult though that may be.

-24-



9/28/65

I come back, now, to my guess that the overall deficit 
on "regular transactions" may be $1-1/2 billion for the year.  
How would such an outcome be interpreted? From one point of 
view it would be a remarkable achievement--all that had been 
hoped for as of last February, despite lower exports, higher 
imports, and larger direct investments than anyone had then 
envisaged. Also, it should be noted, British Government 
conversions of roughly $1/2 billion of its nonliquid portfolio 
into liquid assets during the year will have made our results 
that much worse than they would otherwise have been, and this 
might be regarded as a flaw in the bookkeeping, helping to 
overstate our problem.  

On the other hand, the good 1965 result will have been 
achieved with the aid of some once-for-all transfers, notably 
the repatriation of $600-$700 million of corporate liquid 
funds. Also, bank lending to foreigners will have been held 
well below the level of most recent years, and this would 
probably have been more difficult, without disrupting other 
flows, had it not been for last year's extravagant burst of 
lending.  

People seem always to ask of deficit countries the same 
question that they ask of politicans: "Yes, but what have you 
done for me lately?" Thus a key question now being asked is 
whether further improvement in the balarce of payments can be 
foreseen for next year. At the moment, visibility is limited 
and it is difficult to see where improvement will come from.  
The current account surplus may well turn up again, but capital 
outflows also seem likely to increase, unless they are restrained 
by further changes in relative credit conditions or by inten
sification of special restraint programs.  

Mr. Hickman said he was somewhat puzzled by Mr. Reynolds' 

conclusion that it was hard to see where futtre improvement in the balance 

of payments would come from if one accepted the earlier part of his 

statement. Mr. Reynolds had suggested that direct investment would 

decline if the Commerce Department stiffened its restraint program and 

he had noted that the British conversions into liquid assets this year 

had had the effect of overstating the size of our portfolio investment.

-25-



9/28/65 -26

If the trade balance also was better, as Mr. Koch expected, the 

balance of payments should improve further--unless, of course, 

banks stepped up their foreign lending.  

Mr. Reynolds replied that he had not meant to imply by his 

statement regarding the expected reduction in direct investments 

in the second half of 1965 that such investments would be lower 

next year than this year. The Commerce Department would be fighting 

a rising trend and in his view their restraints would have to be 

made much stronger in order to bring about on absolute reduction from 

the 1965 level of direct investments.  

Mr. Maisel noted that both of the alternative directives 

suggested by the staff 1/ included the statement that "our international 

payments have been in deficit since midyear," presumably on the basis 

of the "regular transactions" figures. He asked whether it was not 

correct that U.S. payments were in surplus in July and August when 

the measurement was on an "official settlements" basis.  

Mr. Reynolds replied that a surplus probably would be recorded 

on the official settlements basis for the third quarter, primarily 

because of large movements out of sterling into dollars in July and 

August. Although figures for all of September were not yet available, 

there probably was a deficit in the month associated with the return 

1/ The two alternative directives prepared by the staff are appended 
to these minutes as Attachment A.



9/28/65 -27

flow into steling. If the improvement in the British situation 

continued, there was likely to be a deficit on the official settle

ments basis for the year as a whole.  

In re:ponse to a question by Mr. Daane, Mr. Reynolds said 

that the size of the 1965 deficit on that basis corresponding to his 

estimate of a $1-1/2 billion regular transactions deficit would 

depend on developments for sterling. It might be on the order of 

$1 billion, but perhaps would be less than that if sterling did not 

do well.  

Mr. Balderston commented that however the deficit was cal

culated the crux of the problem seemed to him to lie in the fact 

that gold outflows were continuing.  

Mr. Hayes expressed the view that it was important to keep 

close watch on the payments figures on both bases of calculation, as 

well as on changes in the gold stock.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(1) Prices and costs.--How have near-term prospects for wages, 
unit labor costs, and prices changed since the steel settlement? 

The overall cost of the new labor contract in the steel 
industry, which runs to August 1, 1968, represents neither a 

new pattern nor an acceleration in wage increases. Terms of 
the contract are roughly in line with estimates of the gain in 
output per manhour in the steel industry--and in the economy 
generally. Consequently, they imply continued stability in 
labor cost per unit of steel production and remove one



9/28/65

potential basis for a general steel price rise. This new agree
ment should exert a major influence in holding coming settlements 
to noninflationary levels. (The next major negotiation, in the 
electrical machinery industry, does not occur until the middle 
of next year.) 

As contract negotiations are completed in other metal 
industries where employees are represented by the United Steel 
Workers, prices may be raised for some products. These devel
opments, however, do not have the potential for a cumulative 
price and cost rise such as followed the very large increase 
in steel wages and prices in 1956.  

The cost of the new contract is estimated by the Council 
of Economic Advisers at 3.2 per cent per year. Productivity 
in the steel industry advanced at an annual rate of 3 per cent 
over 1957-64, after correction for variations in operating 
rates. Continued productivity advances at this rate would 
about offset the scheduled rise in wage rates and fringe 
benefits. It must be recognized that estimates of both costs 
and productivity are highly approximate. The actual cost of 
the new contract will depend importantly on the response of 
workers to the more liberal retirement privileges; continued 
gains in productivity will depend importantly on maintenance 
of a high rate of production. But as best as such factors can 
be estimated at this time, the settlement seems to promise 
that steel wage costs will not outpace productivity increases.  

The outlook for stability in unit labor costs does not, 
of course, guarantee stability in prices. Increases in list 
prices for selected steel products are still widely expected, 
but there is room for doubt that any considerable number of 
increase; would stick in a period of declining production and 
inventor liquidation. Even later, market conditions may 
provide constraints. Competition from imports and from other 
metals i. strong. Capital spending by steel producers has 
been high, new mills and furnaces will soon begin production 
at below-average unit costs, and pressure will exist to 
increase volume by recapturing some of the production lost to 
imports or competing products. But even if selective price 
increases are effected, they are not likely to be large 
enough to raise costs appreciably at later stages of production.  

(2) Business conditions.--What are the implications for continued 

economic expansion of business plans for fixed capital and 
inventory outlays?



9/28/65

Business plans for increasing fixed capital outlays 
continue strong and appear sufficient to about offset the 
probable decline in inventory accumulation. Likely increases 
in consumption spending and government outlays should bring 
the rise in total GNP for the third and fourth quarters into 
the $8 to $10 billion range, about the same as in the second 
quarter and on average over the past year.  

The latest survey of plant and equipment spending 
reaffirmed business intentions to continue to expand their 
outlays through the end of the year. Business expenditures for 
new plant and equipment are now planned to expand by about 
$3 billion (annual rate) from the second to the fourth quarter 
of this year. Sharply advanced capital appropriations reported 
in a survey of large manufacturing companies suggest that the 
expansion momentum should carry forward well into 1966. On 
the other hand, business inventory investment has been tending 
down from the exceptionally high rate reached in the first 
quarter and, with excessive steel stocks now being liquidated, 
this slowdown should continue at least through the end of this 
year. The survey of manufacturers' inventory plans indicates 
a significant reduction in expected additions to their stocks, 
from an average of $800 million in the first three quarters 
of 1965 to $500 million in the fourth quarter.  

Additional offsets to the inventory down drag will be 
provided by rising consumer and government spending.  
Consumption expenditures this year have been stimulated by 
rapidly rising incomes. In the third quarter total consumption 
expenditures apparently increased nearly 2 per cent, about the 
same as in the second quarter. Further increases in consumption 
expenditures even at about this rate would constitute a strong 
expansive influence on the economy; and beginning in September 
personal income is being given an extra fillip by the increase 
in social security benefits, including a large retroactive 
payment, and by the military pay raise.  

The Government sector is also providing expansive strength.  
Federal defense outlays are now increasing by more than $1 
billion per quarter (annual rate) and other Federal purchases 
of goods and services are continuing to rise. In addition, 
State and local government purchases are also rising by $1 
billion plus (annual rate) per quarter.  

(3) Balance of payments.--How is recovery in the sterling 
exchange market affecting international money markets and 
central bank reserves?

-29-



9/28/65

Earlier heavy drains of about $400 million a month on U.K.  
official reserves and special credits were halted late in 
August and reversed, at least temporarily, in September. The 
sterling exchange rate has risen from about $2.79 to nearly 
$2.80 and the 3-month forward discount on sterling has declined 
from about 2-1/2 to 1-3/4 per cent per annum. Most of this 
improvement reflected changes in leads .,nd lags in commercial 
payments and other speculative movements. Adverse movements 
of these kinds had probably accounted for more than one-third 
of the total drain of $3-1/2 billion in the 14 months through 
August.  

Market purchasers of sterling in September must have been 
reducing, net, their investments or cash assets held outside 
Britain or held in the form of dollar or other foreign currency 
claims against banks in London. Withdrawals of funds from the 
Euro-dollar market by persons moving into sterling may have 
been among the factors that have brought the downward drift in 
Euro-dollar rates to an end this month. In turn, the tightening 
tendency in the Euro-dollar market may help to explain the 
reduction in U.S. bank branches' balances with head offices up 
to September 22; in July and August the branches had increased 
these balances substantially.  

Effects of the strengthening of sterling on the reserves 
of continental European central banks cannot yet be quantified.  
The softening of the French franc and the Belgian franc in 
foreign exchange markets is thought to be partly the result of 
heavier demands for sterling in those countries. Italian 
reserve gains diminished sharply in September, but seasonal 
factors cculd explain much of this. In the Netherlands and 
Germany, seasonal tightness in the domestic money market in 
Septmber would normally have tended to increase the demand 
for local currency and add to official foreign exchange reserves; 
these tendencies seem to have been partly offset by the strength
ening of sterling.  

If the recent improvement in sterling should be followed 
by further reflows on a large scale, continental European 
reserve gains would certainly be expected to diminish, just 
as earlier they had been swollen by the flight from sterling.  
At the same time, there would probably be some worsening of 
the U.S. balance of payments deficit. Outflows of U.S.-owned 
funds to London would worsen the deficit on both the official 
and the regular transactions bases of calculation. There

-30-



9/28/65

would be an additional deterioration on the official settle
ments basis to the extent that British reserve gains reflected 
withdrawal by private foreigners, including U.S. bank branches 
abroad, of liquid assets from the United States.  

Presumably British reserve gains would be used first to 
repay swap drawings from the United States, and thereafter to 
repay the IMF, and hence would not be used to buy gold.  
Meanwhile, smaller reserve gains elsewhere in Europe would tend 
to reduce demands for gold from that quarter.  

(4) Bank credit and money.--How should the strength of fall 
bank loan demand now be assessed, taking into account recent 
developments and the influence of likely inventory changes and 
other factors? 

Loan demand at banks this fall is expected to remain strong, 
although perhaps not as strong as in recent months. Continued 
rapid expansion in loans to most types of nonfinancial businesses 
will be offset in part by liquidation of inventory borrowings by 
metals companies and of the recent bulge in loans to finance 
companies.  

This estimate of continued vigorous loan expansion is based 
on the premise that GNP will show substantial further gains 
despite a slowing in business inventory accumulation, as outlined 
under question 2 above. Under these conditions, business needs 
for funds are likely to remain large for the financing of rising 
outlays for plant and equipment ard continued large additions 
to receivables. These requirements for funds are coming at a 
time when internally generated furds are increasing relatively 
little anc when corporate liquidity is low, External financing 
demands are consequently expected to be relatively heavy, but 
how they will be distributed between banks and the capital 
markets is uncertain.  

Bank loans to most groups of nonfinancial businesses are 
expected to show considerably greater than seasonal strength.  
The reduction in business loan demand since mid-August seems 
to have been a temporary lull, particularly in light of the 
strong tax period borrowing in September. It does seem likely, 
however, that liquidation of inventory borrowings by metals 
companies will reduce the growth rate of business loans at 
banks considerably below the 17 per cent annual rate of the 
preceding three months.

-31-



9/28/65

In contrast to nonfinancial businesses, finance companies 
may make larger than usual repayments of bank credit over the 
next two months, working down their bank loans from the high 
levels a.tained recently in financing unusually large dealer 
inventories of autos. Consumer loans at banks are likely to 
continue expanding in line with the experience so far this year, 
an annual rate of about $4.5 billion. Growth in real estate 
loans will depend in part on bank willingness to invest in 
mortgages, but the continuing nature of most mortgage origina
tion arrangements suggests that there is unlikely to be an 
abrupt further slackening in the rate of additions to such 
portfolios.  

(5) Securities markets.--How have developments since the last 
meeting of the Committee affected the near-term outlook for 
securities markets? 

Most long- and short-term interest rates have advanced 
further since the last Committee meeting, and investors remain 
highly sensitive to the possibilities of further yield increases.  
Around mid-September yields on long-term U.S. Government bonds 
showed signs of stabilizing, and quotations on new and recently 
offered corporate issues actually turned down several basis 
points. But pressures on short-term markets around the tax 
date, and announcement of the Treasury's fall financing plans, 
have rai.ed short-term rates sharply, and this development-
unless reversed--may generate another round of upward pressure 
on long rates.  

With respect to the U.S. Government bond market, its 
technical position has improved since the end of August. Dealers' 
holdings of bonds maturing in more than 5 years now have been 
reduced to less than $150 million. But this has been wholly 
the result of official purchases; private investors have 
remained moderate net sellers of Government bonds throughout 
this period. Thus, while the pressure on the market from 
professional holdings has been considerably reduced, investors 
still appear to be backing away from Governments and could be 
the source of some further upward pressures, especially if 
corporate securities continue to be relatively attractive.  

In the corporate bond market, it appears that investor 
attitudes about prevailing and expected levels of interest 
rates are delicately balanced. On the one hand, the unusually 
high levels reached by yields on new corporate bonds in mid
September attracted investor demand. While this response

-32-



9/28/65

undoubtedly reflected an awareness that the calendar of new 
publicly-offered issues scheduled for late September and early 
October is smaller, it also represented some modification of 
earlier, more extreme interest rate expectations. Looking 
somewhat farther ahead, however, the continuing need of 
corporations for external financing is likely to sustain the 
volume of their borrowings in capital markets at high levels.  

Although the visible supply of municipal offerings also 
shows a moderate decline over the next few weeks, thereafter 
the volume of offerings will undoubtedly rise again. The 
likely strength of future bank demand for municipals is 
questionable, particularly since their ability to raise funds 
through CD sales may be limited by the level of short-term 
rates in relation to Regulation Q ceilings.  

(6) Money market relationships.--Assuming a continuation of 
current monetary policy, what range of money market conditions, 
interest rates, reserve availability, and reserve utilization 
by the banking system might prove mutually consistent in coming 
weeks? 

Since late August, relationships have changed markedly 
among the major elements customarily encompassed in "money 
market conditions." Over the first three weeks ending in 
September net borrowed reserves declined to about $100 million, 
while member bank borrowings were about unchanged, and Treasury 
bill rates moved up. In the last full statement week, net 
borrowed reserves returned to the August level of about $170 
million, borrowings increased, and bill rates rose further.  

Pressures developed around and after mid-September as 
tax and dividend payments were refected in large CD run-offs 
and expanded loan demand. Increased reserve availability was 

less effective than usual in moderating money market pressures, 
apparently because of the redistribution of reserves away from 
city banks as Government balances were transferred to private 
holders. Another influence at work may have been the adjustments 
of banks with extended borrowing records at the discount window.  

Announcements last week of the Treasury's tax bill financing 

and of its financing needs over the balance of the year resulted 

in an abrupt further upward adjustment in rates. Most of the 

rate adjustment was in longer bills, where the additional cash 

financings are to be concentrated, but yields on both shorter

-33-



9/28/65

bills and coupon issues also have risen in reaction to this 
development. The current level of 3.98 per cent on the 3-month 
Treasury bill is the highest since late February, despite its 
attractive December maturity date. Federal funds have continued 
to trade mainly at 4-1/8 per cent, but with more frequent reports 
of trading at 4-1/4 per cent.  

The upward pressures on short-term rates that have developed 
recently do not seem likely to be reversed significantly in the 
weeks immediately ahead. Net borrowed reserves of around $150 
million should be associated with 3-month Treasury bill yields 
in the 3.95 to 4.10 per cent range. Movement toward the upper 
end of that range may develop as the 3-month bill maturity 
shifts beyond December--the January 6 bill closed Friday at a 
yield of 4.06 per cent--even though further increases may be 
moderated by substantial System purchases of bills to meet 
reserve needs. Long-term rates, which began rising before 
pressures developed in short-term markets, may now be subject 
to further yield adjustments, as discussed above under question 
5.  

With 6-month and 1-year bills currently yielding about 
4.30 and 4.40 per cent on an investment yield basis, further 
upward adjustments in longer-term bill yields may make it 
increasingly difficult for many banks to attract time deposits 
within present Regulation Q ceilings. This would tend to curb 
bank credit expansion, and/or to intensify bank efforts to raise 
funds through very short-term CDs, Federal funds, and promissory 
notes, or at the discount window. Bank takings of the March 
and June tax bills can be expected to lead to a bulge in bank 
credit in the early part of October, but this expansion will 
moderate as banks sell off the tax bills and U.S. Government 
deposits are drawn down. Growth in money supply, which was 
large in September as Government deposits were reduced more 
than seasonally, is likely to be slower in early October, but 
may pick up again in later weeks. For the demand deposit 
component, an average growth rate in the 4 to 5 per cent range 
seems the most likely expectation.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and views 

on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginn.ng with Mr. Hayes, who

made the following statement:

-34-



9/28/65

The business outlook has strengthened appreciably 
since our last meeting. For one thing, the labor settlement 
in the steel industry has removed one of the major uncertainties 
that were troubling the Committee a month ago. Despite the 
reduction in the strike-hedge inventories of steel that is 
now under way, and that will undoubtedly continue at a moderate 
pace through the turn of the year, this adverse influence is 
likely to be submerged by continuing aggregate gains in spending 
by business (on plant and equipment, and on inventories other 
than steel) as well as by consumers and Government. In fact 
we have now seen a major turnaround in business sentiment-
triggered in the first instance by the implications of the 
build-up of the Vietnam war, and subsequently abetted by 
growing expectation of well sustained demand in key sectors of 
the economy. There is now little talk cf a pronounced slowdown 
in the clo.ing months of the year, and forecasters are busy 
comparing estimates of another solid advance in calendar 1966.  
Fears of a fiscal drag early next year have largely evaporated, 
mainly because of the prospect of much higher defense spending, 
together with higher Government civilian salaries.  

On the cost-price front, the steel settlement came out 
reassuringly close to the guidelines; but this has removed 
only the danger of an over-generous pace-setting settlement.  
We still face the pressures on prices and labor costs normally 
arising in an economy operating close to capacity. The labor 
market appears to have tightened significantly, with growing 
shortages of trained and skilled workers. As for industrial 
wholesale prices, it looks as if the uptrend which started 
in mid-1964 is continuing. Announcements of individual price 
increases seem to be becoming more frequent. All in all, the 
threat of inflationary tendencies remains quite serious. The 
exuberant stock market of recent weeks is doubtless one more 
manifestation of incipient inflationary psychology.  

Despite the outstanding success of the voluntary credit 
restraint program with respect to foreign lending by banks, 
I find it hard to feel much encouragemen: with respect to 
our balance of payments. Sizable deficits have predominated 
in recent weeks--and even after seasonal adjustment the 
regular deficit for the third quarter may be close to a $2 
billion annual rate. Increases in direct investment and 
foreign security issues have played a part. Tne outlook for 
the trade surplus is not encouraging. While the prospect for 

exports is not unfavorable, imports are almost sure to rise 
further as economic activity in the U.S. moves ahead. The 

basic payments problem lies in our inability to date to come

-35-



9/28/65

close to equilibrium without the strong support of artificial 
barriers to outward capital flows. While foreign confidence 
in the dollar is generally stronger than it was some months 
ago, this is based in large part on the belief that our payments 
disequilibrium has at last been cut to a low level.  

With the recent pronounced improvement in the market 
for sterling, another major uncertainty at the time of last 
month's meeting has at least receded into the background.  

As for bank credit, the recent figures, while inconclusive, 
suggest the possibility of a continued excessive pace of 
expansion, and further strength in the demand for funds seems 
likely this fall. To many of us the 8 per cent rate of increase 
that characterized bank credit over the last couple of years 
seemed rather excessive, and the Committee has taken several 
deliberate steps to check it. Yet the gain in recent months 
has been around 9 per cent, whether based on the last-Wednesday
of-the-month data or on the "proxy" series for bank credit.  
Business loans have been rising at about 20 per cent per annum; 
and money supply plus time deposits at 8.6 per cent, with time 
deposits accounting for most of the gain. It is of interest to 
note that the banks have been actively adjusting the liability 
side of the balance sheets in response to the pressures exerted 
by rising credit demands.  

Returning to this country after a fairly extended absence 
abroad, I have been struck by the increases that have occurred 
in market rates of interest, for almost all maturities and for 
most types of market instruments. Of course, temporary factors 
have played a part in these tendencies. But, more basically, 
the pressure of rising demands for credit and growing business 
optimism have acted to tighten the market despite our efforts 
to maintain stable market conditions and despite the maintenance 
of a more or less constant or even a somewhat reduced level of 
net borrowed reserves. To my mind we should recognize and 
reinforce this tightening tendency in the light of all the 
factors I have touched on, both international and domestic. I 
believe we should try more decisively than we have done in recent 

months to check the excessive rate of credit growth; and for this 
purpose an overt move seems to be required, combining a discount 

rate increase with some further increase in net borrowed reserves 
to the $200 to $250 million level. An increase in the prime 
rate would almost certainly follow immediately; but this does 

not seem to me a valid obstacle to our own action, especially 
since the prime rate is now clearly out of line both with the 

underlying availability of bank funds and with the rates 
prevailing in the bond market. The ceilings under Regulation 
Q would certainly have to be adjusted upward in the event of

-36-



9/28/65

the policy move contemplated; and in order to avoid the 
appearance of pin-pointing a new rate level for time 
deposits sought by the System, I would think a flat 
ceiling of 5 per cent for all maturities would be useful.  
It seems to me that there is little justification for 
differentiating between shorter and longer maturities, 
especially in view of the flatness of the present market 
yield curve. Obviously, the directive would have to be 
modified also.  

There is an important question of timing, whatever 
action we may take. On October 5, the Treasury will be 
conducting an auction of $4 billion of Treasury Tax 
Anticipation Bills for payment on October 11, the day 
before the next scheduled meeting of the Committee. In 
the last week of October, the Treasury will be setting the 
terms for refunding the Treasury notes maturing November 15, 
of which a bit over $3 billion are held by the public. These 
prospects consel, I believe, prompt action which will afford 
an opportunity for the market to adjust before the October 5 
bill auction. If action is not taken promptly, it would 
probably be necessary to defer action three weeks or perhaps 
a month and a half or more. Therefore, it seems to me, it 
would be appropriate to act today to change the directive to 
call for greater restraint and to act this week to increase 
the discount rate.  

Whether the discount rate should be raised 1/4 per cent 
or 1/2 per cent can be readily debated. In recent years we 
have thought of a change of 1/2 per cent as a normal change 
when the rate has been somewhere around the present level.  
It certainly does not seem excessive, and the adoption of a 
1/2 per cert increase would lessen the possible need for any 
further increase in the near future. Moreover, a 1/2 per 
cent rise would be much more likely to convince foreign 
authorities that we are determined to maintain the dollar's 
strength abroad. On the other hand, an increase of 1/4 per 
cent would probably suffice to signal that the Federal 
Reserve is concerned but not alarmed by current developments.  
The important point is to signal the need for further 
restraint; the amount of the rate increase is less important.  
On domestic grounds alone I would be inclined to prefer an 

increase of 1/4 per cent, whereas on international grounds 
the larger change would be distinctly better. I would like 

to defer judgment on the amount until there has been a full 
discussion of the subject today.

-37-



9/28/65 -38

Mr. Shuford observed that although sone recent statistics had 

indicated a pause in the economic upswing total demand seemed to be 

strong and rising. Since April personal income had been expanding at 

an annual rate of 6 per cent, and retail sales had risen even faster.  

The automobile industry was talking in terms of a 9 million unit year.  

Industrial production had been increasing at about an 8 per cent rate 

since April, and employment had been rising rapidly. In the Eighth 

District manufacturing output had been rising since early this year 

at about the seme rate as in the rest of the nation.  

A major question, Mr. Shuford said, seemed to be whether 

further expansion in demand would be matched by expanding output or 

whether it would result in higher prices. Current price developments 

were difficult to interpret. Overall indexes had changed little since 

June, but that might reflect a temporary offsetting of general upward 

pressures on prices by the cuts in excise taxes and the special situation 

with respect to agricultural prices. He was not of the view that 

inflationary pressures had subsided. It was his impression that there 

recently had been an increase in announcements of "selective" price 

markups. While the price situation in the automobile industry was 

not clear, it appeared that at least one company had announced a price 

increase, and in St. Louis two large firms in the shoe industry had 

raised prices. He noted that a Boston shoe company also had raised 

prices.



9/28/65 -39

From June to early September, Mr. Shuford continued, financial 

and monetary developments turned less stimulative. Yields on most 

marketable securities moved up. Bank credit expansion moderated 

somewhat from its extremely rapid earlier pace, and the rate of increase 

in money slowed. In the same June to early September period the fiscal 

situation turned more expansive with the excise tax cuts and expanded 

social security benefits. In view of the strong economic situation, 

the mix of public policy--with fiscal actions easier and monetary 

actions less expansionary--seemed appropriate; it appeared likely 

to foster a sustainable domestic growth and to place moderate upward 

pressures on interest rates beneficial in reducing net outflows of 

funds from the country.  

Most recently, however, the money supply had risen markedly, 

Mr. Shuford observed. While figures for a few weeks should not be 

overemphasized, and while, as Mr. Partee had mentioned, recent changes 

in Government deposits had influenced the money supply, he felt the 

Committee should take care that money growth not continue to be out 

of line with what was called for by the current economic situation.  

Although money market conditions might have firmed in the past month, 

apparently the demands for funds under those conditions were strong 

enough to provide an acceleration of monetary expansion. He was 

hopeful that this most recent increase in money would be reversed, 

and that the more moderate rate of expansion that had been developing



9/28/65 -40

earlier would prevail. The demand for bank credit had been strong, 

he noted, and all indications--both formal reports and discussions 

with bankers--were that it would continue strong for the remainder 

of the year.  

Under those conditions Mr. Shuford felt that the Committee 

should move to a slightly firmer policy. That would call for 

consideration with respect to the discount rate, but at the moment 

he was inclined to feel that a discount rate change could be post

poned a bit. He would reserve final judgment on that question, 

however, and also on the amount of the change, if one was to be 

made, until after discussion around the table today. He did feel, 

however, that it was time to move in the direction of a somewhat 

firmer policy.  

Mr. Patterson reported the single most important recent 

development in the Sixth District was clearly Hurrican[sic] Betsy, which 

had hit two widely separated areas in the District--the southern tip 

of Florida and southeast Louisiana. While both the old New Orleans 

Branch building and the new building escaped with only minor window 

damage, many of the Branch's employees were not as fortunate. Loss of 

property for many was large; in three instances it was virtually 100 

per cent. Even at this point, some of the employees had not fully 

determined what their total losses would eventually be. Thus, it 

might not be known for months whether the $1 billon loss figure for the 

whole State of Louisiana set by the Governor was correct.



9/28/65 -41

In Florida, however, it appeared that HurricaneBetsy caused 

less damage than had Hurricane Hilda last year, Mr. Patterson said.  

Apart from the relatively unimportant lime ard avocado crops, damage 

to Florida's farm economy was relatively small. In Louisiana, power 

disruption posed a serious problem to the chemical industry. Oil 

operations in the face of the storm were cut, and there was some 

damage to New Orleans shipping, 

A telephone survey made of farm creditors revealed that 

Louisiana's sugar cane crop would be largely salvageable, cotton 

output would be substantially reduced, and rice production cut slightly, 

Mr. Patterson reported. Farm creditors said they would be able to 

meet the credit needs without difficulty. One unfortunate aspect 

was that some farmers, especially cane growers, had now experienced 

two hurricanes in successive years, so that they would need to go 

even more heavily into debt. But all in all, the District's agri

cultural economy had withstood the shock of Betsy quite well.  

Still another telephone survey of feel, farm machinery, and 

fertilizer suppliers revealed that agricultural credit conditions 

in the Sixth District generally remained good, Mr. Patterson continued.  

Delinquency rates were near or below those of last year. The 

employment picture was good. Employment gains in July set some sort 

of record for the month, and the August figures pointed to a further 

appreciable increase. Incomes were advancing close to the vigorous 

pace of early summer.



9/28/65

The steady expansion also carried into banking, Mr. Patterson 

remarked. Whereas in past years loans slowed down during the summer, 

this year's interruption was short-lived and loans increased considerably 

in August and in early September. Loan demand from business borrowers 

was particularly strong. The intensity of those loan demands had 

forced most of the just-surveyed Atlanta and New Orleans banks to 

become increasingly selective in their lending, to firm up on rates, 

and to demand higher compensating balances from their business 

borrowers. Now that those banks faced peak seasonal demands, they 

might find it necessary to raise their lending rates further, irrespective 

of Federal Reserve policy.  

Mr. Patterson concluded with the observation that it would seem 

difficult to change policy at this meeting wiLh the Treasury cash 

financing under way.  

Mr. Bopp said he would address his coments this morning 

primarily to the staff questions on capital spending and bank credit.  

Opinions about the outlook for capital spending had become increasingly 

optimistic in the past few weeks, he noted. Evidence from a number of 

sources--the upward revision of spending plans for the latter part of 

this year, analysis of capital appropriations, new orders for equipment, 

and corporate cash flow--all seemed to be pointing toward an increase 

in expenditures next year at something like the same rate as in this 

year.

-42-



9/28/65 -43

Another approach to the overlook for capital spending, and 

one which suggested to Mr. Bopp a more moderate view, was to calculate 

the likely rate of capacity utilization next year. It seemed to him 

that current capital spending and that slated for the near future 

would bring roughly a 5-1/2 to 6 per cent increase in capacity on 

stream during 1966. Given that increase in capacity, a rise in 

industrial production of approximately 8 per cent would be necessary 

to bring the operating rate as much as 1 per cent above the preferred 

rate. If, as he felt was more likely, industrial production in 1966 

increased by on.y 4 to 5 per cent, then the operating rate either 

would hover around the present figure of approximately 90 per cent 

or would decline slightly to a figure of 89 per cent or so.  

But if che majority of recent forecasts turned out to be 

correct, Mr. Bopp said, another very strong year in capital expendi

tures might present a dilemma for Federal Reserve policy. In recent 

months there had been increasing evidence of imbalance in an economy 

so long characterized by balance. As had been pointed out at earlier 

meetings, that was seen in the componencs of industrial production.  

Growth in production so far this year had been concentrated in 

materials and equipment; output of final products for consumers had 

leveled off. That kind of gap could not be sustained indefinitely 

and, in the past, had been typical of later stages of expansions.  

The current decline in steel inventories should help bring the



9/28/65 -44

materials component back into closer relationship with production 

of consumer goods, but the prospect seemed to be for a continuing 

gap between consumer goods and producers' equipment.  

Although monetary policy could make the financing of some 

planned capital projects more difficult and expensive, Mr. Bopp 

continued, the potential dilemma in pursuing that route was 

presented by the likelihood that the imbalance would occur in an 

environment lacking overall inflationary pressures. The prospect 

that the operating rate in manufacturing would level out or even 

decline slightly suggested that overall pressure on prices from the 

capacity side was not ahead. Many things could happen to change that 

outlook, and perhaps he was raising possibilities which would not 

develop. But the current very optimistic predictions for capital 

spending did raise questions that deserved some thought.  

A more immediate consideration was the demand for loans, 

Mr. Bopp remarked. The principal Philadelphia banks had just 

completed their loan forecasts for the fourth quarter. Two of the 

banks had not thus far experienced the net loan liquidation which 

usually occurred for several weeks following the September 15 tax 

date. Moreover, business loan demand was exceeding their forecasts 

and was expected to continue at a high level. Another bank expected 

loan demand to be generally steady, although not in excess of 

expectations at this time of year. Only one bank expected business



9/28/65 -45

loans to fall below the usual seasonal increase, and even that bank 

expected no overall decline in total loans in the fourth quarter.  

That kind of picture added up to a continuing strong loan demand.  

As the green book 1/ pointed out, Mr. Bopp said, some of the 

uncertainties which obscured the outlook in recent months had now 

been resolved. A steel strike had been avoided, a non-inflationary 

wage settlement had been signed, and sterling had gained a stronger 

footing. Meanwhile, industrial commodity prices were generally 

stable; the upward pressure of rising ronferrous metal and food 

prices had largely subsided.  

Although escalation of the conflict in Vietnam could change 

the situation, Mr. Bopp thought the prospects were for a continued 

absence of overall inflationary pressure. Therefore, he would 

maintain the current posture of monetary policy. By this he meant 

about the current level of reserve availability and interest rates.  

If more aggressive purchases of Government securities, possibly 

long-terms, were necessary to reassure the market that further 

increases in rates were not likely in the near future, he would 

favor such action.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
by the Board's staff for the Committee.



9/28/65 -46

The new, larger, estimate of the deficit in the balance of 

payments for July-August was discouraging, Mr. Bopp said. But at 

present he would be inclined simply to be on the alert for further 

deterioration. He favored alternative A of the draft directives.  

Mr. Hickman said that the recent strength and momentum of 

the economy provided a strong foundation for the tests of coming 

months. The combination of a downdrag from steel and some setbacks 

from Hurricane Betsy would likely result in no gain, or possibly a 

slight dip, in the index of industrial production for September.  

For the remainder of the year, the key question was whether the 

adverse effects of the steel inventory liquidation would be offset 

by advances in other sectors. On balance, his guess was that the 

production index would probably average about the same in the fourth 

quarter as in the third. The downdrag from steel apparently would 

be slightly less than anticipated earlier--about 1-1/2 points in 

the production index on average in the fourth quarter. Auto 

production was expected to have no significant effect on the 

production index, either way, during the fourth quarter; but other 

components--reflecting strength in capital spending and in consumer 

goods other than autos--should add about as much as would be lost 

from steel.



9/28/65

Such a view was consistent with the consensus of 24 Fourth 

District business economists who had met recently at the Reserve 

Bank, Mr. Hickman observed. The group's median forecast for the 

fourth quarter was for no change in the production index--which, 

incidentally, was a substantial upward revision from the last, pre

Vietnam, forecast of the same group. In addition, those economists 

anticipated successive modest gains in indus:rial production of 

about 1 index point for each quarter of 1966.  

It was becoming increasingly clear, Mr. Hickman said, that 

Federal fiscal policy would be expansionary in 1966, particularly 

in the second half. While the amount of the increase in defense 

spending was indefinite, the second stage of the excise tax cut, 

further reductions in corporate income taxes, and medicare benefits 

would all be stimulating. The increase in social security taxes at 

the beginning cf 1966 would act as a considerable offset to those 

expansionary factors.  

Mr. Hickman thought there still was no evidence of a general 

uptrend in prices, despite the steel wage increase and the escalation 

of defense spending. Nevertheless, there was some indication that 

upward pressures on industrial prices might emerge from the cost 

side, a view expressed frequently by the business economists attending 

the Reserve Bank's recent meeting. Among potential future pressures 

were the expected extensions of the steel settlement into various

-47-



9/28/65 -48

metal-fabricating industries, the costs of wage settlements yet 

to be negotiated this year in aircraft and ordnance, the airlines, 

and other incustries, and the 2-1/2 per cent "productivity" increase 

in wage rates that became effective this month under last year's 

auto ccntrac.. In general, with unemployment among adult workers 

at 3.7 per cent--which was about as low as at any time during the 

past ten years--the shortage of experienced workers might easily 

worsen. In past business expansions, increased use of inexperienced 

and less-qualified workers had adversely affected productivity and 

cost-price relationships, thus working toward bringing the business 

expansion to an end.  

On the financial front, there appeared to Mr. Hickman to 

be less nervousness than at the time of the Committee's August 31 

meeting, largely because of the improved status of the pound. Yields 

on long-term Treasury bonds and on corporate issues apparently had 

stabilized around the highest levels in five years. Somewhat 

belatedly, municipal yields had increased recently, due possibly to 

large dealer inventories and to bank selling.  

Bank selling of municipals was a reflection of strong demands 

for bank credit and the apparent "bite" of System policy, Mr. Hickman 

observed. While borrowing to finance steel inventories would decline, 

he expected chat to be more than offset by increased demands to finance 

retail inventories and consumer durables purchases. In addition, a



9/28/65 -49

reduction in corporate liquidity had caused business firms to turn 

increasingly to external financing for working capital and plant 

and equipment spending.  

Mr. Hickman was pleased to see that net borrowed reserves 

averaged about $100 million in the three weeks following the August 

31 meeting. Ir the latest week, however, the first published figures 

showed a substantial deepening of net borrowed reserves and a sharp 

increase in bark borrowings to the highest level in nearly three 

years. The stringency thus introduced into the money market--along 

with seasonal factors, a distribution of reserves in favor of country 

banks, and the Treasury decision to finance in the short-term market-

contributed to an increase in the bill rate, which, if continued, 

would probably trigger an increase in the discount rate. That might 

be necessary later on, if price increases began to accelerate, but 

it hardly seemed justified now on the basis of information currently 

available, 

In view of domestic and international uncertainties, as well 

as the forthcoming Treasury financing, Mr. Hickman supported alternative 

A, which called for no change in policy, of the staff's draft directives.  

More specifically, he would like to see net borrowed reserves below $150 

million most of the time, and borrowings below $500 million. Moderately 

easy reserve availability until the delivery date of the new tax

anticipation bills would facilitate redistribution by the banks and 

prevent a sharp rise in bill rates.



9/28/65 -50

Mr. Maisel said he would note first that he thought it 

important that the draft directives be changed to show that the 

Committee recognized and, he would hope, followed the "official 

settlements" basis for the balance of payments. Since that balance 

was running at a surplus, he would suggest that the last clause 

in the opening sentence of both draft directives be revised to 

read, "our official international payments have remained in 

surplus while our gold losses remain moderate." 

The Committee's more important task, however, was to 

agree on the meaning of the language of its previous directives, 

Mr. Maisel continued. In particular, what was "moderate growth," 

and what were "the same conditions in the money market?" He 

assumed that 'moderate growth" of the reserve base, bank credit, 

and the money supply meant that they would expand at a rate at 

least equal to the growth potential of the economy so that if 

there was merely normal growth there ould be no tightening of 

interest rates.  

Unfortunately, Mr. Maisel remarked, that did not seem 

to have been the case. The Committee had not been accommodating 

the normal growth of the economy. While GNP this year was growing 

at a 6 per cent annual rate, somewhat below the hoped-for level 

and that necessary to employ the full labor force, the Committee 

had increased nonborrowed reserves at a rate of only 2.4 per cent.  

The money supply had grown at a rate of only 3.7 per cent.



9/28/65 -51

The money and credit to finance the economy's moderate 

growth rate had been supplied by the banks' curtailing their 

liquidity, Mr. Maisel commented. Recently the banks appeared 

to have come :lose to the end of their ability to make up for 

the Committee's lack of accommodation. That would account for 

the rapid increases in money rates.  

It seemed clear to Mr. Maisel that the Committee could 

rot at this time responsibly put such monetary pressure on the 

economy as to cause a cutback in capital investment and a halt 

to the expansion of jobs at the same rate as the labor force.  

He thought the Committee had to keep its eye on the basic problem 

of lack of utilization of resources and nor feel it necessary to 

ratify by further action its own failure to allow the economy the 

credit it needed. He felt the argument that because credit was 

tight, the Committee should make it tighter was basically circular.  

Mr. Maisel said he had though: he understood that the 

sense of the Committee's directives was to accommodate the normal 

growth rate of the economy. Recent market actions made it clear 

that the Committee had not furnished sufficient reserves for that 

purpose. The liquidity of the banking system had been lived off 

long enough. It was necessary that the Committee now look ahead 

and determine that its policy of the past six months of no change 

required making more reserves available. The level of borrowed



9/28/65 -52

reserves should be decreased sufficiently to enable banks to meet 

normal demand. That would mean a more rapid increase in owned 

reserves. Such a growth would solve the problem of current market 

rates. They would decline back at least to the summer's rates.  

Action showing that the Committee was not desirous of curtailing 

production would return the markets to the more comfortable position 

they were in before they became so acutely aware of their lack of 

liquidity.  

On the assumption that he had correctly stated what was 

meant by "moderate growth" and by the "same conditions in the 

money market," Mr. Maisel said he would support alternative A 

with the necessary correction on the balance of payments. In 

doing so, however, he believed it should be made clear that the 

behavior of the markets in the past month had not been consistent 

with the basic desire of the Committee to furnish sufficient money 

to the economy to meet the needs of normal growth.  

Mr. Daane said that he would note at the outset that he 

dissented vigorously from Mr. Maisel's proposal that the balance 

of payments reference in the directive be formulated solely in 

terms of the figures on the "official settlements" basis. Such 

figures did not represent the only "official" concept of the 

Administration, nor should they be the only ones considered by 

the Committee. But even if the "official settlements" basis were



9/28/65 -53

to be used, it still would be true that a ceficit was in prospect 

for the rest of the year and for the year as a whole.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he shared the feeling of Mr. Hayes 

and others that the U.S. balance of payments problem continued 

to be worrisome, and on that ground alone he felt the Committee 

should not take any easing action today. Also, he was not persuaded 

by the staff view that the recent firming of market conditions meant 

that it would be inappropriate for the Committee to act in the 

direction of further firming. In light of the strength of loan 

demand and the growth rate of the money supply, and of the fact 

that the very solid expansion underway certainly had not been 

inhibited by the firming of market conditions, he did not think 

it was circular to argue that the Committee should reinforce the 

market firmness with some further moderate restraint. He was 

sympathetic with Mr. Hayes' position in that respect.  

However, Mr. Daane observed, he did have some real question 

as to the timing. He noted that both draft directives gave the 

impression that the uncertainties in foreign exchange markets 

had been largely resolved. He did not agree; the fact that the 

British effort to restore the position of sterling was continuing 

had to be taken into consideration in the Committee's deliberations.  

Accordingly, while he had considerable sympathy with alternative B 

of the staff's drafts, he was not certain that this was the best



9/28/65 -54

time to adopt such a directive. He leaned toward some version of 

a "no change" directive at this juncture, with the expectation 

that the Committee would maintain close surveillance over 

developments in the weeks immediately ahead.  

Mr. Daane then noted that there had been meetings over 

the past few days of the Deputies, as well as of the Ministers 

and Governors, of the Group of Ten. This morning the latter had 

issued a communique concerning, among other things, two matters 

on which he had reported to the Committee on previous occasions.  

The communique indicated that the Group of Ten had agreed that 

the General Arrangements to Borrow should be renewed for a second 

term of four years, with a review to be undertaken in two years 

of any possible need for adaptation in the Arrangements. Thus, 

by October 1968 the Group would be in a position to make any 

adaptation corsidered desirable.  

A second point covered by the Communique, Mr. Daane 

continued, related to the question of "where do we go from here" 

with respect to international liquidity arrangements. The 

agreement announced this morning involved a first phase consisting 

of intensified efforts on the part of the Deputies to determine 

what basis of agreement could be reached on ways to strengthen 

the international monetary system, including arrangements for 

future creation of reserve assets as and when needed, looking



9/28/65 -55

toward a preliminary report in the spring of 1966. The first 

phase would not necessarily terminate then, out it presumably 

would culminate at some point in a measure of agreement on 

essential points.  

It was contemplated, Mr. Daane said, that once such a 

basis for agreement had been reached the matter would pass from 

consideration by the Ten to consideration in a somewhat broader 

forum. Since the problems concerned the world economy as a whole, 

the Ministers and Governors had agreed that it would be useful 

for the Deputies to seek ways by which efforts of the Executive 

Board of the IMF and those of the Deputies could be directed 

toward consensus as to desirable lines of action. The Ministers 

and Governors instructed the Deputies to work out procedures to 

achieve this a,.m, in close consultation with the Managing 

Director of the Fund, with a view to preparing for final enactment 

of any new arrangements at an appropriate forum for international 

discussions.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thcught that the develop

ments Mr. Daane had reported represented progress on the part of 

the Group of Ten.  

Mr. Mitchell said he thought he fell within the group that 

was somewhat skeptical about the prevailing optimism on the business



9/28/65 -56

outlook. It seemed to him that the optimism was based primarily on 

a somewhat exaggerated notion of the economic stimulus that would 

be provided by the Vietnam hostilities. He was more concerned about 

the secondary and tertiary effects of the inventory adjustment in 

steel and stee products; time was needed to learn how much of an 

adjustment would have to be absorbed. Mr. Koch had confined his analysis 

largely to projections of components of GNP, but it also was necessary 

to consider the future course of industrial production. Personally, 

he expected little change in the production index in the next four 

months, and perhaps some decline. In general, he thought there was 

greater uncertainty about business prospects than one might gather 

from many of the statements currently being made.  

With respect to prices, Mr. Mitchell thought the steel 

settlement overshadowed all other developments of the past few months 

and he felt reference to it should be made in the Committee's directive.  

The settlement was a noninflationary one; while it did not mean there 

would be no selective increases in steel prices, the settlement itself 

and the precedent it established were both on the side of price 

stability.  

The problems in the international area appeared no nearer 

a solution than they had two or three years ago, Mr. Mitchell said, 

except that the Group of Ten Deputies were going to study the 

liquidity question more intensively and broadly, and hopefully



9/28/65 -57

they would move forward. But he saw no great need on balance of 

payments grounds for altering monetary policy any more than the 

Committee already had unconsciously altered it.  

On the financial side, Mr. Mitchell found himself in 

complete agreement with Mr. Partee's remarks. He (Mr. Mitchell) 

wanted to avoid the very thing Mr. Hayes favored--namely, a change 

in the discount rate--because he thought that might well result 

in a grinding interruption to the economy's upward progress. For 

the same reason he was disturbed by the recent trends of interest 

rates in capital and money markets. He woul favor an effort to 

tranquilize those markets rather than, as some had suggested, 

moving toward further firming in an already firm situation. For 

whatever reason, banks were reluctant to borrow from the Federal 

Reserve, and were not getting the reserves they needed. Under 

those circumstances he thought that the System should be supplying 

reserves somewhat more freely than it had in recent weeks.  

Mr. Mitchell said he was unhappy about the staff's draft 

directives. He would suggest the following wording: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that the domestic economy has 
expanded further in a climate of optimistic business 
sentiment and firmer financial conditions, and that 
our international payments have been in deficit since 
midyear. Some of the uncertainties previously affecting 
the domestic outlook for price stability and foreign 
exchange markets have diminished, but the impact on the 
business outlook of contracting steel and steel and 
allied product inventories cannot yet be gauged with



9/28/65

significant accuracy to say that it will be offset 
by expansive factors. In this situation, it is the 
Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to 
conduct its operations so as to promote stability 
in money and capital and foreign exchange markets, 
while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve 
base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account 
the current Treasury financing, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to easirg somewhat the 
pressures in the money market that have developed 
recently; this would involve net borrowed reserves 
averaging about $50-$100 million, borrowing of under 
$500 million, and Federal funds trading most often 
at the discount rate.  

In Mr. Mitchell's judgment the Manager had not had sufficiently 

specific instructions to cope with the problems he had faced in the 

market recently. The purpose of the proposed second paragraph was 

to provide some criteria to which the Manager could refer if he 

continued to ercounter a difficult situation. While he had 

specified certain numerical targets in that paragraph he would 

defer to Mr. Holmes' judgment if the latter thought the targets 

mentioned were likely to prove inconsistent.  

Chairman Martin commented that he would interpret Mr. Mitchell's 

proposed directive as calling for a change in policy in the direction 

of ease. There was no reason, of course, why such a course should 

not be proposed. He thought it should be clear, however, that while 

Mr. Hayes advocated a firmer policy, Mr. Mitchell favored an easier

one.

-58-



928/65 -59

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he would place a different 

interpretation on his proposal. In his opinion policy already 

had firmed; what he advocated was a restoration of the market 

conditions the Committee presumably had intended to maintain 

under its August 31 directive. The present situation would not 

have arisen, he thought, if the Committee had been more specific 

about its intentions in the August 31 directive. The problem 

of formulating, instructions to the Manager was, of course, an 

old one, but it had plagued the Committee particularly seriously 

in the recent period.  

Mr. Maisel noted that the Committee's previous directive 

had called for maintaining about the same conditions in the 

money market. Nevertheless, as both Mr. Hayes and Mr. Holmes 

had noted, and as was clear from all indications, market con

ditions were now tighter than they had been a few weeks ago. For 

purposes of clarification he would ask whether the change in 

market conditions should be viewed as a change in policy; or, to 

put the question differently, whether a restoration of the con

ditions of, say, three weeks earlier should be viewed as maintaining 

the prior policy or changing to an easier one.  

Chairman Martin commented that the Committee could maintain 

market rates at any given levels if it were willing to supply 

whatever amount of reserves were necessary for that purpose. In



9/28/65 -60

his judgment, however, that was not the Committee's objective under 

"no change" directives.  

Mr. Daane observed that the present situation, in which 

previous relations among money market variables no longer were 

consistent, provided an excellent illustration of why the Committee 

should not attempt to introduce quantified targets into its directive.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he differed with that view; in his 

opinion the current situation offered an excellent example of the 

need for numerical instructions.  

Mr. Hayes said he concurred in Mr. Daane's view that it 

was not feasible to quantify instructions to the Manager. At any 

time various cross-currents were at wo.:k in the market, and the 

Committee faced a new set of circumstances each time it met. He 

submitted that at the time of the August 31 meeting no one could 

have foreseen accurately the manner in which developments subsequently 

unfolded. It also was necessary to recognize that the market could 

tighten by itself without any effort or, the Committee's part to create 

firmer conditions, and that was what in fact had happened recently.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that the Manager nevertheless had not 

acted to counter the firmer conditions that had developed in the 

market. He added that he did not mean to imply any criticism of the 

Manager; in his opinion the fault lay with tne Committee.



9/28/65 -61

Chairman Martin remarked that it would be possible for the 

Committee to ignore market forces, in effect making the market itself 

and driving all. others out. Perhaps it had approached that position 

at times; but in recent years it had attempted to give some play to 

market forces, in the process obtaining indications of the nature of the 

pressures existing.  

After :ome further discussion the go-around resumed with remarks 

by Mr. Shepardson.  

Mr. Shepardson said that he concurred in Mr. Hayes' analysis 

of the present situation. It seemed to him that expansionary forces 

definitely were at work. He was not ready to accept the statement 

that the steel settlement was a noninflationary one. It was not as 

inflationary as some had feared it might be, but he still thought 

that upward pressures on prices would be manifest. He had difficulty 

in interpreting, the price indexes against the background of the many 

announcements cf price increases being made. Nevertheless, however 

one measured p ices there had been a continuing upward crawl, although 

there had not been rampant inflation. Given the state of business 

optimism, there seemed to him to be a definite possibility of an 

outbreak of price increases.  

In that connection, Mr. Shepardson continued, the situation 

would not be so difficult if there were prospects of a correction 

when prices got out of hand. What concerned him was that, as far



9/28/65 -62

as he had been able to observe in the last ten years or so, such 

corrections had not occurred. There were so many built-in rigidities 

that the best one could hope for was a leveling off after a burst of 

increases, with subsequent increases starting from the higher plateau.  

Accordingly, it was important in his opinion to try to forestall any 

outbreak.  

For some time, Mr. Shepardson said, he had felt that the 

Committee should move to a firmer position soon. As he had noted 

at previous meetings, he thought the Committee had about reached the 

point where its next move should be a significant one, probably 

involving a change in the discount rate. But he questioned whether 

this was the time for such a change; unlike Mr. Hayes, he thought a 

better opportunity would arise after the current Treasury financing 

was completed. On that basis Mr. Shepardson favored continuance of 

the present policy, and alternative A for the directive, on the 

understanding that the money market conditions to be maintained were 

those existing at the present time.  

Mr. Hayes said he might clarify his reasoning with respect 

to the question of timing. His thought was that if the Committee 

made a change in policy now the market would have all of the 

circumstances in view at the time of the Treasury financing. If, 

on the other hand, a policy change was made after delivery of the 

new securities had been effected, there was the possibility that



9/28/65

the action would be construed as "pulling the rug out" from under 

the market, 

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

I do not think it can be emphasized too often that 
we meet today in an atmosphere of significantly tighter 
credit conditions than prevailed one or two months ago.  

We know that several factors have contributed to 
that run-up in yields--among them increases in demands 
for funds from both government and private borrowers 
and major shifts in market expectations. Some people 
would go on to argue that the Federal Reserve has had 
virtually nothing to do with that tightening, and 
presumably therefore bears no responsibility with respect 
to it. I have absolutely no sympathy for that position.  
We may not have triggered the tightenirg by an overt act, 
but we acquiesced in its taking place. We could have 
moderated or resisted the rise in interest rates by a 
more aggressive supplying of reserves, and we chose not 
to do so, 

Now, with tighter conditions prevailing in every 
major credit market, we again face a policy choice. I 
think we must be very careful not to fool ourselves with 
semantics in the process. I would argue that, broadly 
speaking, we have three alternatives today. First, we 
could choose to foster general credit conditions not 
much changed from around the end of July, or, if you 
prefer, around the end of August--in which case we 
would need to tell the Manager to act forcefully to 
ease bank reserve positions and relax current money 
market pressures. A second possible choice would be 
to maintain money market conditions and reserve availabil
ity about as is--with such relaxation of reserve pressure 
(by the Desk) as would be necessary to avoid any further 
tightening regardless of the cause. Finally, there is 
a third policy choice--an unappealing one in my view--of 
compounding the recent tightening of credit conditions by 
instigating (or, if you wish, permitting) still further 
tightening.  

Which course we choose, of course ought to depend 
upon our appraisal of the underlying business situation.  
As 1 review the evidence before us, I am impressed with

-63-



9/28/65

the generally vigorous pace of economic and credit 
expansion, particularly in the investment area, but I 

note that it has not yet had to bear the full weight 
of the inventory adjustment that will follow the steel 
settlement, Business sentiment seems cptimistic, but 
it has not yet bubbled over into widespread advances in 
prices. Our balance of payments picture is still not as 
good as one might wish. But in those payments accounts 
alleged to be sensitive to interest rates and credit 
conditions, we seem to be doing very well. Probably 
this is due more to our voluntary rest aint program and 
the Interest Equalization Tax than to changes in the 
general credit climate in this country, but it provides 
no argument for still further credit tightening now.  

All things considered, given the strength of credit 
demands that have evolved recently and the probable need 
for some kind of "even keel" in connection with the 
Treasury financing, I am disposed to go along very 
cautiously with maintaining for the next three weeks 
about the degree of firmer general credit availability 
that has developed. To resist further tightening, however, 
I think the Manager may need to operate in a manner designed 
to achieve a lower volume of net borrowed reserves and a less 
tight money market than developed last week. I want to 
emphasize that, in my view, such a posture should only be 
regarded as appropriate so long as credit demands continue 
in their present strength. Any tendency for market pressures 
to relax, reflecting some underlying moderation in the 
forces of credit demands, should not be resisted by the 
Manager; rather, he should be directed to permit and even 
reinforce it somewhat by a corresponding easing in bank 
reserve positions. I regard this as a delicate period, 
with a potentially important influence on the life expectancy 
of the current business expansion, and I think we have to be 
wary of allowing the current climate of firmer credit con
ditions to overstay its usefulness.  

With these thoughts in mind, I deplore the vagueness 
of the second paragraph of both alternative directives 
distributed by the staff. I would favor a first paragraph 
as suggested for alternative A, followed by a second 
paragraph that tells the Manager to maintain about the 
same money market conditions as prevailed on average 
during September, taking into account the current Treasury 
financing and also the rate of expansion in reserve utiliza
tion by the banking system. (The September averages I

-64-



9/28/65 -65

refer to are: 3-month bill rate--3.90 per cent; 6-month 
bill rate--4.05 per cent; Federal funds rate--4.10 per 
cent; and net borrowed reserves--$118 million.) 

Mr. Wayne reported that general economic advance continued 

in the Fifth District, with strength evident in all major industries.  

The Richrond Bank's latest business survey reflected increased optimism 

and suggested that the pace of activity might be quickening. The 

employment situation had continued to improve throughout the District.  

In West Virgin.a, for example, the rate of insured unemployment was 

recently at the lowest point since November 1956. Reports of labor 

shortages, especially in the skilled categories, appeared to be 

coming in more frequently.  

In the national economy, Mr. Wayne continued, liquidation 

of steel stockpiles had already begun and would probably proceed 

for several months. In view of the continuing high rate of steel 

consumption and of the prospect of some upward price adjustments, 

however, the rate of liquidation might prove to be less than past 

experience might suggest. On balance, with final demand in all 

sectors of the economy continuing to rise and with a further in

crease in business outlays for plant and equipment now a virtual 

certainty, he would expect the dampening effect of the inventory 

development to be more than offset. The inventory turnaround in 

metals might be expected to take some of the edge off business 

loan demand. Inventories would likely increase in other lines,



9/28/65 -66

however, and further increases in business capital outlays would 

appear to insure that business loan demand would remain strong 

for the rest of the year.  

Despite the recent stability in the price indexes, Mr. Wayne 

was not convinced that the present situation was without an inflationary 

potential. Prospects in all sectors suggested expanding final demand 

in the months ahead and, on the supply side, it seemed to him that 

conditions might favor cost-push pressures. The Committee had been 

interpreting the high rate of business capital outlays as a sign of 

expanding capacity that would dampen upward price pressures. He 

wondered if the Committee had given sufficient attention to recent 

developments in the labor market. The effective rate of capacity 

expansion was Limited by the scarcest factor and it might be that 

significant labor bottlenecks were approaching. He wondered if the 

U.S. actually had 4-1/2 per cent of "employables" unemployed. He 

was impressed with the increasing evidence of labor shortages and 

with the growing number of announced price increases.  

On the international scene, Mr. Wayne said, the recent 

improvement in sterling was encouraging and it appeared that recent 

changes in the distribution of international reserves had worked 

in favor of the United States. But the problem in that area, at 

least for the near-term future, remained essentially unchanged.



9/28/65 -67

Mr. Wayne went on to say that the market for Government 

securities had been adequately discussed and analyzed, so he 

would like to take a brief look at the market for municipals, 

which had some interesting aspects. Commercial banks had been 

the mainstay of that market for the past four years, and had 

acquired over 70 per cent of the net addition to State and local 

debt during that period. They now held some $36 billion of tax 

exempts, or roughly 35 per cent of the total and those made up 

10 per cent of total bank assets. At weekly reporting banks, 

holdings of municipals were now approaching holdings of Governments.  

Mr. Wayne was somewhat concerned about the reversibility 

of that heavy bank movement into municipals. The secondary market 

in that area was thinner and much less well developed than was 

the case with Governments, and if banks should attempt to meet 

growing loan demand through liquidating tax exempts, a particularly 

severe strain might develop. The strain might, indeed, be severe 

enough if banks simply slowed down their rate of new acquisitions.  

In any event, the fact that weekly reporting banks had added little 

to their "other" securities in the past three weeks and reports 

that some banks were considering selling some of their holdings 

could be a prelude to a significant problem in the municipals market.  

What impressed him here was that that market might well have become 

the bellwether of money and credit restraint.



9/28/65 -68

In the area of policy, Mr. Wayne continued, recent weeks 

had seen a more distinct and more general firming of conditions 

in both money and capital markets than there had been thus far 

in the long peiod of expansion. When the Committee moved toward 

less ease late last year and early this year, most short-term 

rates rose but there was no appreciable change in long rates.  

Probably more important, the expansion of bank credit and the 

money supply actually accelerated somewhat. To him it would 

seem quite hazardous to back away from the firm conditions that 

had developed. The substantial additions to personal income 

this month and next, the high level of business optimism, the 

large capital outlays by business, the rising level of defense 

expenditures, and developing labor shortages, especially in the 

more skilled categories, all would add upward pressures on prices 

not likely to be offset by declining activity in the steel sector.  

Even with its present posture, the Committee might well see a 

continuation of the slow upcreep in prices, and any easing would 

be quite likely to speed it up.  

If approximately the present level of reserve availability 

was maintained, Mr. Wayne said, the firming of financial markets 

would probably continue--a movement he would favor so long as it 

was moderate and orderly. On the other hand, he believed that 

any tightening move at this time might well produce acute stringency



9/28/65 -69

in the capital market, especially in the municipal sector, and might 

also prejudice the recent improvement in sterling. Further, the 

large sale of tax-anticipation bills just ahead would probably 

cause a significant increase in bank credit, at least temporarily, 

and any reduction of reserve availability might jeopardize the 

success of the offering. For those reasons he favored continuing 

the present policy.  

Mr. Wayne added that he had no desire to reopen the discussion 

of the subject of quantification. In his opinion, however, all the 

Committee would have achieved if it had included quantified instructions 

in its August 31 directive would have been to insure the need for 

meeting several times in the interim. For that and other reasons he 

was not in favor of quantification. For today's directive he would 

favor alternative A of the staff's drafts. He had no objections to 

attempts to improve the wording but since he was not optimistic about 

the possibility of reaching agreement on new language he would 

recommend acceptance of the draft as submitted.  

Mr. Clay remarked that the most important issue before the 

Committee today was the tightening of the money and capital markets 

and the upward pressure on interest rates. Substantial movement 

already had taken place, and the markets appeared to be quite 

sensitive to further advances in yields.



9/28/65

Economic prospects appeared to be quite favorable, Mr. Clay 

said, although readjustments in some areas growing out of the settle

ment of the steel strike were likely to weaken the industrial production 

index. Expansion was likely in final demand for goods and services in all 

major sectors of the economy--consumer, business and government.  

Moreover, it appeared probable that the economic advance could 

continue to take place in an orderly fashion in terms of resource 

utilization and price developments. The principal question in that 

connection arose out of the unknown proportions of the military 

programs and expenditures.  

In evaluating the economic prospects, however, account had 

to be taken of the reduced liquidity position of business as compared 

with earlier in the economic upswing, Mr. Clay commented. Accordingly, 

business now required more outside financing than earlier for any 

particular degree of economic growth. In addition, the commercial 

banking system's liquidity also had been reduced substantially.  

Under those circumstances, it was essertial that monetary policy 

prevent credit restraint from becoming a disruptive force in the 

economic advance.  

In approaching the period ahead, Mr. Clay said, the Manager 

should not pay much attention to the net borrowed or free reserves 

guide, in view of the circumstances prevailing. The guide should 

be the condition of the money and capital markets. While it was

-70-



9/28/65 -71

particularly important to forestall further upward movement in 

open market interest rates, some turnaround in yields would be 

desirable. The impact of open market operations to alter the recent 

course of interest rates should have a powerful effect upon market 

attitudes and expectations, facilitating the desired change in the 

money and capital markets. Moreover, open market operations 

supplying seasonal reserve needs in the weeks ahead should be 

of assistance in implementing such a policy. In that connection, 

it was important to prevent Treasury bill yield developments that 

would force an increase in the Federal Reserve discount rate.  

Neither of the draft directive alternatives appeared to 

Mr. Clay to be satisfactory. Alternative B called for further 

firming of credit conditions, and that would not be appropriate 

for reasons he had already indicated. Alternative A simply accepted 

what already had happened with respect to credit tightening and, 

judging by developments since the August 31 meeting, would be 

compatible with further tightening in the period ahead. He suggested 

that in the second paragraph of alternative A the language following 

the phrase "with a view to" be replaced by "attaining somewhat easier 

conditions in the money market." With the Treasury financing a week 

away and of the auction type, it should be possible to pursue such 

a policy in the interim.



9/28/65 -72

Mr. Scanlon reported that developments of the past month 

appeared to have increased confidence of Seventh District businessmen 

that economic expansion would continue through 1965 and, probably, 

well into 1966. Steel producers had been surprised at the limited 

extent of order cancellations and postponements following the labor 

settlement early in September. There had been no period thus far 

when cancellation of orders exceeded new bookings, as had occurred 

in the spring of 1962. Demand for steel plates, structurals, and 

galvanized sheets remained strong. Heavy inventories and large 

imports suggested that any attempt of steel producers to make 

general price increases in the near future probably would not be 

successful.  

Demand for workers continued strong in nearly all Seventh 

District areas, Mr. Scanlon said. Many firns continued to report 

great difficulty in hiring sufficient numbers of workers--both skilled 

workers and unskilled adult males.  

Wholesale prices probably were rising on balance, Mr. Scanlon 

remarked. A recent internal survey of prices paid for identical items 

by one large retailer showed a very small increase over last year.  

No special adjustment was made in this comparison for the cut in 

excise taxes. Also, higher priced items were added continously to 

the lines handled.



9/28/65 -73

Mr. Scanlon expected some moderation in the trend toward 

tighter labor markets in the District in the months ahead. There 

had been three prime movers in that area--steel, autos, and machinery.  

Steel firms were now reducing labor requirements and needs of auto 

producers probably were at a peak. Of the three, only machinery and 

equipment producers were still attempting to increase employment and 

their order backlogs continued to rise. Machine toll builders reported 

a high level of interest at their convention now in progress in Chicago.  

Reports from District banks indicated that loan demand continued 

to be strong, Mr. Scanlon observed, although in recent weeks loan 

increases at those banks were slightly less rapid than for the United 

States as a whole. Business borrowing had been only moderately larger 

than a year ago but loans to finance companies were up sharply and 

real estate loans had risen further. In the first half of September 

borrowings by producers of machinery and other metals products rose 

more than last year.  

A large share of the rise in business loans in the first half 

of September, Mr. Scanlon said, was attributable to public utilities, 

which often borrowed to pay taxes. The rate of growth in business 

loans, although rapid by past standards, had slowed in comparison 

with the first half of the year after allowance for seasonal factors.  

Nevertheless, with growing business expenditures in relation to cash 

flows, further vigorous demand for bank credit could be expected,



9/28/65 -74

especially if rates on capital issues continued to rise relative 

to rates on bank loans.  

Mr. Scanlon went on to say that fiv of the District's eight 

reporters in the lending practice survey of September 15 stated that 

loan demand was stronger and interest rates on commercial and indus

trial loans firmer than three months ago. Seven banks indicated 

firmer policies with respect to at least some of the lending terms 

covered. Officials of some savings and loan associations reported 

that they had observed improvement in quality of loan applications 

and attributed that to tightening up by banks.  

Reserve pressures on major banks in Chicago and Detroit 

over the tax rate were relatively mild but might increase as 

deposits declined following the tax payments, Mr. Scanlon said.  

The volume of borrowing from the Chicago Reserve Bank by both city 

and country banks had been averaging somewhat higher in recent 

weeks despite the relatively small national totals of net borrowed 

reserves. However, the number of borrowers had not increased.  

Mr. Scanlon shared the view of those who felt that any 

change in policy should be one of firming. He certainly would not 

back away from the present position and if ne were convinced market 

forces were bringing enough upward pressure on rates to call for a 

discount rate change he could accept the change. However, like 

Mr. Shepardson, he did not feel that today was the time to make a



9/28/65 -75

firming move. Accordingly, he favored alternative A of the 

draft directives.  

Mr. Galusha commented that, appealing to the well-known 

maxim "good news is no news," he would say little this morning 

about Ninth District developments. The simple fact was that the 

District continued to enjoy heartening advances, particularly in 

employment. In August wage and salary employment was up 2.3 per 

cent from a year ago. And the August unemployment rate for the 

District was estimated to have been 3.7 per cent. Average hours 

worked and average weekly compensation had continued to increase 

more rapidly than in the nation as a whole, and similarly for 

retail sales. Ninth District cash farm income was up from a 

year ago, if on a cumulative basis slightly less than in the 

nation. Snow, heavy rains, and early frosts had dimmed the 

brilliant prospects of a month ago. Still, the expectation was 

that 1965 would turn out to have been a relatively good year for 

agriculture.  

Banks in the Ninth District continued relatively tight, 

Mr. Galusha noted. Both weekly and nonweekly reporting banks had 

record high average loan-deposit ratios in July. Those ratios 

declined slightly in August, but preliminary evidence indicated 

that they would be up rather substantially in September. Over 

the first part of September weekly reporting banks broke their



9/28/65 -76

seasonal pattern and sold large quantities of Treasury and other 

securities, presumably to accommodate a larger-than-seasonal 

business loan demand.  

Finally, Mr. Galusha said, it appeared from the Reserve 

Bank's most recent business survey that the outlook continued 

bullish. To a greater extent than a year ago, District firms were 

reporting large increases in new orders and order backlogs. Also, 

more firms were reporting slight increases in prices received.  

On the other side, more were reporting large increases in 

finished inventories.  

Turning to the national scene, Mr. Calusha found encour

agement in the steel settlement, if the Council of Economic Advisers 

and Mr. Wernick of the Board's staff were correct in their 

appraisals of the increase in hourly compensation. Those appraisals 

suggested that if steel price increases occurred in coming months 

they would be selective and quite modest. He also found 

encouragement in the continuing virtual stability of wholesale prices 

generally; and in recently expressed opinions about the intermediate

term outlook, the most optimistic included, which indicated that 

demand inflation was not likely to become a reality over the coming 

six to nine months. He agreed, of course, that Government spending, 

particularly for defense, had to be watched carefully. But it would 

seem ,that the Committee could do no more than be guided by the best



9/28/65 -77

current guesses about what level Government spending would reach 

in fiscal 1966. And official guesses--which contrasted oddly with 

some hard-to-credit Congressional guesses he had heard--were such 

as to suggest that at the moment there was no cause for alarm.  

Mr. Galusha thought it was possible that if the Committee 

continued to hold average net borrowed reserves in the range of 

past weeks the market's expectations would be confounded and rates, 

having been pushed up by a change in guesses about monetary policy, 

would retreat to levels of a while ago. Bu- that seemed unlikely.  

He personally believed that any attempt to "confirm" the present 

rate structure in a market as volatile as that currently existing 

would be quickly translated into further increases. That prospect 

had to be viewed against a background of rather considerable 

increases in rates generally; the increases recorded in the period 

since early 1965 were not insignificant. Against that background, 

moreover, the risk of a slight decline in rates appeared less than 

compelli-g.  

Mr. Galusha was inclined, however, to regard "no change in 

policy at this time" as a conservative statement. But it should 

be clear, he said, that in urging no change in policy he was 

urging that deliberate tightening be avoided and further increases 

in rates on Treasury securities be resisted.



9/28/65 -78

Mr. Galusha added that there seemed to be a general 

discomfort induced by the continuation of the high level of 

economic activity, as if that fact in itself was cause for 

concern. There did not appear to him to be any obvious aber

ration across the broad spectrum of business nor in the numbers 

being generated to justify the degree of concern. The market 

place had moved to curb credit creation with significant 

increases in rates. Why not see what developed at those rate 

levels before making an overt act which could have an unwanted 

geometric effect? 

Mr. Galusha concluded by remarking that he suspected he 

would vote for alternative A of the directive unless it lost its 

present flavor through revisions agreed upon by a majority.  

Mr. Swan reported that on the Pacific Coast employment 

had increased somewhat in August, as it had in the country as a 

whole, but the rate of unemployment remained unchanged. Employ

ment in the aerospace industry rose for the fifth consecutive 

month but the major factor seemed to be a r:.se in production of 

commercial aircraft rather than an increase in military output.  

Retail sales, although well above a year ago, were still lagging 

behind those for the nation. The expansion in credit at District 

weekly reporting member banks from mid-August to mid-September 

again was less than a year ago and also less than in the rest of



9/28/65 -79

the country. However, the increase in the business loan category 

was larger than a year ago.  

Mr, Swan noted that the Twelfth District was one of the 

areas in which there had been far less borrowing from the Reserve 

Bank during the past several weeks. At the same time, District 

banks had been actively seeking funds in the Federal funds market.  

As elsewhere, the survey of bank lending practices, according to 

the figures received thus far by the Reserve Bank, indicated some 

further firming of rates and some tightening of other terms.  

With respect to the national situation and policy, it 

seemed to Mr. Swan that some of the earlier uncertainties had 

diminished, it they had not been resolved. On the other hand, 

some of the uncertainties seemed to have been transferred to the 

securities market. Since the August 31 meeting of the Committee 

there had beer. a steel settlement which certainly was less 

inflationary than it might have been. Some slowdown in overall 

inventory growth presumably was underway, although its magnitude 

would depend to a considerable extent on developments in steel 

inventories. Also, the pound was in a somewhat better position.  

This country's own international position was not good, but as 

far as he could see most of the causes were not new; the Committee 

had been discussing them for some time. A substantial Treasury 

financing lay just ahead. Money and credit markets were somewhat



9/28/65 -80

tighter, even though that resulted from developments in the 

markets themselves rather than from any positive action on the 

Committee's part.  

Considering all of those factors, Mr. Swan said, it 

seemed to him the Committee should not tighten further at this 

point. He thought it quite likely that either a positive step 

toward firming by the Committee or any further tightening by 

the market itself would produce a reaction that would result in 

considerably more than "slightly" firmer conditions. In such a 

situation, System was likely to be confronted with a need to take 

the steps Mr. Hayes had recommendedbut which he (Mr. Swan) did 

not favor at this time--namely, to raise the discount rate and 

the Regulation Q ceilings.  

On the other hand, Mr. Swan continued, given the basic 

strength in the present economic situation he would not necessarily 

try to back away from the conditions existing at the moment.  

He would accept a policy of "no change" but he agreed that that 

term needed further definition. The tightening that had occurred 

did not appear to him to have been inconsistent with the sense 

of the Committee's decisions for "no change" at the late-August 

meeting or other recent ones; the Committee, he thought, had 

focused primarily on the level of net borrowed reserves in 

discussing immediate policy objectives, and the rate structure



9/28/65 -81

had firmed without any appreciable change in the net borrowed 

reserve level. But the Committee had the responsibility for 

deciding whether or not to act to offset market forces, as 

Mr. Robertsor. had noted, and at this time he would define "no 

change" to call for attempting to offset any tendencies in the 

market toward further tightness. In other words, emphasis should 

be placed on market rates, with the object of keeping the bill rate 

around present levels. If a lower level of net borrowed reserves 

was required to keep the bill rate from rising further, as might 

well be the case, that would be acceptable to him.  

Mr. Swan said he would not suggest any changes in the 

second parag:aph of the directive, even though he would prefer 

a quite different formulation. He agreed with Mr. Mitchell that 

it would be desirable to include a reference to the results of 

the steel settlement in the first paragraph.  

Mr. Irons reported that economic activity in the Eleventh 

District, as reflected in data for production, construction, 

employment, and retail trade, was at a very high level and was 

continuing to expand. The District was particularly fortunate 

in that it probably would have a highly favorable agricultural 

situation this year. Most major crops were showing production 

increases over a year ago.



9/28/65 -82

There continued to be tightness in banking, Mr. Irons 

said, and bank liquidity was at relatively low levels. Loans 

continued to rise, there had been some further reductions in 

Governments, and deposit increases continued. District banks 

were very active purchasers of Federal funds, with net purchases 

running at about $250 million. City banks in particular were 

actively seeking funds to meet loan demands, which were strong 

and were expected to continue strong over the rest of the year.  

At the national level, Mr. Irons continued, some of the 

earlier uncertainties had been removed. A steel inventory adjust

ment was occurring, but he doubted that its consequences would 

be drastic; it would have some effect on industrial production, 

but probably not a highly significant or long-continuing one.  

As to the major categories of demand, business outlays on new 

plant and equipment promised to be very large, consumer expec

tations were strong, and government expenditures at both the 

Federal and State and local levels were expected to increase.  

Personal incomes were rising and the attitudes of consumers 

seemed to fortify their willingness to spend. The labor market, 

particularly that for skilled workers, continued to reflect some 

degree of firmness, despite the persisting 4-1/2 per cent 

unemployment rate.



9/28/65 -83

Mr. Irons thought there might be some lessening of upward 

price movements as a result of the steel settlement, but in his 

opinion the tendency on balance would be for prices to continue 

to move up. The possibilities of absorbing increased costs were 

reduced as the economy moved closer to optimum rates of resource 

utilization.  

In light of domestic conditions as well as international 

developments with respect to sterling and the U.S. balance of 

payments, Mr. Irons preferred to continue present policy at this 

time. It seemed to him that the Committee had three alternatives: 

it could adopt a policy of somewhat greater ease, move overtly 

and strongly in the direction of greater firmness, or attempt 

to maintain the availability and cost of reserves about as they 

had been during the past month. He favored the last of these 

alternatives, having in mind the general patterns prevailing over 

the period rather than those existing at any particular time, 

such as the last two or three days or some day two weeks ago.  

The market appeared to be transmitting signals of changed 

conditions, and the basic significance and importance of those 

signals should become clearer if an effort were made to maintain 

conditions as nearly as possible as they were. In his opinion 

the Manager should not be bound by any statistical guide with 

respect to, say, the level of net borrowed reserves or the



9/28/65 -84

interest rate on some particular market instrument; he should 

have the authority to exercise judgment and to operate in terms 

of the feel of the market.  

Mr. Irons concluded with the observation that he would 

accept alternative A for the directive as submitted, and would 

not attempt to make any changes in wording.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that with the national economy operating 

at a high level and manufacturing output advancing on a broad front, 

New England's factory-oriented economy was receiving substantial 

stimulus. Manufacturing output in August was averaging more than 

8 per cent year-to-year gains, with the important electrical 

machinery industry posting a 14 per cent gain. Nonfarm employment 

had risen to new peaks and unemployment had fallen to lows not 

experienced since 1956. With high employment and rising wages, 

aggregate personal income in the region continued a steady growth 

that bolstered high levels of consumer spending. Auto registrations 

for the first seven months cumulated to a 7 per cent gain from 

last year. Department store sales in the four weeks ending 

September 18 had averaged a 12 per cent year-to-year gain.  

Mr. Ellis noted that preliminary tabulations of the 

Reserve Bank's fall capital expenditure survey for New England 

suggested that outlays this year would outstrip spring expecta

tions by 3 per cent, yielding a 22 per cent year-to-year gain.



9/28/65 -85

Substantial carry-over of plant building expected for the year 

helped to b ost recorded present plans fcr 1966 outlays to a 

9 per cent gain, with many firms yet to be heard from.  

In that ebullient atmosphere, Mr. Ellis said, District 

bankers both recorded and reported strong loan demands. Their 

records revealed year-to-year growth of 16 per cent in total 

loans, with the 21 per cent growth in real estate loans leading 

the parade. Their reports indicated their customers would be 

expecting full accommodation this fall, especially in view of the 

fact that bank loans at the prime rate of 4-1/2 per cent were 

"bargains" in today's market, where the average yield on new 

Aaa corporate bond issues had risen to 4 70 per cent. At 4-1/2 

per cent, the prime rate was an artificial rate.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis commented that 

compared with last spring there was substantially less diversity 

in opinions about the business outlook. Most analysts now would 

agree with the green book's summary statement that "...for all 

major categories of final demand--business, consumers, and 

government--the prospect is for further expansion." Given the 

existing high level of business activity, with factory operations 

other than steel at 90 per cent or more of capacity and with 

shortages of skilled workers, the central issue revolved around 

meeting the expected demand increases without substantial price 

inflation.



9/28/65 -86

In his judgment, Mr. Ellis said, upward pressures on 

prices were likely to continue, with the indexes showing steady 

upward movement. Since the steel settlement, price increases had 

been announced for products in a number of categories which he 

would not take the time to list. He would note, however, that 

freight handling charges at Atlantic and Gulf ports were scheduled 

to rise from 5 to 12 per cent on October 1 to cover higher dock 

labor costs. There were important areas in which strikes existed 

or threatened: Boeing Aircraft, the oil industry--which was 

facing a 5 per cent wage demand--and the United Aerospace Workers.  

In that atmosphere the extent to which demand pressures were 

stimulated by rapid--he almost said unsustainable--bank credit 

expansion could play a vital role in determining whether price 

pressures were contained or escaped to feed inflationary expecta

tions.  

Agenda question 6, Mr. Ellis noted, requested views on 

what range of monetary developments might prove to be consistent 

within an assumed policy objective of "no change" in coming weeks.  

The question seemed to imply that a "no change" choice continued 

to be available to and definable by the Committee. But he was 

pleased to see that both the staff comment and Mr. Partee in his 

remarks today emphasized the changed relationships among elements 

in "money market conditions."



9/28/65

There were at least three developments suggesting that the 

Committee might have to make a choice between internally inconsistent 

intermediate goals, Mr. Ellis observed. One development might be 

loosely labeled "changes in rate relationships." He had in mind the 

facts that certificate of deposit rates were more generally touching 

their 4-1/2 per cent ceiling while the prime rate remained pegged 

at the same ceiling by other forces; that large corporations might 

now borrow at the bank prime rate of 4-1/2 per cent less expensively 

than in the bond market; and that a divergence existed between the 

discount rate and a Federal funds rate that was consistently at 

4-1/8 per cent and edging toward 4-1/4 per cent.  

A second development, Mr. Ellis said, might be labeled 

"changirg market expectations." As he read the signs, the rate 

increases he had noted as well as the gradual upsurge of long-term 

bond rates suggested that both lenders, and investors were coming to 

believe that higher interest rates were for:hcoming. That had to 

be evaluated as an evolution of the market itself, because monetary 

policy certainly had been accommodating during the past several 

months. If anything, the slight dip in average net borrowed 

reserves of the past six weeks suggested that the Committee had 

been eager to avoid the rate developments that had come anyway.  

A third development might be labeled "changed rate-reserve 

relationships," Mr. Ellis continued. Since establishment of the

-87-



9/28/65 -88

discount rate at 4 per cent last fall it had proved possible to 

hold the short-term bill rate below 4 per cent while holding 

borrowings at a $460 million average and ne: borrowed reserves 

between $150-$200 million. During the past month, with net 

borrowed reserves averaging only $127 million, borrowings averaged 

$550 million and short-term bill rates had .limbed to 3.96 per 

cent. It seemed apparent that market pressures seeking to swell 

the rate of bank credit expansion--which, incidentally, had 

totaled 10.6 per cent in 12 months--would force a choice between 

acceptance of higher rates on the one hand, or faster credit 

expansion facilitated by lowered net borrowed reserve targets and 

member bank borrowings on the other.  

Four weeks ago, Mr. Ellis observed, his own choice between 

those alternatives was conditioned by the uncertainties attending 

the steel negotiations and the sterling crisis. Both of those 

problems, while not finally settled, had been substantially 

alleviated. Meanwhile, the evidence of the need to choose between 

conflicting intermediate monetary goals had strengthened. His 

own judgment was that the Committee should not seek to maintain 

a ceiling on upward interest rate movements, either of bill rates 

or the prime rate. Once such a peg was accepted as a definite 

goal, he saw no ready way to abandon it without even more serious 

consequences than the Committee now faced. To attempt to fore

stall rate advances would entail an overt action to ease policy



9/28/65 -89

by setting lower targets of net borrowed reserves. He submitted 

that such action would create more apprehension than it would 

inspire confidence in existing rate levels.  

Mr. Ellis' choice of policy, therefore, was for a target 

for net borrowed reserves centered at $150 million, with an 

expectation that borrowings might average about $500 million if 

credit demands followed strong seasonal patterns and reserves 

continued to expand as they had recently. He would agree with 

the staff's expectation that short-term bill rates might rise to 

4.10 per cent. especially as the maturity date on the three

month bill moved into January. Under his approach, as distinct 

from that of Mr. Hayes, a decision on discount rate action would 

be withheld until late October, after the Treasury financing.  

In Mr. Ellis' judgment the second paragraph of alternative 

A of the draft directives did not provide sufficiently clear 

instructions to the Manager. The Comnittee owed the Manager a 

statement of its choice between highe- rates with existing reserve 

targets or more rapid credit expansion with lower net borrowed 

reserves and existing rates. And the Committee owed itself a 

renewed effort to improve the content of the directive, with 

specification of choices between targets if not quantification of 

targets. Mr. Robertson had described three alternatives facing 

the Committee, and had selected the second alternative of seeking 

average September conditions. Some such type of policy prescription



9/28/65 -90

should be provided the Manager--whether it was the second alternative, 

as Mr. Robertson preferred, the third alternative, which he (Mr. Ellis) 

favored, or Mr. Hayes' more aggressive fourth alternative. In contrast 

with the view expressed by Mr. Galusha, he expected to vote against 

alternative A for the directive unless it was amended to provide more 

adequate specification.  

Mr. Balderston said that although he had great sympathy for 

Mr. Hayes' approach, it was his feeling that today was not the time 

to move to a firmer policy. His position was generally similar to 

those of Mr. Wayne and Mr. Ellis. He thought Mr. Robertson had 

clarified the nature of the Committee's problem by differentiating 

the several alternatives for policy.  

He would like to stress two things, Mr. Balderston remarked.  

The first was a point that Mr. Wayne already had brought to the 

Committee's attention--the fact that starting in 1962 banks had 

been acquiring the bulk of the net additions to outstanding State 

and municipal debt. In that year they had bought $4.4 billion out 

of $5.5 billion net additions, or 80 per cent, and they had been 

buying such issues at a high rate ever since. Some of those issues 

no doubt were marketable, but some, he thought, had to be called 

unmarketable; it was hard to imagine where purchasers other than 

banks might be found for the bonds of, for example, many small and 

little-known townships. Having acquired those bonds, the banks 

probably would be holding them indefinitely.



9/28/65 -91

Secondly, Mr. Balderston continued, the Committee should 

note that the Treasury had announced a financing of considerable 

size, involving $4 billion in bills with 100 per cent tax and loan 

account credit. The proceeds of the financing probably would be 

expended by the Treasury fairly rapidly over the next few weeks.  

During the period when the proceeds were in tax and loan accounts, 

required reserves would be increased accordingly. If the Committee 

adhered to a policy of keeping money market conditions unchanged 

during the coming weeks the System, at its own initiative, would 

supply the reserves to take care of those added requirements.  

Meanwhile, the Treasury would be drawing on those bank deposits 

to take care of its fall expenses, and the funds thus expended 

would find their way into private demand deposit accounts. He 

recognized that the bulge in bank credit associated with tax 

and loan financing might prove temporary; it certainly would be 

temporary in a period of slack credit demand. But that was not 

the cas., at present, and iffall loan demand remained high the 

Committee might find some of the reserves it had provided in 

October haunting it in November.  

The issue today, Mr. Balderston remarked, centered on the 

meaning of "status quo" at a time when a sizable Treasury financing 

had been superimposed upon unusually strong credit demand. Should 

the System accommodate both? If it did, it would be acquiescing in



9/28/65 -92

the ballooning of bank credit beyond the constructive needs of 

the economy. If the System supplied sufficent [sic] reserves to roll 

rates back to the levels of a month ago, it would be acting to 

depress a rate level that had resulted from the forces of the 

market--more specifically, from the impact of expectations of 

enlarged demands.  

It seemed to Mr. Balderston that a more sensible and 

prudent interpretation of a "status quo" policy for the next 

two week. would involve providing just enough reserves to 

accommodate the normal seasonal increase in demand plus those 

that were directly related to the temporary bulge in tax and 

loan accounts. In his view, such a policy .ould not interfere 

with an orderly distribution of the Treasury's current issue.  

He thought the Committee should anticipate that the somewhat 

higher rates attending the money market conditions of recent 

days might con:inue, and that rates might even rise further.  

As he aad indicated, Mr. Balderston said, he favored a 

status quo policy, as suggested by alternative A of the draft 

directives. However, he was somewhat unhappy about the wording 

of the draft. In his opinion the description of economic and 

financial developments contained in the first two sentences 

tended to lay the basis for a shift of policy toward firmness.  

However, the next sentence began with the words, "In this



9/28/65 -93

situation," and went on to indicate, in effect, that the Committee's 

policy had remained unchanged. He thought it would help somewhat 

if the words "In this situation" were deleted. Also, he would 

strike the opening words of the second paragraph, "To implement 

this policy and taking into account," and have the paragraph 

begin, "In view of the current Treasury financing, System open 

market operations shall be conducted with a view . . . " That 

change seemed desirable because in his judgment the financing 

was the primary reason for maintaining the status quo at this 

time.  

Chairman Martin remarked that he agreed with Mr. Galusha 

that there was no reason to fear prosperity, even though many 

people seemed to feel that the current expansion could not last 

simply because activity was at so high a level. He could not 

believe, however, that all periods of prosperity floated on 

constantly rising levels of credit, or that one could ignore 

such matters as loan-deposit ratios of banks or credit quality 

and assume that it was possible to propel prosperity forward 

without any adjustments occurring in markets. Everyone wanted 

to see the prosperous conditions the country was experiencing 

continue, and he personally had no fear of higher interest rates 

in that connection.



9/28/65

As to policy, the Chairman said, he thought that this was 

the wrong time to make a change. The Treasury already had announced 

its October financing and, while one might argue on technical grounds 

that if a change were going to be made it should be done in advance 

of the actual financing, the Committee had not yet decided that a 

change was in order. The consensus appeared to be against a policy 

change today and some members were of the view that the Committee 

should ease conditions somewhat. In his judgment it would be desir

able to keep to the status quo, with the Desk maintaining market 

conditions on as even a keel as possible at this juncture. If that 

suggested that the Committee should write some more specific target 

levels into the directive, he did not know how that could be done 

effectively. He assumed that the Manager had been trying to carry 

out the Committee's previous directive; when forces built up in 

the market the Manager could not be expected to adjust market 

conditions day by day. He agreed with Mr. Wayne that any attempt 

to specify quantitative instructions in the directive would force 

the Committee to meet more frequently. The Committee had wrestled 

with the problem of the directive for years and he personally did 

not believe that it was feasible to write it in quantitative terms.  

The Chairman then noted that it was obvious from the discus

sion that the Committee had a difficult drafting problem today, and

he invited suggestions.

-94-



9/28/65

Mr. Robertson said he thought that a change of a few words 

at the end of the second paragraph of alternative A would give the 

Manager a much clearer idea of what the Committee wanted. The 

change involved replacing "as have prevailed in recent weeks," as 

the description of the money market conditions to be maintained, 

with "as have prevailed on average in September." In response to 

a suggestion that there might be some advant.ge to using the phrase 

"since the last meeting" in place of "in September," Mr. Robertson 

said he thought either phrase would serve the purpose.  

Chairman Martin suggested that there might be some problems 

of definition .ith respect to the word "average," and he then turned 

to Mr. Holmes for comment.  

Mr. Holmes said that he thought the most difficult problem 

such a directive would pose for the Desk was in connection with the 

three-month bill rate, which this morning was at 4.02 per cent. He 

would interpret the language Mr. Robertson proposed to call for 

rolling the bill rate back to about 3.90 per cent, which might be 

hard to do in the current atmosphere.  

Mr. Robertson commented that he had not intended the proposed 

instruction to apply to the rate on any particular instrument; what 

he had in mind was the overall span of money market conditions.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that the wording suggested by Mr. Robertson 

carried more of a flavor of easing market conditions from their

-95-



9/28/65 -96

present state than he thought was reflected in the consensus around 

the table. It was true that some members were strongly in favor of 

the course indicated by the suggested wording. More, however, had 

spoken in favor of maintaining the recently firmer conditions, and 

several had indicated a preference for overt action toward further 

firming, although not immediately. He would suggest retaining the 

original language of alternative A.  

Mr. Swan commented that he could see little difference 

between "in recent weeks" as in alternative A, and "since the last 

meeting," as Mr. Robertson proposed. The real issue, he thought, 

was whether an attempt should be made to roll back conditions to 

those prevailing four weeks ago or to maintain those prevailing at 

present. Mr. Daane agreed, and added that it. was his impression 

that a majority of the Committee had indicated a preference for 

the latter course.  

Mr. Wayne suggested that the matter might be settled simply 

by calling for "maintaining conditions in the money market within 

the ranges which have prevailed since the last meeting." 

Mr. Ellis said he would not favor avoiding a decision on 

what he thought was the real question facing the Committee--whether 

or not to roll back bill rates. As the staff had pointed out, 

previous relations among elements of money market conditions were no 

longer consistent, and it was necessary to decide what the Manager



9/28/65 -97

was to be asked to do. Once that decision was made the Committee 

could turn to the question of language for the directive.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that he had not detected such exclu

sive emphasis on bill rates. The discussion, in his opinion, had 

been more in terms of the whole structure of market rates.  

Mr. Ellis replied that he understood the language Mr.  

Robertson proposed to imply a rollback of bill rates from their 

present level of 4.02 per cent. That, he thought, was the question 

with which the Committee was faced.  

Chairman Martin said he would reiterate a point he had made 

earlier; namely, that the course that Mr. Mitchell and some cthers 

favored seemed to him to involve a definite change in policy in 

the direction of ease.  

Mr. Mitchell replied that he did not believe he was recom

mending a change in the Committee's policy posture. It seemed to 

him that the Committee had found itself in a situation in which 

money market conditions were much firmer than it had intended them 

to be. If he favored a "change" in policy it was only in the 

limited sense of advocating the earlier conditions rather than those 

of the most recent week.  

Mr. Hayes said he thought it was important to distinguish 

between the temporary factors that had led to the developments of 

the latest week and the underlying situation of strong credit demands



9/28/65 -98

that was producing tighter conditions in the market. To his mind, 

the alternatives were clear: the Committee could recognize the 

basic strength of the forces in the market and let current rate 

levels continue to prevail, or it could try to restore the earlier 

rate levels.  

Chairran Martin agreed that the choice was between main

taining the status quo with respect to interest rates or rolling 

them back.  

Mr. Robertson said that he did not advocate a drastic 

rollback of rates; as he had indicated, he favored maintaining the 

average conditions prevailing during September.  

Mr. Mitchell said he thought there were some unwarranted 

implications :.n the way the term "rollback" was being used in the 

discussion today. The average of net borrowed reserves in 

September was $118 million, as compared with $167 million for 

the most recent week. Net borrowed reserves were one of the 

factors governing the Manager's actions, but Mr. Robertson's 

prescription, which he favored, also provided for an average bill 

rate of 3.90 per cent and an average Federal funds rate of 4.10 

per cent, as other elements in the general pattern of conditions 

to be maintained.  

Mr. Ellis commented that he thought market conditions had 

gone beyond the point where that pattern could prevail; the



9/28/65 -99

September averages now were inconsistent with one another. As he 

understood the staff and the Manager, net borrowed reserves would 

have to be below $118 million if the bill rate was to be maintained 

at less than 4 per cent.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that money market relations had changed.  

He noted that in its comment on question 6 the Board's staff had 

estimated that net borrowed reserves of $150 million were likely 

to be associated with a bill rate near the upper end of the 3.95

4.10 range.  

Mr. Hickman asked what level of bill rates was likely to 

be consistent with net borrowed reserves of about $118 million.  

Mr. Holmes replied that he found it hard to answer that question 

with any precision. Some market forces would be tending to push 

bill rates higher and some to move them lower, and he did not 

think one could be specific about the outcome.  

Chairman Martin then proposed that a vote be taken, 

essentially on the question whether to maintain the status quo as 

presently constituted with respect to market rates or to roll 

rates back to lower levels. That, he thought, was what the issue 

amounted to.  

Mr. Shepardson suggested that the vote be taken on a 

directive with the last phrase of the second paragraph of



9/28/65

alternative A modified to read, "with a view to maintaining about 

the current conditions in the money market." 

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Messrs. Maisel, 
Mitchell, and Robertson dissenting, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the 
System Account in accordance with 
the following current economic policy 
directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meet.ng indicate that the domestic economy has expanded 
further in a climate of optimistic business sentiment and 
firmer financial conditions, and that our international 
payments have been in deficit since midyear. Some of the 
uncertainties previously affecting foreign exchange markets 
have diminished. In this situation, it remains the Federal 
Ope Market Committee's current policy to strengthen the 
international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the 
current Treasury financing, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Commmittee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining about the current conditions in 
the money market.  

Chairman Martin then noted that there had been distributed 

copies of a letter dated September 21, 1965, from Congressman Wright 

Patman, Chairman of the House Committee on Banking and Currency, 

requesting that certain recent records of the Open Market Committee 

be made available in his office at an agreed time, with necessary 

personnel from the Committee present, so that he might review and

-100-



9/28/65 -101

examine the records. These included records relating to the dollar 

value of the portfolio, trading in the Account, income of the Account, 

the procedural way in which it was obtained, the procedural way in 

which it was transferred, and the way in which the Federal Reserve 

Board and the Reserve Banks received their operating income.  

After discussion, the staff of the Committee was authorized 

to assemble appropriate records bearing on the questions raised, with 

the understanding that arrangements would thereafter be made for 

their transmittal.  

Secretary's note: The following letter 
was sent to Congressman Patman, over 
the signature of Chairman Martin, on 
October 1, 1965: 

This is in reply to your letter dated September 21, 
in which you request information relating to the securities 
in the System Open Market Account: and the income derived 
from these securities. The staff of the Federal Open 
Market Committee is getting together the records bearing 
on the questions raised in your letter.  

I have asked Mr. Cardon to get in touch with Mr. Nelson 
when this material is ready, so that arrangements may be made 
for the review and examinations referred to in your letter.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, October 12, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 27, 1965 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on September 28, 1965 

Alternative A (no change) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further in 
a climate of optimistic business sentiment and firmer financial 
conditions, and that our international payments have been in deficit 
since midyear. Some of the uncertainties previously affecting 
foreign exchange markets have diminished. In this situation, it 
remains the Federal Open Market Commictee's current policy to 
strengthen the international position of the dollar, and to avoid 
the emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating moderate 
growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the current 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintain
ing about the same conditions in the money market as have prevaile 
in recent weeks.  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further 
in a climate of optimistic business sentiment and firmer financial 
conditions, and that our international payments have been in deficit 
since midyear. Some of the uncertainties previously affecting 
foreign exchange markets have diminished. In this situation, it is 
the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to move further 
to strengthen the international position of the dollar, and to counter 
the emergence of inflationary pressures, by moderating somewhat the 
pace of growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 

supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account the 
current Treasury financing, System open market operations until 

the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view 

to attaining slightly firmer conditions in the money market.


