









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C. on Tuesday, July 13, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Balderston 
Bryan 
Daane 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Trieber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuforc, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Garvy, and Koch, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors



7/13/65

Mr. Patterson, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Jones, Tow, 
and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Monhollon, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. MacLaury, Manager, Foreign Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
held on June 15, 1965, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period June 15 through July 7, 1965, and a supplemental report for 

July 8 through July 12, 1965. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said that the gold stock would again remain unchanged this week. It 

now looked as though the extra $100 million in gold transferred to 

the Stabilization Fund at the time of payment of the U.S. gold 

subscription to the International Monetary Fund at the end of June



7/13/65 -3

should meet requirements through the remainder of July. The only 

gold sales of any significant size in prospect at the moment were 

$34 million to France and $12.5 million to Austria.  

During June, Mr. MacLaury observed, demand for gold in the 

London market was generally lower than it had been in earlier months 

this year, and the pool was able to nake some progress toward re

couping its previous deficit. By the end of June, sufficient gold 

had been accumulated for the Bank of England to make a distribution 

of $44 million, of which the U.S. received half. There was some 

further accumulation during the early part of July, but last Friday 

(July 9) demand again picked up temporarily, sending the price as 

high as $35.11-1/2 after the fixing. At the moment, the pool's 

position was about the. same as at the end of June--a net deficit of 

approximately $150 million--and the price had now fallen back below 

$35.10-1/2.  

Mr. MacLaury noted that supplies of gold coming onto the 

London market this year had been augmented to a considerable extent 

by South African sales of gold from their reserve holdings, apart 

from new production, reflecting that country's balance of payments 

deficit. Whereas sales from South African reserves added only about 

$60 million to market supplies in all of 1964, they had added some 

$200 million during the first half of this year alone. Thus, while 

Russian sales had continued to be conspicuously absent for over a 

year, the gold market had benefited from a source of supply that 

could not be counted on indefinitely.



7/13/65 -4

In the exchange markets, Mr. MacLaury said, attention con

tinued to focus on sterling, and on the figures that gave clues to 

its prospects. For example, it was the disappointing trade figures 

for the month of May, reldased at the beginning of the current 

reporting period, that touched off several days of selling pressure 

and cost the Bank of England more than $150 million in support 

operations. More recently, the spot rate had held pretty much on 

its own, and in fact had withstood some fairly heavy pressure from 

official operations by the Bank of England designed to roll over 

maturing forward contracts. Not all the maturing contracts were 

extended, and paying off a part of them put an additional burden on 

U.K. reserves. Given the keen market interest in U.K. statistics, 

it was decided to draw on the Federal Reserve swap to the extent of 

$360 million at the end of June to reduce the published reserve 

decline to $67 million. As it turned out, the market was not 

visibly affected one way or the other by the reserve announcement, 

despite the fact that the public statement said that use had been 

made of the swap arrangement. No figure, of ccurse, was given.  

Subsequently, Mr. MacLaury continued, the U.K. repaid $85 

million of its drawing from unutilized proceeds of its previous IMF 

drawing, reducing the amount presently outstanding on the Federal 

Reserve swap to $275 million. The market was once again focusing 

on the trade figures which had been released today. They showed 

imports down noticeably from their swollen May level. But exports



7/13/65 -5

also were slightly lower, thus failing to show the hoped-for improve

ment. The market's preoccupation with those figures--not just for a 

single month, of course, but over a period of time--was quite under

standable. The Chancellor of the Exchequer had himself indicated that 

developments in the next few months would be of crucial importance in 

determining whether further measures were required.  

On the continent, Mr. MacLaury observed, currency rates 

fluctuated somewhat in response to changing money market conditions 

in Germany, Switzerland, and the Netherlands. On balance, however, 

the System had been able to make substantial further progress in 

reducing its commitments in guilders and Swiss francs, in the latter 

case partly through the use of marks. Specifically, the drawing on 

the Bank for International Settlements swap, which was $55 million 

at the beginning of the period, had been entirely liquidated. Roughly 

$15 million equivalent of the necessary Swiss francs were purchased 

from the Swiss National Bank when that Bank needed dollars. The 

remaining $40 million equivalent were obtained through the BIS by 

selling marks against Swiss francs on a covered basis, using marks 

acquired either in the market or from the Bundesbank, which had 

undertaken some support operations as the mark rate softened. In 

effect that meant that while the System still had $40 million 

equivalent of forward commitments in Swiss francs, it had improved 

its overall position in foreign currencies by the $40 million



7/13/65 -6

equivalent of marks acquired. Apart from that operation, the 

System also purchased $8 million equivalert of Swiss francs from 

the Swiss National Bank and paid off the last of its market forward 

commitments in Swiss francs. As the Committee would recall, those 

commitments were initially entered into last December to provide 

cover for Swiss commercial bank dollar investments that otherwise 

would have been sold to the central bank.  

Similarly, Mr. MacLaury continued, during the period the 

System was able to buy some $52 million equivalent of guilders from 

the Netherlands Bank which had sold dollars in its market apparently 

mainly in connection with commercial demand. Those guilders were 

used by the System to pay off maturing forward contracts, reducing 

the amount outstanding in guilder market forwards to only $2.5 million, 

which matured later this month. It was expected that the System's 

remaining forward guilder commitments would be liquidated by the end 

of July. In addition, the System had beer. able to reduce its $10 

million equivalent sterling-guilder swap by half during the period, 

also purchasing the required guilders from the Netherlands Bank.  

All in all, it was evident that considerable progress had been made 

in reducing System commitments in those particular currencies without 

recourse to funding or gold sales.  

In the case of Italy, Mr. MacLaury said, the picture was 

quite different. The Italian authorities had been taking in 

dollars at a very rapid rate. Reserves had not risen more than



7/13/65 -7

they had mainly because of the very large swap transactions between 

the Exchange Office and the Italian commercial banks. In effect, 

some $900 million had been shifted back out of official reserves 

through such operations during the first half of this year. The 

present prospect, however, was that the Italian balance of payments 

would be in surplus by more than $1 billion this year. Unrelated to 

market developments, but of interest to the Committee, was the fact 

that the System had been able to pay down $5 million equivalent to 

the Bank of Italy during the period through acquisition of lire from 

Ceylon, which in turn had drawn them from the IMF. There was still 

a strong likelihood that the System's remaining drawings on the Bank 

of Italy, in the amount of $163 million, would be liquidated by the 

end of July as a result of a U.S. drawing of lire on the IMF and 

issuance of a lire-denominated bond by the Treasury. Likewise, 

it was hoped that most, if not all, of the U.S. debtor position 

under the Belgian swap arrangement--which during the period fi.st 

rose by $20 million to $80 million and subsequently (on July 12) was 

reduced by $10 million--could be liquidated by similar means.  

Finally, Mr. MacLaury noted that the Canadian dollar had 

had a softer tone in the spot market recently, dropping on Friday 

to $0.9219 and eliciting some support from the Bank of Canada. On 

the other hand, the premium on the three-month forward Canadian 

dollar at one point rose to well over 1/2 per cent, although it was 

now back down to levels around 1/4 per cent. The fluctuations in



7/13/65 -8

the forward rate appeared to be related to the bunchings of 

repatriations of U.S. funds from Canada, and did not seem to 

have generated any significant movement of funds in the reverse 

direction.  

Mr. Daane asked about the implications of the transaction 

Mr. MacLaury had described, in which the System in effect had 

converced $40 million of its Swiss franc debt to the BIS into a 

third-currency swap of marks against Swiss francs.  

Mr. MacLaury replied that there was a distinction--although 

one that should not be pushed too far--between a System debt incurred 

by drawing on a standby swap arrangement and a third-currency swap 

such as had been arranged with the BIS. In the former case, the 

System was simply in a short position on a foreign currency; in the 

latter case, its net position was not a short one. In the trans

action in question an opportunity had arisen for the System to 

acquire marks, and it had appeared desirable to use those marks to 

reduce the System's short position in Swiss francs. Because the 

transaction was a covered one there remained an obligation to pay 

Swiss francs to the BIS in three months, but on a balance-sheet 

basis an offsetting asset now existed in the form of a liability 

of the BIS to pay the System an equivalent amount in marks at that 

time. The need for transactions of this type arose mainly because, 

while other countries could settle debts to third countries by 

transferring dollars, the U.S. could not directly pay a debt in, 

say, Swiss francs by use of another currency such as the mark.



7/13/65

In response to questions by Mr. Hickman, Mr. MacLaury said 

that under the arrangement made the System was exposed to the risk 

of loss in the unlikely event of devaluation of the mark. Since 

there was a similar risk in connection with outright holdings of marks, 

however, the System's exposure in this respect had not been increased 

by the transaction. Dollar limits were, of course, set both on the 

System's spot holdings of foreign currencies and on forward trans

actions by the Committee's continuing authority directive for foreign 

currency operations.  

Mr. Shepardson noted that at the previous meeting of the 

Committee there had been some discussion of System drawings under 

the swap line with the National Bank of Belgium. At that time Mr.  

Coombs had indicated that the one-year period in which drawings were 

to be fully liquidated, under the terms of the Committee's guidelines, 

in the Belgian case would elapse in August. Mr. Coombs also had 

expressed the hope that the account with the Belgian Bank would be 

cleared up in the first week in July. However, in the Special 

Manager's supplementary report, distributed this morning, it was 

indicated that a maturing $5 million drawing on the Belgian Bank 

had been renewed yesterday for three more months. He asked whether 

that renewal implied that the Belgian account would not be cleared 

up shortly.  

Mr. MacLaury responded that the three-month period of the 

renewal was a technical matter--all drawings and renewals under 

the standby swap lines had three-month terms--and it did not imply



7/13/65 -10

that the drawing actually would be kept on the books for that period.  

The Account Management hoped to have the Belgian drawings liquidated 

by the end of July, but the precise timing depended on the date of 

the prospective U.S. drawing on the IMF. It was his understanding 

that for technical reasons the Treasury had postponed the planned 

Fund drawing, but was still expecting to make it in the month of July.  

Mr. Shepardson then asked what would be done about the drawings 

on the Belgian line in the event that the Treasury decided not to draw 

on the IMF.  

Mr. MacLaury replied that if it were not possible to acquire 

the Belgian francs necessary to repay the drawings within the one

year limit the ultimate means of settlement would be by sale of gold.  

In his opinion, however, the Treasury would prefer to arrange for 

settlement through an IMF drawing.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that when the Committee began its 

program of reciprocal currency arrangements the understanding had 

been that drawings would be used to counter temporary flows that 

were considered likely to be quickly reversible. While he realized 

that the one-year limit established in the guidelines had not yet 

elapsed in the case of the present drawings on the Belgian swap 

line, in his judgment those drawings were being extended beyond what 

had been originally contemplated.  

Chairman Martin remarked that it would be desirable for the 

Committee to continue to watch the situation with respect to the 

Belgian swap line closely.



7/13/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
June 15 through July 12, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury then asked the Committee's approval of renewal 

of four standby swap arrangements that would mature soon, with no 

changes in size or maturity. The arrangements in question were 

those with the Austrian National Bank, maturing July 26, 1965, in 

the amount of $50 million, for a term of 12 months; with the Bank 

of Japan, maturing July 30, in the amount of $250 million, also for 

a period of 12 months; with the German Federal Bank, maturing August 

9, in the amount of $250 million, for six months; and with the Bank 

of France, maturing August 10, in the amount of $100 million, for three 

months.  

In response to questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. MacLaury said 

that one drawing had been made on the Austrian swap arrangement since 

its initiation, and that the Austrians had been following a program 

of regular gold purchases from the U.S. since February, buying $12-1/2 

million of gold each month. He understood, however, that their gold 

purchase program would be completed within a month or two.  

Mr. Mitchell then remarked that he had had some question 

about the desirability of a swap arrangement with Austria, and his 

doubts were reinforced by the fact that the Austrians were buying 

gold rather than utilizing the swap line.

-11-



Mr. MacLaury commented that, as Mr. Shepardson had indicated, 

the initial intent was to use swap drawings to deal with temporary 

and reversible flows. The one drawing the System had made on this 

swap line had proved not reversible, and accordingly had been settled 

in gold; and the Austrians' program of gold purchases this year was 

related to earlier dollar accruals that did not appear to be reversible.  

In his judgment there was no conflict between the existence of the 

standby swap arrangement and the gold purchases Austria had been 

making.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he thought there was an advantage to 

the United States in the System's swap line with the Austrian National 

Bank.  

Renewals of the standby swap 
arrangements with the Austrian National 
Bank, the Bank of Japan, the German 
Federal Bank, and the Bank of France, 
as recommended by Mr. MacLaury, were 
approved.  

Mr. MacLaury then recommended renewal for three months of a 

swap drawing on the Bank of Italy, in the amount of $50 million, 

that would mature on August 18. Such approval would be a precaution 

in the unlikely event that the prospective U.S. drawing on the IMF 

was not made; he contemplated that the drawing on the Italian swap 

would be paid off before the end of the month.  

Possible renewal of the $50 million 
drawing on the Bank of Italy was noted 
without objection.

7/13/65 -12-



7/13/65

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to comment on 

developments at the three meetings he had attended in Paris the 

past week.  

Mr. Daane said he would not do more than touch on the 

highlights of the meetings, which were of the Group of Ten Deputies, 

Working Party 3 of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 

Development, and the Economic Policy Committee of the OECD, taking 

place in that. order. Only two substantive issues were discussed at 

length at the Group of Ten Deputies meeting. The first concerned 

the question of renewal of the General Arrangements to Borrow; and the 

second involved the disposition to be made of the so-called "Ossola 

report"--the report of the Study Group on Creation of Reserve Assets.  

As he had mentioned on a previous occasion, Mr. Daane said, 

the General Arrangements to Borrow expired in October 1966 but their 

renewal was required by October 1965. It had been obvious in the 

preliminary discussion by the Deputies at their meeting in May that 

while the general sentiment was in favor of an extension, there was 

considerable dissatisfaction with the structure of the GAB. In 

particular, opinions had differed with respect to duration. Those 

divergencies in view were carried forward to the recent meeting; all 

of the Deputies agreed that the GAB should be renewed, despite some 

dissatisfaction with certain technical aspects, but there was a sharp 

division on the question of duration. The original GAB had a four

year term, and the United States, Britain, Canada, Japan, and Sweden

-13-



7/13/65 -14

favored renewal for another four years. France, Germany, the 

Netherlands, and Italy favored renewal for only two years, on the 

grounds that the longer term would imply too great a degree of 

permanence to the GAB and would inhibit technical changes in the 

Arrangements themselves. More directly, Deputies from the latter 

countries thought it would be unwise to extend the GAB for more 

than two years since a study was under way of possible reforms of 

the international monetary system. Under Secretary Deming and others 

presented the view that the Arrangements were not permanent since 

they could be amended or terminated at any time, and could lie dormant 

if not needed. One of the major reasons advanced for a four-year 

term was the possible effect on confidence of a shorter renewal.  

The U.S. representatives directly rejected the view that there was 

a tie between the term of the GAB and possible monetary reform.  

Mr. Deming indicated that such a view implied much too inflexible 

a timetable; it suggested that "new" monetary arrangements would be 

in effect within two years.  

Mr. Daane noted that the question of renewal of the GAB would 

now go forward to the Ministers of the Group of Ten when they met in 

Washington in September in connection with the World Bank-Fund 

meetings. The IMF view, as expressed by the Managing Director, 

favored a four-year extension, on the grounds that the GAB dem

onstrated the existence of collective support for the international 

monetary system and, more importantly, it made $6 billion of additional 

resources available for the Fund.



7/13/65 -15

On the question of the disposition of the Ossola report, 

Mr. Daane said, there was virtually unanimous agreement that the 

report should be published, with France alone dissenting. It was 

decided to have the Secretariat group, including Robert Solomon 

of the Board's staff and George Willis of the U.S. Treasury, work 

out some minor changes in the format of the report, and to have 

each country give its assent or not on the question of publication 

by July 26, Mr. Daane's personal expectation was that the report 

would be published and available no later than sometime early in 

the fall.  

At the WP-3 meeting, Mr. Daane continued, the principal 

focus was, of course, on the situation of the United Kingdom. The 

Working Party was unanimously of the opinion that the time had come 

for Britain to consider implementing the earlier commitment by 

Chancellor Callaghan, in his letter to the Managing Director of 

the IMF, to the effect that further measures would be taken if 

needed. There was a growing lack of confidence in the private 

financial ccmmunity with respect to the measures taken thus far.  

Even the British Government's own forecasts now indicated a larger 

deficit in the U.K. balance of payments this year than had been 

expected. British foreign trade developments were disappointing 

and today's announcement showed that exports had declined further 

in June. Internally, wage and employment developments were not 

satisfactory.



7/13/65 -16

The British representatives seemed to be somewhat surprised 

by this Working Party attitude, Mr. Daane remarked. They felt that 

it was too early to expect substantial results from the measures 

that had been adopted, and they thought there were indications 

that those measures were beginning to take hold. In that connec

tion they noted the flattening in the trend of retail sales, 

evidencesof a slowdown in industrial production, declines in 

housing starts, and a return of unemployment to its January level.  

In their judgment the U.S. voluntary restraint program was having 

an adverse impact on Britain's situation. In any case, it was 

the clear conclusion of the Working Party that the British should 

be reviewing their situation and measures, and the British in

dicated that they were currently doing so.  

There was considerable discussion at the WP-3 meeting of 

the effects of the U.S. balance of payments program on international 

liquidity, Mr. Daane said. The Germans and the Swiss, in particular, 

noted that they were pleased with any resultant reductions in 

liquidity that were occurring, and the Germans thought that the 

U.S. goal should be to attain a surplus in its international 

payments. There was some puzzlement expressed regarding the effect 

of the program on liquidity in this country; the continental 

representatives found it hard to understand why the repatriation 

of U.S. funds had not added significantly to credit availability 

in the United States.



7/13/65 -17

Mr. Daane went on to say that there were the usual country 

reviews at the WP-3 meeting. The paper by the OECD Secretariat 

projected a surplus in the Italian balance of payments this year 

of $1.4 or $1.5 billion, and a French surplus of around $3/4 billion.  

The Italians were quite unhappy about the estimate for their country; 

they indicated that they expected a substantial surplus but not one 

as high as predicted. The French, on the other hand, not only 

accepted the Secretariat's estimate, but conceded that there also 

would be a surplus in the franc area, of about $250-$300 million, 

leading to a total surplus on the order of $1 billion.  

The most interesting country presentation, in Mr. Daane's 

judgment, concerned Germany. It was clear that the Germans were 

still struggling with an overheated econony and that they had no 

intention of diminishing the degree of credit restraint being 

exerted. On the other hand, there was no intention of increasing 

restraint ei:her, although there was some indication that if any 

change were to be made it would be in the direction of further 

tightening.  

The discussion at the meeting of the Economic Policy 

Committee of the OECD was, as usual, more formal than at the WP-3 

meeting since the group was considerably larger, Mr. Daane remarked.  

The theme was the general slackening of growth rates. For most 

of the countries represented, the 1965 growth rate was projected 

to be below that of 1964. Overall, the projected 1965 rate still



7/13/65 -18

averaged about 4-1/2 per cent, but projections for 1966 indicated 

further slackening. A great deal of concern was expressed by 

speakers, including Mr. Ackley of the U.S., as to whether suf

ficiently expansionary policies were being followed. For the 

first time in the FPC in Mr. Daane's experience, France was 

roundly criticized on that score; there was considerable discussion 

of so-called stagnation in the French economy. The representatives 

of that country felt that their economy was recovering and that a 

number of policy actions had been taken to assure recovery. The 

general tenor of the discussion, however, was contrary to that 

view. There also was a feeling that economic growth in the U.S.  

would be slowing down, and that this country should follow a more 

expansionary fiscal policy. Indications that the U.S. authorities 

stood ready to take additional budgetary actions to stimulate the 

economy if necessary were noted with approval. As to monetary 

policy, as uual the U.S. was urged to tighten further. The Germans 

in particular felt that a firmer monetary policy now would give U.S.  

monetary authorities additional elbowroom if it became necessary 

to move toward ease before the end of 1965 or in 1966.  

The discussion of the British situation at the EPC meeting 

was simply an echo of that at the WP-3 meeting, Mr. Daane said.  

The British were urged to take any further measures needed "in good 

time" to achieve equilibrium in their balance of payments by the 

end of 1966.



7/13/65 -19

Following Mr. Daane's remarks, Chairman Martin reported 

briefly on discussions that had preceded the proposal for an 

international conference on world monetary reform made in a speech 

by Secretary of the Treasury Fowler on the preceding Saturday 

(July 10), on a draft of which the Chairman had been invited to 

comment. He went on to note that the advisory committee on 

monetary reform recently appointed by President Johnson would 

meet for the first time on Friday, under the Chairmanship of 

former Treasury Secretary Dillon. Discussions of the matter 

would be proceeding in coming weeks, Chairman Martin observed.  

As he had advised Secretary Fowler before the latter's speech, 

he was sure that the System would be as helpful as it could in 

assuring that they proceeded in the best way possible.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

June 15 through July 7, 1965, and a supplemental report for July 

8 through July 12, 1965. Copies of both reports have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



7/13/65 -20

The money market was active in the past four weeks as 
the banking system responded to heavy credit demands over 
the June corporate tax date and beyond, passed through the 
June 30 statement date, and met the large currency needs 
associated with the July 4 holiday. The major money market 
banks came under increased reserve pressure, and their strong 
bid for Federal funds kept the rate at 4-1/8 per cent on 
most days. Indeed, given the magnitude of reserve needs and 
the uncertainties of a period of large financial flows, 
there was some trading of nominal amounts of Federal funds 
for the first time at 4-1/4 per cent, and member bank bor
rowing from the Reserve Banks rose above $1 billion on two 
days. Federal funds became redundant on one occasion as 
well, and relatively large reserve excesses remained unused 
at money center banks at the close of each statement week, 
attesting to the complications banks experienced during this 
period in managing their reserve positions.  

The uncertainties, stemming from the large and, at 
times, unexpected ebbs and flows in demands placed upon the 
money market during the period, also posed difficulties for 
the System in meeting the substantial reserve needs that 
emerged. Nevertheless, the System was able to meet these 
needs with only limited recourse to purchases of Treasury 
bills in the market. The Treasury's willingness to run its 
balances at the Reserve Banks below the $900 million level 
that ordinarily prevails was a major help in supplying 
reserves, and, fortuitously, various foreign operations 
turned out, on balance, to supply reserves when they were 
most needed. Even so, open market operations still had to 
supply $564 million reserves net over the four weeks, and 
day-to-day operations involved transactions of much greater 
magnitudes as the System sought to avoid placing downward 
pressure on Treasure bill rates.  

Over $2.3 billion repurchase agreements against Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances were made and 
terminated during the interval, and a total of $280 million 
Treasury bills were purchased directly from foreign accounts.  
In addition, the good availability of coupon issues throughout 
the period enabled the System to provide $245 million reserves 
through this medium, mainly during periods when prices were 
steady or declining slightly. In fact, availability was such 
that the largest daily amount of purchases ($81 million) 
could be accomplished by means of a full market-go-around.  
Purchases of about $250 million Treasury bills were made in 
the market on June 16, but part of these acquisitions repre
sented weekly and tax anticipation bills which were permitted 
to mature soon thereafter, and no bills were purchased in the 
market after that date.



7/13/65

Treasury bill rates moved generally lower in the 
first part of the period, as reinvestment demand arising 
from maturing June tax bills was augmented by commercial 
bank demand for bills prior to the June 30 statement date.  
The 3-month bill declined to 3.77 per cent bid at one 
point. Subsequently, the return flow of bills from 
banks, higher dealer financing costs, and disappointment 
at the lack of expected large-scale System buying caused 
bill rates to back up about 10 basis points. The 
absence of System demand at this time was all the more 
important since dealers had built up inventories in 
anticipation of such buying. With inventories high, 
dealer bidding in the last few weekly bill auctions was 
more cautious. Rates for the 3- and 6-month bills in 
yesterday's auction were set at about 3.88 and 3.93 
per cent, 9 and 6 basis points higher than four weeks 
earlier.  

In the capital markets, the period was marked by a 
further decline of stock prices and a subsequent re
covery. In contrast, prices of Treasury notes and bonds 
were narrowly mixed. Quotations tended to move higher 
at times when investment buying appeared but tended to 
recede whenever activity receded. There has been an 
underlying confidence among market participants, however, 
in the viability of current interest rates--a feeling 
that drew strength from the uncertainties reflected in 
the stock market. Dealers have generally acted to 
maintain their positions in coupon securities at a 
high level.  

The tone in the corporate and municipal bond 
markets has improved somewhat since the last meeting 
as a large volume of business has been transacted 
around recent price levels. More recent additions of 
new corporate issues to the calendar, and the possibility 
that new offerings of bank capital notes may be in 
the works, have prevented any major improvement in 
corporate bond prices, however. Tax-exempt bonds remain 
in plentiful supply, and while investors appear willing 
to place funds around current levels, they do not 
seem ready to chase prices higher.  

I might mention at this time that the Treasury's 
August refinancing, involving somewhat over $3 billion 
public holdings, will be undertaken before the next 
meeting of the Committee. The advisory groups will 
convene in Washington on July 27, and an announcement 

of the terms might be expected the following day.

-21-



Market participants feel that the operation will be 
routine. In view of the still-sizable supply of 
longer bonds undistributed, the market expects the 
Treasury to confine its financing to the short-term 
area--possibly a single issue in the 2-year range.  

As was reported to the Committee in the written 
reports, we have ceased trading with C. F. Childs & 
Company, which terminated its operations in Government 
and certain other securities on June 30 after more 
than half a century of activity. This withdrawal 
followed capital losses in recent years in activities 
unrelated to the Government securities market. The 
withdrawal was accomplished gracefully and had no impact 
on the market or its operations.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the open market transactions 
in Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period June 15 
through July 12, 1965, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Noyes made the following statement on economic condi

tions: 

You have probably seen, as I have, quite a bit 
lately in the press and elsewhere about the "new economics." 
Let me suggest that we have a "new semantics" to go along 
with it. In this new semantics we refer to things as 
unchanged when they are increasing at the same rate as 

they were in the previous period, and as going up only 

when they are going up faster than they were going up 
before.  

There is nothing wrong with this, so long as we 

are careful to be sure that we understand one another.  

It should be clear that when we say things were down a 

bit from the first to the second quarter what we mean 

is that they were up less, and when we say they were

7/13/65 -22-



7/13/65

substantially unchanged from May to June, we mean that 
they were expanding at about the same pace.  

In the day-to-day production and distribution of goods 
and services, we have not seen any of the pyrotechnics that 
turned up in the financial and international areas in the 
last four weeks. In fact, the broad aggregate measures of 
income, expenditure, and physical output are almost all 
continuing to move frighteningly close to the rates pro
jected around the turn of the year by our own staff, and 
by most other careful analysts of the economic outlook.  

This is true of GNP, which we now expect to be up about 
$7 billion in the second quarter; of industrial production, 
which has leveled off at the advanced 141-142 rate; of 
personal income, which is actually running a bit ahead of 
expectations; and of unemployment, which is a bit lower--that 
is, better than--expected. As with the balance of payments, 
however, we are warned that at least a part of the improvement 
in unemployment is not basic. "Basic" is another word that 
occupies a prominent place in the new semantics, but I must 
confess I am not able to define it satisfactorily for you.  

The "on track" performance by the real economy might 
be presumed to provide some grounds for confidence--if not 
downright optimism--as to the future. But, in fact, one 
does not even have to venture out into the turbulent 
financial markets or the troubled international waters to 
lose any complacency he might have mustered. Both the 
recent behavior of prices and apparent rate of inventory 
accumulation are enough to give one pause.  

I have spoken about both of these troublesome 
areas on several occasions in recent months. I do not 
want to seem to be crying a wolf that never comes, but 
they continue to be a cause for concern, if not alarm.  

Despite the slowdown in the economy (note that 
here again I am employing the new semantics referred to 
earlier), prices have continued to creep up. From time 
to time, chere have been signs that the advanced prices 
of some of the basic industrial materials, especially 
the nonferrous metals, might have reached their peak 
and be about to move down a little, but significant 
declines have failed to materalize.  

As Appendix C to the green book 1/ points out, 

the upward pressure on prices has not yet been diffused 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared by the Board's staff for the Committee.

-23-



through the whole structure of prices and costs. One 
important reason that this has not occurred has been 
the general absence of inflationary expectations. The 
restoration of a climate of stable price expectations 
is much to be desired, and, is at least one benefit 
that we can hope will flow from current moderation in 
the pace of expansion.  

The other major concern to which I would draw your 
attention is that we have had, even in the official 
statistics, a considerable inventory buildup, and there 
is impressive evidence that even a greater share of 
recent output than these data indicate remains in the 
hands of processors and distributors. Like price 
stability, the absence of rapid inventory buildup 
had been, until last winter, an unusual feature of 
this period of expansion, and one which contributed 
importantly to its sustainability.  

It is very hard for me to ascribe either recent 
price behavior or the recent pace of irventory 
accumulation to a maladroit monetary policy. It is 
equally difficult for me to find convincing evidence 
that there is any cause-and-effect relationship between 
the modest restriction of reserve availability earlier 
this year and the slower rate of increase in real out
put since April, especially in the light of the latest 
credit developments which Mr. Koch will discuss.  

Under present policy, I think it i. not unreasonable 
to hope that the recent upward price movements will 
turn out to be only a flurry and that we will return to 
the more stable pattern which characterized this expansion 
up to the third quarter of 1964. We can also hope the 
accumulated inventory may be absorbed without untoward 
repercussions. It is hard for me to see that a change 
in policy in either direction at this time would signif
icantly increase the chances that either of these things 
will happen. I am reasonably certain that a change now 
would get more blame than it deserved if we subsequently 
find ourselves in either an inflationary spiral or the 
downphase of an inventory cycle.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether Mr. Noyes had May developments in 

mind when he referred to the "recent" upward movement of prices.  

Mr. Noyes replied that his thinking had been based primarily on 

appendix C of the green book, which generally included data

7/13/65 -24-



7/13/65 -25

through May. However, some estimates of price developments in 

June were given in the appendix and also in the body of the green 

book. The June estimates had struck him as being neither more 

disturbing than those through May nor particularly reassuring; 

they indicated that average prices were continuing to rise.  

Mr. Hickman said he thought that June price developments 

definitely were not disturbing. Omitting meats and livestock, 

which were responding to supply conditions, price movements in 

June appeared in the main to be down rather than up; yet the 

discussions in the press, like Mr. Noyes' comments, suggested a 

continued bubbling up of prices. He did not see such a situation 

in the latest figures although, of course, it might appear in 

data for subsequent months.  

Mr. Noyes said that price movements in June evidently 

were mixed, but he agreed that the rise in the overall index 

probably would be due largely to increases in the agricultural 

components. It was true the most recent flurry of increases was 

a May rather than a June phenomenon, but the uptrend in average 

industrial prices actually had been in process since the third 

quarter of 1964. He certainly hoped that this trend was flattening 

out.  

Mr. Swan asked whether Mr. Noyes felt that rapid inventory 

accumulation was still concentrated primarily in a few areas or was



7/13/65

becoming more widely diffused. Mr. Noyes replied that the official 

inventory data were difficult to interpret; among other problems, 

they were reported late and the original figures often were revised 

substantially. As a result, there was some risk of over-interpretation.  

Unquestionably, accumulation had been rapid at steel and durable 

goods manufacturing industries and, recently, at automobile dealers.  

Members of the Board's staff agreed that inventory growth recently 

had been rapid in the aggregate and reasonably widespread, but there 

were differences of view about degree. Some thoughtful analysts on 

the staff felt that the accumulation had been much larger and more 

widespread than the official figures indicated.  

Mr. Ell.s noted that there was a reference in the staff 

materials to the large additions to industrial capacity coming on 

line as capital expenditures continued high. He asked whether an 

estimate was available of the current rate of capacity utilization 

in manufacturing.  

Mr. Noyes replied that present guesses of the rate of capac

ity use were in the neighborhood of 90 per cent. However,here also 

he was highly skeptical of the advisability of pressing the figures 

very far. The margins of error in capacity figures were quite large, 

particularly relative to the sizes of the changes that might occur in 

the short run. From what was known about additions to capacity and 

changes in the rate of production, it seemed to be a reasonable 

presumption that presently and for some time to come capacity would be

-26-



7/13/65 -27

growing faster than output; that was about as far as he was prepared 

to go.  

Mr. Hickman commented that business cycles often originated 

in inventory developments, and in his judgment the inadequacies of 

present inventory statistics placed the Committee in the dangerous 

position of having to guess about the nature of actual events. He 

noted that the Federal Reserve was in process of discontinuing data 

collection for department stores, and indicated that it might be 

desirable for the System to undertake to learn more about inventory 

developments than presently available data revealed. Perhaps the 

Board's staff might explore the possibilities of such a program 

and make recommendations.  

Mr. Noyes observed that the inadequacies of present 

inventory data did not result primarily from lack of resources 

for compilation--the Government was devoting a substantial volume 

of resources to that purpose--but from the intransigence of the 

statistical problems. Thus, there was some doubt in his mind 

about the amount of improvement that could be achieved by the 

addition of System resources to those presently available. However, 

he would be happy to ask the Board's Division of Research and 

Statistics to make some preliminary investigations of the possibilities 

for data improvement.



7/13/65 -28

Mr. Hickman remarked that the System might have one 

possible advanage in that businesses frequently were willing 

to report information to it that they were reluctant to reveal 

to others.  

Chairman Martin noted that inventories had long been 

recognized as one of the most seriously deficient areas in the 

body of available statistics. He recalled that in the mid-1950's 

the Board had sponsored a study by a consultant committee of the 

problem in that area, as well as in certair others, at the request 

of the Subcommittee on Economic Statistics of what was then known 

as the Jcint Committee on the Economic Report of the Congress. He 

agreed that it would be desirable to continue work in the area.  

Mr. Koch then made the following statement concerning 

financial developments: 

Several months have now elapsed since the two modest 
moves in the direction of monetary restraint taken in 
February and March. Therefore, I should like to address 
my brief remarks this morning to three questions: (1) 
What have been the apparent results of these moves; (2) 
with the benefit of hindsight, have these results, on 
the whole, been appropriate; and (3) what do they suggest 
as to the most appropriate posture for current policy.  

Recert policy can appropriately be characterized 
as one of moderate restraint. The oft-maligned but still 
useful short-run guide to policy, free or net borrowed 
reserves, has changed from a positive figure of about 
$100 million on average over the three months ending with 
January to a negative figure of between $150 and $200 
million recently. Member bank borrowings have risen 
from about $300 million to almost $600 million. Changes 
of almost $300 million in these indicators are large ones 
for such a short period of time.



7/13/65

This rather sharp increase in the degree of pressure 
on bank reserve positions has been occasioned by a desire 
to achieve tauter money market conditions, conditions 
more consistent with the 4 per cent discount rate adopted 
last November. Even so, we have seen the Treasury bill 
rate become quite disassociated, for a time at least, from 
more restrictive bank reserve positions and other indicators 
of the tone and feel of the money market. Most recently, 
though, bill rates appear to be rejoining the money market 
team.  

Turning to the more basic financial indicators of 
policy, events of the recent past indicate once again how 
much financial developments depend not only on monetary 
policy but also on market forces as well as other policy 
measures. With the liquidity of business corporations 
becoming more limited relative to financing needs, their 
demand for bank loans has continued strong, and they have 
stepped up the volume of their capital market financing in 
recent months. This has occurred at a time when banks 
have been under somewhat more reserve pressure, when 
their liquidity has declined to a relatively low level, 
and when time and savings deposit grcwth has slackened, 
following the initial rapid inflow last winter when 
interest rates on these deposits were raised.  

Banks have had to liquidate Government securities 
and on balance have apparently reduced their rate of 
acquisition of other securities in order to meet the 
strong loan demands. There was a sharp rise in bank 
holdings of securities other than U.S. Governments in 
June, but the rise was concentrated at New York City banks 
and was no doubt associated in large part with a temporary 
and unu:ual spurt in Federal agency and municipal tax 
warrant financing.  

The end result of all of these banking developments 
has been a continuing quite rapid rate of expansion of 
total reserves and credit, but with a larger proportion 
of the reserves having to be obtained by borrowing and 
with credit obtainable only at somewhat higher costs and 
under somewhat more restrictive lending terms. Money 

supply growth has been quite moderate for the year to 

date, about 2-1/2 per cent, almost all of which was 
concentrated in June.  

The cost and availability of most types of capital 

market financing, as well as bank financing, has become 

a little more restrictive in recent months, due in the

-29-



7/13/65

main to a large increase in new flotations of corporate 
and municipal bonds, and to the public's reappraisal 
of stock values. Thus, yields on both new corporate 
bonds and on outstanding State and local government 
bonds have risen about 25 basis points above the early 
year levels. Average stock prices are down about 5 
per cent from their mid-May peak, and therefore dividend 
yields are up about 20 basis points.  

So much for what has happened. Has this been 
appropriate? I think so. We have permitted sharp 
expansion in bank reserves and bank credit to occur, but 
have allowed these expansions to have some self-limiting 
effects, through pressure on member bank borrowings in 
the case of reserves and on interest rates and other lending 
terms in the case of bank credit.  

Some of the recent credit expansion has been due to 
temporary factors such as the prolonged steel strike threat.  
Moreover, most of the expansion is but one side of a financial 
coin, the other side of which is savings--savings the holders 
of which wish to hold in liquid form. We need much more 
information and analysis of who owes the increasing volume 
of credit and the resources they are likely to have to 
service and repay it, before we can conclude from the total 
credit figures, or from the bank proportion thereof, that 
the recent large credit rise poses a threat to further 
sustainable economic growth.  

As for the relationship of recent policy to inter
national financial flows, whatever domestic credit easing 
effects might have resulted from reduced U.S. foreign 
lending and investing and the repatriation of liquid funds 
previously held abroad have been more than offset by the 
combined restraining effects of our policy and strong 
domestic credit demands.  

Finally, what does all this suggest as to the most 
appropriate policy under current conditions? In my view, 
the restraining effects of past policy changes and market 
developments have not yet all been felt. For some time 
business and bank liquidity have been declining gradually 

but steadily; now bank credit terms and terms for long-term 
financing are becoming more restraining. These are the 
financial terms that most directly affect decisions to 

spend and invest.  
Under these circumstances, my own preference is for 

no change in policy at the present time. I say this with 
recognition of the facts that the full effects of policy

-30-



7/13/65

come only after substantial lags and that we may be in the 
later stages of the current economic expansion. Further 
restraining action strikes me as too risky, both because 
of the uncertain basic strength of the domestic economic 
situation and because of the uncertainties, at least for 
the short-run, created by recent stock market developments.  
In any case, because of the upcoming Treasury financing, 
any further restraining move would have to be prompt in 
timing and moderate in nature.  

Easing action also seems to me to be premature. With 
lasting balance of payments improvement still a hope rather 
than a reality, the domestic economic situation should more 
clearly call for easing before we actively seek it through 
monetary policy.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

In evaluating the present state of the balance of pay
ments, the two chief considerations to bear in mind are 
that the initial impacts of the President's program have 
been large, and that a very substantial deterioration has 
occurred since last autumn in the current account--specifi
cally, a shrinkage in the merchandise trade surplus.  

Just because the initial impacts of the President's 
program on the capital account have been large, the 
program cannot be expected to hold down the deficit later 
in the year in anything like the degree it has done so 
up to now.  

The shrinkage in our trade surplus since last autumn, 
which amounts to more than $2 billion at an annual rate, 
has been hidden from casual view by the distortions of 
foreign trade movements caused by the dock strike. These 
distortions made the second-quarter trade surplus larger 
than it would otherwise have been, and, along with the reflux 
of bank credit, this produced a balance of payments surplus 
in the second quarter instead of a deficit.  

With data now in for the six-month period December 
through May, it is evident that the shrinkage of the trade 
surplus has gone farther and faster than was anticipated 
in projections of the balance of payments made by an inter
departmental group not very long ago. Imports have been 
rising sharply. In the second quarter, after adjustment 
for the strike distortion, they were probably already above

-31-



7/13/65

the $20 billion annual rate projected for the year.  
Exports, on the other hand, have remained near last autumn's 
high level, and below the lower edge of the wide range that 
was allowed for in the export projection.  

The various considerations I have mentioned make it 
likely that the balance of payments deficit for the full 
year 1965 will be nearer $1-1/2 billion than $3/4 billion.  
(These were the two ends of the overall deficit projection.) 
With a seasonally adjusted net deficit of $1/2 billion 
behind us in the first half, a seasonally adjusted deficit 
of the order of magnitude of $1 billion lies ahead in the 
second half.  

It would be premature to interpret the leveling off 
in our exports since the autumn of 1964 as a sign of a 
deteriorating competitive position for the United States.  
In part, it has been due to agricultural rather than 
manufactured exports. In part, like the British, we are 
being affected by the leveling off in import purchases 
of nonindustrial countries. A sign of more fundamental 
trouble may be the sharp rise in our imports of consumer 
goods and capital equipment, as well as of steel and 
other materials.  

As the autumn period of seasonal strain on sterling 
approaches, the question of its possible impact on the 
U.S. balance of payments is going to become acute. I 
should like to say a little about this.  

Whatever shadings of views there may be about Britain's 
problems--whatever the degree of pessimism about Britain's 
ability to work out of its difficulties in the longer run, 
and whatever the degree of optimism that Britain's present 
policies will deal successfully with :he immediate crisis-
everyone can agree on one thing, and that is that British 
im:orts are going to fall significantly before long. Hopes 
of a marked acceleration in British exports are diminishing 
in the present world trade situation, and the urgently 
needed short-run adjustment in Britain's trade balance 
must therefore be made mainly in imports. British imports 
are either going to fall as a result of present policies, 
or, if not, then as a result of more drastic measures which 
will become necessary.  

The fall in British imports may come at a time when 
U.S. imports may be leveling off after the steel settlement 
has been reached, French and Japanese imports may not yet 
be rising, and anti-inflationary policies may be having 
increasing success in Germany and other countries. Under 
such conditions, a large fall in British buying abroad, no 
matter how it is produced, will have a depressing influence

-32-



7/13/65

in the world economy. An apparent dilemma will then be 
posed for U.S. monetary policy: it will be more evident 
to everycne than it is right now that the U.S. balance 
of payments needs strengthening yet drastic anti-inflation
ary measures by the United States at that time might cause 
still further retardation of economic expansion throughout 
the world, and even more difficulty ahead for our exports.  

It seems to me that that will be a time above all 
for us to accept a temporary further worsening of our 
balance of payments, if it comes, without precipitate 
counteraction. Under such circumstances we should rely 
primarily on inter-central bank cooperation for defense 
of the dollar, rather than on drastic restriction of 
credit. I would like to add to this one other observation.  
Our experience of a massive outflow of direct investment 
and bank loans last January and February shows how im
portant it is that we definitely rule out exchange controls 
from our chinking and that changes in the I.E.T. be completed 
and go into effect before they are needed, lest anticipatory 
capital outflows be provoked again. And still one more 
thing should be added. If, despite all expectations and 
intentions to the contrary, sterling devaluation is forced 
upon the British Government and British imports are reduced 
in that way instead of some other, our dilemma would still 
be essentially the one I have outlined, though heightened 
by chances of speculative outflows; and the dangers for the 
world, and for ourselves, of resolving the dilemma by 
drastic credit restriction might be even greater.  

I do not think that future possibilities of deflationary 
strains in the world economy should influence Federal Reserve 
policy in the meantime. How the British pull through 
depends now primarily on what happens to the current account 
in their balance of payments. Small interest rate variations 
are of very minor consequence at present for capital move
ments to or from sterling. What happens to their current 
account depends primarily on themselves, in the short time
perspective with which we are now concerned. So it seems 
to me that Federal Reserve policy should be determined 
now, as at any time in the last several years, by the 
possibilities of gaining long-run benefits from moderate 

slowing of bank credit expansion: benefits for price 
stability, for economic growth uninterrupted by boom or 

recession, and for the gradual approach of international 

equilibrium. This way of looking at the policy problem 
will continue to be relevant, it seems to me, until a

-33-



7/13/65 -34

time when it becomes clear that business cycle forces are in 
a position such that continued restraint would precipitate 
an otherwise avoidable recession.  

Mr. llis said he gathered from Mr. Hersey's remarks that the 

surplus in the U.S. trade account in 1965 would be less than the $6.7 

billion recorded in 1964. He asked whether Mr. Hersey would hazard 

a guess as to what the 1965 figure would be.  

Mr. Hersey replied that he would expect the trade surplus 

this year to be on the order of $5 billion. In his statement he had 

noted that the shrinkage thus far this year from last autumn had 

been over $2 billion at an annual rate, but the surplus in the autumn 

had been at a higher rate than in 1964 as a whole.  

Mr. Balderston commented that, as he understood Mr. Hersey's 

remarks, he (Mr. Hersey) thought that domestic goals should be 

stressed in formulating current monetary policy; that selective 

controls should be abjured in dealing with the balance of payments 

problem; and that in the event of devaluation of sterling or a 

worsening in the U.S. balance of payments, main reliance should be 

placed on cooperation among central banks for the defense of the 

dollar. If that was an accurate summary, how did Mr. Hersey think 

it would be possible to obtain the cooperation of foreign central 

banks if they already held all of the dollars that they wanted? 

Mr. Hersey responded that he had not meant to imply that 

U.S. monetary policy now or in the near future should be determined 

solely on the basis of domestic considerations. In his judgment it



7/13/65 -35

was important to continue to work toward states of credit availa

bility and capital market conditions that would facilitate approach 

to equilibrium in the country's international payments; and he 

believed that domestic price stability was of crucial importance 

to the balance of payments.  

As to inter-central bank cooperation in the hypothetical 

event of sterling devaluation, Mr. Hersey continued, he thought two 

factors should be borne in mind. First, sterling presumably would 

be strong after devaluation, and Britain would be among the countries 

able to assist in the defense of the dollar. Secondly, much of the 

reflow of funds to Britain that probably would develop would be 

from the continent, and insofar as it involved dollar holdings it 

would come, to a great extent, from the Euro-dollar market. Ac

cordingly, even though foreign commercial bank holdings in the U.S.  

might tend to be drawn down, the Euro-dollar market would be tight 

and that tightness would be communicated to national money markets 

on the continent. Given the kind of world outlook at that time 

that he had outlined and that had been pictured at the recent Paris 

meetings, he thought it would be not impossible to get the continental 

central banks to agree that a tighter U.S. monetary policy was an 

improper prescription for dealing with the situation that would then 

face the United States.



7/13/65 -36

Mr. Maisel asked whether Mr. Hersey would agree that the 

kinds of price increases that had occurred recently, such as in 

industrial materials, served to improve the competitive position 

of the United States and thus were favorable to the U.S. balance 

of payments.  

Mr. Hersey replied that increases in prices of steel and 

machinery would not help the U.S. payments balance. Mr. Hickman 

remarked that price increases for nonferrous metals presumably 

would be helpful to the extent that this country was a net exporter 

of such metals. Mr. Hersey said he doubted that the U.S. was a 

net exporter of nonferrous metals at present.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(1) Business conditions.--What, on balance, are prospects for economic 
activity in the second half of the year, taking into account such 
influences as the recent behavior of the stock market, the continued 
accumulation of steel inventories, and Federal fiscal measures? 

On balance, the most likely prospect continued to be for a 
moderate rate of expansion in aggregate output in the second half 
of the year. GNP appears to have increased some $7 billion in the 
second quarter to an annual rate of about $656 billion. As demand 
forces can now be assessed, gains in the next two quarters may be a 
little larger than this, but are not likely to be large enough to 
prevent some increase in the unemployment rate and some decline in 
the rate of capacity utilization in manufacturing.  

The recent stock market decline apparently has had little 
effect on business activity. Consumer purchases of autos rose 
sharply in June and total retail sales remained strong. No



7/13/65

important reappraisals of business plans for fixed capital 
expenditures have been reported.  

Recent inventory developments continued to be dominated 
by the buildup of stocksof steel and autos. The rate at which 
steel users are accumulating stocks of that metal has slowed markedly 
since April, but total steel stocks continue to rise rapidly as 
mills restore inventories depleted earlier. Steel inventories are 
now as high in relation to consumption as at the peaks of both the 
1962 and 1963 buildups, and are considerably higher in absolute 
terms. The prospective sharp decline in steel output after the 
conclusion of present wage negotiations will be a contractive 
influence on the economy, but its effect on the rate of overall 
expansion should be moderated by a more expansive fiscal policy 
and continued strength in other areas.  

In this connection, recent surveys suggest continued high 
levels of consumer spending for durable goods and rising business 
expenditures on new plant and equipment; and outlays by State and 
local governments no doubt will continue to advance at a steady 
pace. Consumer spending will be stimulated by fiscal policy 
measures, including the large and retroactive increases in social 
security benefits expected to be enacted shortly and the recent 
reduction in excise taxes. The Federal budget position on a 
national income (annual rate) basis is likely to shift from a 
surplus in the second quarter estimated at $1.3 billion to a 
deficit in the second half of the year of almost $4 billion.  
Similarly, the full employment surplus will show a large decline.  

(2) Productivity and costs.--What do recert and prospective develop
ments in productivity and costs portend fcr prices and profit margins 
in the next few months? 

Recent tendencies in productivity and unit labor and materials 
costs have been a little less favorable than earlier this year.  
These tendencies as well as prospective developments, however, do not 
in themselves appear to foreshadow widespread increases in costs and 
prices, or any appreciable lowering of corporate profits and profit 
margins from the high levels reached in the first quarter and 
probably in the second quarter also.  

The advance in productivity in manufacturing may have 
slackened somewhat in the second quarter as growth in output slowed.  

Meanwhile wage rates continued to advance at about the same pace as 

earlier. As a result, the sizable further decline in unit labor 

costs which occurred in the first quarter may not have been extended

-37-



in the second. Costs of some industrial materials rose further but 
large increases were confined mainly to nonferrous metals and mill 
products.  

On the assumption that output will continue to expand 
moderately in the near future, productivity should continue to 
rise, although probably less sharply than earlier in the expansion.  
Unit labor costs are expected to be relatively stable. Although 
future wage increases cannot be predicted, there is a chance of 
a larger-than-guidepost settlement in steel, which might firm labor 
demands in other contract negotiations. Recent settlements, however, 
continue to show substantial diversity, reflecting variations in 
specific industry conditions, with little spreading of the larger
than-guidepost increases that have occurred in some industries.  

Wages, particularly of the 2 million workers covered by 
escalator clauses, also will be affected by the step-up in consumer 
prices arising mainly from reduced supplies of meats and of some 
fruits and vegetables. Some of these supply and price developments 
are temporary, but higher meat prices could persist into next year.  
To some extent, the rise in consumer prices is being moderated by 
the recent excise tax reduction.  

With competition continuing active, management has held a 
fairly tight rein on both overhead and direct costs. The high and 
rising level of expenditures for new plant and equipment this year 
will result in larger additions to industrial capacity than last 
year. With the labor supply expected to grow more rapidly, manpower 
supplies should be ample except for a few specialized skills.  

In the steel industry, a package settlement above the 
guideposts is possible, and the companies have indicated that an 
increase as large as that in aluminum would be followed by a price 
rise. There is a real question, however, whether such a price 
increase could stick under the market conditions that are likely 
to prevail for some time after a settlement; production will be 
curtailed as large inventories are liquidated, and foreign 
competition will continue.  

(3) Foreign trade.--In the light of current economic and financial 
trends in other countries, what can be said about the outlook for 

world trade, and for U.S. exports in particular? 

Key questions about the outlook for world trade and U.S.  
exports concern the extent and timing of the adjustment of Britain's 
payments position, the pace of economic advance in other industrial

7/13/65 -38-



7/13/65

countries, and the payments positions of the nonindustrial nations.  
Common Market imports in the near term are not likely to be affected 

by the controversies recently in the news.  

On the whole, the probability of rapid growth in world 

trade over the rest of the year appears small. Strengthening of 

demands in a number of industrial countries may be counterbalanced 
by reduction of demands in Britain, necessitated by its payments 
deficit, and perhaps also by slowing of import growth in non
industrial countries. In the circumstances, prospects for 

significant increases in U.S. exports in this period seem poor.  

The gain over 1964 levels may well be substantially less for 

exports than for imports.  

From the end of 1962 through 1964 world trade expanded 

by 25 per cent and U.S. exports by somewhat more. Behind this 

rapid expansion of trade lay an upsurge in activity in all 

industrial countries, beginning in 1963, which contributed also 

to higher export earnings of the nonindustrial countries. In 

1964, growth in aggregate world trade and in U.S. exports owed 

a good deal to expanded purchases by the nonindustrial countries.  

Slower growth of activity in industrial countries abroad during 

1964--with recessions in Italy and France and a slowing of the 

previously very rapid Japanese expansion--was accompanied by less 

rapid expansion of trade among the industrial countries; purchases 

by these countries from nonindustrial countries also rose less 

rapidly.  

Britain has now taken measures restricting demand but the 

impact of these measures on domestic activity and the external 

position has sc far not been large. Imports in the three months 

March-May were not much changed from the rate of the fourth quarter 

of last year, and the trade deficit remained large. Existing 

measures may reasonably be expected to have an increasingly 

restrictive impact on imports as the year goes on, but more drastic 

measures may still prove necessary.  

In continental Europe, recovery from recession was firmly 

established in Italy by the turn of the year and guarded optimism 

about future trends of activity in France began to appear in early 

spring. Stimulative policy measures taken by these countries in 

the past three months should help assure a stronger demand situation 

in the latter half of the year. Elsewhere on the continent, demands 

have on the whole continued to press on plant capacity and labor 

supplies, and little alteration in these conditions is in prospect.

-39-



7/13/65

Anti-inflationary efforts, aided by higher imports from North 
America, have been having some success; export price advances 
may be slowing down in Europe whereas U.S. export unit values 
were beginning to show increases late last year.  

In Japan, activity leveled out around the end of 1964 
after monetary policy had been tightened because of payments 
difficulties and overbuilding of inventories and fixed investment.  
However, Japanese exports began to rise rapidly during 1964 and 
monetary policy has been eased this year; these developments 
should eventually lead to renewed rises in activity and in imports.  

In the nonindustrial countries as a group, imports had 
by late last year caught up with the earlier expansion of their 
export earnings, and reserve positions began to weaken, par
ticularly in Australia and South Africa. Imports of nonindustrial 
countries can now be expected to level out. One possible indication 
that a leveling out has already begun is that recent U.S. exports 
to this group as a whole apparently have been below the advanced 
levels of last autumn. At best, the nonindustrial countries are 
not likely to be adding much to total world demand in the second 

half of 1965.  

(4) Federal finance.--What will be the likely implications of 
Federal cash needs and debt management for credit markets in the 
second half of 1965? 

The Federal Government's demand on credit markets are 
likely to be relatively moderate in the second half of 1965.  
Because of the large cash balance at the end of June, the 
Government probably will need to raise less new cash this year 
than it did in the second half of 1964, even though the cash 
deficit may be little different.  

As in 1964, most of the new cash is likely to be raised 

in the bill area, principally in the form of tax bills which can 
be paid off out of the relatively large cash surplus expected 

for the first half of 1966. However, the net increase in out

standing bills from Treasury operations in the second half of 

1965 may turn out to be somewhat smaller than in the same period 

of last year, when it was $5.5 billion. Nevertheless, the 

effect of the increase will probably be sufficient to exert at 
least seasonal upward pressure on bill rates from the supply 
side as the year progresses.

-40-



7/13/65

With respect to long-term markets, the Treasury accomplished 
enough debt lengthening through its January advance refunding and 
May refinancing to keep the average maturity of the debt at the 
end of this year about the same as at the end of 1964. Therefore, 
the pressure to engage in further debt lengthening is not as great 
currently as it has been in the past. This does not, of course, 
preclude such an action if market conditions are propitious. In 
view of the present state of the bond market, including relatively 
heavy dealer inventories of bonds, however, the Treasury is un
likely to consider major debt lengthening operations in the period 
immediately ahead. In the relatively moderate-sized Augus: refunding 
(the public holds only $3.2 billion of the maturing securities), it 
seems likely that the Treasury will stay in the short-or snort
intermediate-term area.  

(5) Bank credit and money.--What factors lie behind the sharp 
increases in bank credit and money in June, and are such factors 
likely to continue to operate over the near term? 

The sharp June increases in bank credit and money stemmed 
in part from temporary or unusual circumstances. Nevertheless, the 
underlying forces influencing both series clearly appear expansionary.  
The unusually heavy June borrowing by business is one indication of 
the current strength of loan demand. However, owing to liquidation 
of the June 30 loan bulge and in the absence of Treasury financing, 
the end-of-month bank credit series is likely to show little change 
or decline on a seasonally adjusted basis in July.  

Part of the $3.5 billion bank credit rise in June was accounted 
for by temporary loan expansion in the last week of the month. This 
included substantial borrowing by securities dealers to cover 
redemption of maturing RPs held by nonfinancial businesses. As 
usual, these borrowings were repaid within a short period; nearly 
all of the security loan increase had been liquidated by July 7.  
In addition, there was a sharp and unusual rise in bank holdings 
of securities other than U.S. Governments in June. The rise was 

concentrated at New York City banks and was no doubt associated in 

large part with two large new Federal agency financings and the 
issuance of a sizable New York City tax note.  

The strong upward trend in business demands for bank loans 

could moderate somewhat over the near term; corporations may divert 
more of their external financing from banks to the capital markets.  
This possibility is suggested by the fact that bank financing has 
been used to a far greater extent than might normally have been 
expected to finance this year's growing external needs, particularly

-41-



7/13/65 -42

in view of the continued firming in interest rate and other lending 
policies at the large city banks. Prospective declines in steel 
and auto inventories, and possible further reductions in the rate 
of accumulation of other stocks, also would tend to moderate demand 
for bank loans.  

With respect to the money supply, the sharp June rise helped 
to meet the need to add to cash balances in view of the steadily 
increasing volume of money transactions. Money supply growth was 
limited early in the year by a large buildup in time and savings 
deposits and subsequently by higher than usual Treasury balances 
at commercial banks.  

The projected rapid drawdown of Treasury balances in late 
July and early August will tend to increase private money holdings.  
Even with the sharp rise in June, growth in the money supply in the 
first half of the year as a whole, at about 2-1/2 per cent, was at 
a considerably lower rate than the increase in GNP. This suggests 
some further need to rebuild cash balances for transactions purposes 
in the months ahead.  

(6) Money market relationships.--Assuming a continuation of current 
monetary policy, what range of money market conditions, interest 
rates, reserve availability, and reserve utilization by the banking 
system might prove mutually consistent during coming weeks? 

In recent weeks net borrowed reserves have remained within 
the $150 mill.on to $210 million range that has prevailed since 
early May. But during the past two weeks Treasury bill rates and 
dealer loan rates have risen, and Federal funds have traded persistently 
at 4-1/8 per cent, with occasional trades at. 4-1/4. The 3-month 
Treasury bill has moved above 3.85 per cent, up from 3.77 per cent 

in late June, as relatively heavy bill inventories pressed against 
smaller than expected public and official demands. In the past 
week New York City banks have returned to a basic reserve deficiency 

position of more usual size.  

Assuming net borrowed reserves continue in the recent range, 

bill rates seem likely to remain between 3.80-3.90 per cent, with the 

odds favoring the upper end of the band. At present, no substantial 

downward bill rate pressures appear in the offing. The early summer 

period of heavy needs for reserves has passed and the System is not 

likely to be a major market factor over the next four weeks. The 

Treasury's August refunding is likely to be routine and to have 

little effect on bill rates. The exceptional recent tautness in



the Federal funds and dealer loan markets may lessen in the period 
ahead, but these markets may be expected to show more tightness 
than in June.  

The money market conditions specified above are not likely 
to be associated with significant pressures on long-term interest 
rates, although the municipal market remain,. heavy and upward 
yield pressures there may persist. Congestion has eased in the 
corporate market, at least temporarily. The Treasury will probably 
not test the long-term Government market in the August refinancing.  

The race of expansion in bank credit and money over the 
next few months probably will fall off from the high June rate, as 
discussed under Question 5. Private demand deposits, which showed 
little net change during the first 5 months of the year, are likely 
to increase, but much less rapidly than in June. Perhaps, on balance, 
a growth rate of around 4 or 5 per cent would be a reasonable expec
tation for the July-September period. In the same months last summer 
private demand deposits grew at a 7 per cent rate.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement: 

Business activity continues to expand, and further 
growth is in prospect. We have been seeing a more cautious 
reassessment of future prospects, and in some quarters a 
considerable amount of pessimism. But in our view the 
underlying sources of strength in the economy remain intact 
despite the prospect of some inventory liquidation later in 
the year. The positive factors include good business profits, 
business plans for further increases in plant and equipment 
spending, the stimulus to consumer sperding expected from the 
recent excise tax cut, and a further expansion in combined 
spending of Federal and State and local governments on goods 
and services in the months ahead.  

Even though the statistics on gross national product 
show a much higher rise in the first quarter than in the 

second quarter of 1965, after adjustments are made for 
special factors related to the steel and automobile indus

tries the advance in the second quarter was probably as 

great as that of the first quarter. It appears probable 

that the overall performance of the economy during the 

second half of 1965 will be in line with the projections 
made by the Council of Economic Advisers and our own 
expectations at the beginning of the year.

7/13/65 -43-



7/13/65

Trends in domestic prices, both wholesale and retail, 
are disturbing. There continues to be a noticeable upcreep 
in prices for industrial commodities; while the rate of 
advance is still modest in comparison with the inflationary 
surge of the mid-1950s, it contrasts with the stability 
achieved during the early portion of the current expansion.  
Labor costs per unit of output in manufacturing are still 
below a year ago but they have not been declining for the 
last several months. Against this background the wage 
negotiations in the bellwether steel industry are highly 
important. A settlement that would increase costs could 
have serious repercussions on the overall cost structure 
at home and on the international position of the dollar.  

On the international side, an unusually favorable 
second quarter has followed an unusually unfavorable first 
quarter. For the first time in many years we are seeing 
a quarterly balance of payments surplus. But this second 
quarter surplus rests largely on special, and nonrecurrent, 
factors. There is little evidence of a fundamental improve
ment in our basic balance of payments position. A slowing 
down in the rate of economic expansion in some industrial 
countries and balance of payments problems in a number of 
nonindustrial countries make it difficult to expect our 
exports to grow at the rate they have in recent years. On 
the other hand, our imports have been increasing more 
rapidly in the light of the high general demand at home, 
augmented by a special demand for steel. Indeed, so far 
this year our trade surplus has been considerably less 
than last year. It is not clear how much the reduction 
is due to the dock strike, but it is clear that our costs 
at home are a basic factor in the effort to improve our 
balance of payments position.  

As for the credit situation, banks have been meeting 
heavy loan demands somewhat more selectively and on 
moderately tighter terms. Rising loan-deposit ratios, 
declining holdings of Government securities, and sub
stantial net borrowings from the Reserve Banks are 
indicative of pressures on bank liquidity positions.  
So far, however, the continuous deterioration of those 
indicators of bank liquidity does not seem to have 
materially affected the willingness of the banks to 
accommodate customers. Banks have been adding to their 

loan portfolios without reducing total investments. Bank 
credit has continued this year, as it has in recent 
years, to expand more rapidly than has overall production.  
In fact, the rate of expansion so far this year has 
been faster than in the preceding years.

-44-



7/13/65 -45

It seems to me that in view of the continued strength 
of domestic business accompanied by further price advances, 
the absence of signs of a fundamental improvement in our 
balance of payments, and an excessive growth in bank credit, 
monetary policy should move toward a somewhat firmer tone.  
The Treasury will be announcing a refunding in the last 
week of July. This should be a routine operation, and 
therefore should not inhibit any change an monetary policy 
now. In view, however, of the need for an "even keel" policy 
in connection with the financing, any change in monetary 
policy should be modest.  

Mr. Ellis said that, to borrow Mr. Noyes' new semantics, the 

most noteworthy economic news in New England was of "no change" in 

employment--that is, a steady and strong employment expansion.  

Commencing last fall, jobs in durable goods factories expanded right 

through the period of the automobile shutdown and had continued upward 

ever since. Expanded operations in shipbuilding and aircraft engine 

manufacturing had lifted the regional transportation equipment index 

some 20 points in 12 months. The durables index was up 15 points in 

eight months.  

Quite naturally, Mr. Ellis continued, that strength had been 

translated into lower unemployment and longer work weeks. In May the 

work week, at 41.1 hours, just matched the U.S. average. Unemployment 

rates in May ranged from 2.6 per cent in New Hampshire to 4.6 per cent 

in Massachusetts, with a 4.2 per cent regional average. Insured un

employment at mid-June reached the lowest point recorded since November 

1956. Also reflecting the employment expansion were the reclassifications 

of three New England cities, leaving the region with only one city in the 

"labor surplus" category of 9 per cent or more unemployed.



7/13/65

Mr. Ellis remarked that the aggregate regional measures of 

consumer income, consumer spending, orders to manufacturers, manu

facturing output, and construction had "fallen off" in terms of the 

new semantics--they all continued to move upward, according to the 

latest data, but generally at more modest rates than typical of the 

first-quarter trends. The financial counterparts of the trends also 

continued to show substantial expansion rates, all reflected in 

some way in the single statistic that total loans and investments of 

First District weekly reporting banks during the three weeks ending 

June 30 averaged a plus 9,5 per cent in year-to-year comparisons.  

Evidence of how the District's banks were using the reserves being 

created showed up in the 21 per cent year-to-year gain in real 

estate loans at weekly reporting banks.  

Turning to issues of policy, Mr. Ellis offered the view that 

one of the most critical elements of the economic outlook was the 

rate at which additional industrial capacity would come effectively 

on line in the next 6-9 months. Although the country was entering 

the fifth year of rising capital goods outlays, capacity utilizatior 

rates had continued to rise to their present level of 90 per cent 

or higher on average. Of course, that implied that specific and 

important individual industries had been running measurably above 

90 per cent.

-46-



7/13/65

Mr. Ellis noted the long awareness of the historical 

evidence that cost-push inflation pressures edged prices upward at 

such utilization levels. The pervasiveness of industrial price 

advances since last fall and the strengthening in their trend--as 

shown in the green book appendix--offered evidence that the economy 

might well be traversing the jagged edge of inflation. He noted 

that, on page 11 of part II, the green book said: "The index for 

industrial commodities, which had risen 0.2 per cent in May, edged 

up another 0.1 per cent in June. The increase through the first 

half of the year amounted to 0.7 per cent--almost the same as the 

rise in the fourth quarter of last year." All of this emphasized 

the critical importance of new capacity coming on line faster than 

the foreseeable increases in demand stemming from the effect of 

the social security program superimposed on steadily rising consumer 

spending, which already was running 7 per cent above year-ago levels.  

In that context, Mr. Ellis said, perhaps he should feel 

somewhat relieved by his own judgment that the U.S. trade balance 

this year was likely to fall substantially below the $6.7 billion 

level of 1964. That would help in a small way to relieve domestic 

supply pressures. Such a result would be of little comfort, however, 

in view of the country's need to maximize the trade component of 

its balance of payments.

-47-



7/13/65

As usual, Mr. Ellis remarked, a choice of monetary policies 

for the period ahead had to recognize two major unknowns: (1) the 

strength of credit demands that would emerge, and (2) the lag in 

impact of existing and recent monetary policy. Concerning future 

credit demands, bankers had reported in the credit survey that 

they saw no letup in the recent unusually strong demands. Coupled 

with that was some evidence that business liquidity had reached a 

point requiring increasing reliance on bank financing, as Mr. Koch 

had noted.  

Concerning the lag in policy impact, Mr. Ellis noted that 

that constrain: gained importance the closer in time the cyclical 

inflection points in the trend of the economy were approached.  

That fact in turn seemed to reinforce a natural tendency to make 

no policy change--to wait and see.  

In that context, Mr. Ellis found both reassurance and some 

guidance by looking at the course of the Committee's policy over the 

past twelve months. In successive probing actions, the Committee 

had moved from a posture of slight monetary ease, characterized by 

net free reserves of $78 million and member bank borrowing averaging 

$278 million, to slight restraint, with net borrowed reserves of 

$174 million and borrowing of $539 million, using 4-week averages.  

Except for the discount rate move timed with the U.K. rate action 

last fall, at no single point had it been clear to all that an

-48-



7/13/65

overt, major policy move was appropriate; but, as Mr. Koch had 

observed, the small incremental moves the Committee had made added 

up to a significant total change. He concurred in Mr. Koch's 

judgment that those policy moves had been appropriate; the Committee's 

position was much better today than it would have been if it had not 

made successive small moves in the past twelve months. By the same 

token, he believed the Committee would be in a sounder position six 

and twelve months hence if it continued that basic probing action.  

It was Mr. Ellis' understanding that within the framework 

of unchanged money market conditions the Account Manager was working 

with a net borrowed reserve target range centered at $150 million, 

a target first adopted at the Committee's May 25 meeting. In his 

judgment it was appropriate to make a further slight step along the 

path the Committee had been following. Accepting the staff's 

description of the recent money market relationships in which net 

borrowed reserves had remained within a $150-$210 million range for 

nine weeks and, therefore, not expecting substantial impacts on 

money rates or money market conditions, Mr. Ellis recommended 

establishing a net borrowed reserve target centered at $200 million.  

Over time, member bank borrowing should be expected to average around 

$550 million if credit demands continued to show their recent strength.  

The real objective of such a move, Mr. Ellis said, was to 

continue the course of gradual probing the Committee had followed.

-49-



7/13/65 -50

If credit demands strengthened in the fall, the Committee's policy 

would have been firmed slightly to hold the surge within bounds.  

If credit demands weakened in the fall, it would have established 

a base from which a sharp policy move could be expected to have 

more impact.  

Mr. Irons reported that there had been further expansion of 

economic activity in the Eleventh District recently and business 

conditions were strong. The index of industrial production for the 

District was up more than one percentage point from May to June, 

and a further increase was expected in July. A substantial part 

of the rise was due to increased output of crude oil; gains in 

manufacturing production were moderate. Construction contract 

awards continued to rise and were at a new high despite some weak

ening in residential contracts. Employment and unemployment were 

little changed, showing only slight gains. Department store sales 

and new car sales were strong. The outlook for agriculture was 

generally reported to be good after recent rains. On the whole, 

according to most of the major economic indicators, the District 

economy was operating at a level that on almost any basis other than 

comparison with the first quarter would be considered very high.  

Financial conditions in the District were tight, Mr. Irons 

said, and District banks, including some of the smaller banks, 

were much less liquid now than they were not too long ago. Bank



7/13/65 -51

loan demand was very strong, especially in the commercial and 

industrial categories. Both demand and time deposits were up 

substantially. Banks were attempting to maintain their reserve 

positions by buying Federal funds when they were available, but 

coming to the discount window when funds were difficult to obtain 

and, in some cases, when the rate on Federal funds was above the 

4 per cent discount rate.  

At the national level, Mr. Irons continued, the outlook for 

the next few months seemed to be expansionary. Gains would be 

stimulated by rising consumer, Government, and business spending.  

The advances would be accompanied by some dangers, of which the 

most important were possible developments in Viet Nam and in the 

balance of payments situations of the United States and Britain.  

Adverse developments in those areas could change the outlook 

substantially. Also worrisome were inventory developments and the 

accumulation of wage and price increases.  

On the whole, barring unfavorable developments in Viet Nam, 

the U.S. balance of payments, or the position of sterling, Mr. Irons 

felt that the economic situation would be strong in the next six 

months. Banks were making every effort to meet, and perhaps to 

foster, strong loan demands, despite their general lack of liquidity.  

They were seeking funds from various sources and, in the Eleventh 

District at least, were employing various devices to attract time



7/13/65 -52

deposits. Certificates of deposit were being sold on a considerable 

scale in both the District and the nation, and borrowings from the 

Federal Reserve were high.  

It seemed to Mr. Irons that except for Treasury bill rates 

money market conditions had been reasonably firm, and even bill 

rates had moved up recently. Other shcrt-term rates probably gave 

a better picture of conditions in the money market, and it was 

possible that those conditions were firmer than had been thought.  

But with banks willing to pay the price necessary to get funds, and 

continuing to solicit loan business, net borrowed reserves probably 

were not very meaningful at present for policy target purposes.  

As banks made loans required reserves increased and net borrowed 

reserves rose; the System supplied additional reserves which the 

banks put to work; and the cycle continued. The Committee's present 

policy was supposed to be one of moderate restraint, but in fact it 

did not seem to be working out that way.  

In such circumstances, Mr. Irons doubted that a small 

increase in net borrowed reserves would be very effective. He 

thought the point was approaching at which the discount rate would 

have to be raised if further restraint was considered necessary.  

For the time being, he would continue present policy without 

significant change and without too much concern about the level of 

net borrowed reserves. Meanwhile, the Committee could continue to 

watch the situation closely.



7/13/65 -53

Mr. Swan reported that business activity in general seemed 

to be continuing to advance in the Twelfth District. In May employ

ment rose somewhat more rapidly in the District than in the country 

as a whole. Tentative figures for the June rate of unemployment in 

California showed a rise of one-tenth of a percentage point--as the 

national figures did--but basically the economic situation in the 

District seemed to be much the same as a month earlier.  

District savings and loan associations recently had been 

advertising extensively, Mr. Swan said, especially those that earlier 

had raised the rates they paid and then had brought them down under 

prodding by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. Most of the associations 

reducing rates recently had adopted other procedures to the advantage 

of the shareholder, such as compounding interest daily and crediting 

deposits to the date of withdrawal. In their advertising they were 

attempting to demonstrate that the overall interest return to the 

shareholder was now a few basis points higher than before the rate 

reduction. Those actions suggested that the associations were mak: g 

an effort to regain the ground they had lost to commercial banks in 

the competition for savings deposits, at least in a relative sense.  

In the four weeks ending June 30, Mr. Swan continued, there 

was a substantial increase in bank credit at weekly reporting banks 

in the District. As had been the case through most of 1965, the 

percentage gain was somewhat less than at all weekly reporting banks



7/13/65 -54

in the country. However, there still was considerable evidence of 

pressure on reserve positions. District banks were net buyers of 

Federal funds and were still borrowing in substantial volume at the 

Reserve Bank.  

With respect to the national economic situation and policy, 

Mr. Swan's conclusions were about the ,;ame as Mr. Irons'. In the 

immediate situation, and given the expected Treasury financing, it 

seemed to him that even a slight degree of firming was not indicated.  

With the recent increase in Treasury bill rates and some continuing 

uncertainties in capital markets and the stock market, he was inclined 

to think that the Committee should not make any policy change at this 

point.  

Having said that, Mr. Swan remarked, he would add that a 

number of things were of considerable concern to him, including the 

sharp increases in reserves and bank credit in June in the face of 

somewhat higher member bank borrowings and net borrowed reserves, 

the expected shift in the position of the Federal budget from 

surplus to substantial deficit in the third quarter, and the fact 

that the prospects were not bright for further improvement in the 

U.S. balance of payments in the months ahead. He found it surprising 

that nonborrowed reserves, which had declined at an annual rate of 

1.2 per cent in May, rose at an 8.4 per cent rate in June despite the 

fact that borrowings and net borrowed reserves were higher in the 

latter month.



7/13/65 -55

In view of the factors he had mentioned, Mr. Swan said, he 

was somewhat closer to the conclusion that it would be desirable to 

move to a tighter policy than he had been before. Like Mr. Irons, 

however, he had questioned the value of a vry limited move at this 

point. He would prefer to wait to see whether the views expressed 

in the staff comments on questions 5 and 6 proved justified; namely, 

that "The sharp June increases in bank credit and money stemmed in 

part from temporary or unusual circumstances" and that "The rate of 

expansion in bank credit and money over the next few months probably 

will fall off from the high June rate." If the staff's expectations 

were fulfilled, he would feel somewhat differently; but if they were 

not he probably would be inclined to pursue the possibility of a 

firmer policy at a subsequent meeting.  

Mr. Ga..usha commented that the Ninth District economy, 

buoyed by sharply higher levels of residential and commercial 

construction activity, seemed to be growing at a more rapid rate 

than the national economy. And the outlook was that the present 

rate of growth would be sustained, at least over the coming few 

months. District banks, city and country alike, increased their 

loans outstanding quite sharply during June. Country banks were 

presently more fully loaned up than at any time in the last five 

and a half years. And the average loan-deposit ratio for city 

banks was down only very slightly from the record high established

last April.



The outlook for the national economy appeared to Mr. Galusha 

to be for some slight lessening of resource utilization over the last 

half of 1965. He believed that a moderate increase in the unemploy

ment rate--to, say, 5 per cent at year end--was likely. So was a 

slight decline in average capacity utilization rates; the odds were 

not great that manufacturing output wculd grow as rapidly as capacity 

during the third and fourth quarters of 1965.  

It therefore was Mr. Galusha's guess that economic expansion 

would certainly continue and at an impressive rate, but not at a 

rate sufficient to prevent some slight lessening of pressure on 

resources. Accordingly, he saw upward pressures on prices as 

moderating somewhat in coming months, even assuming no change in 

monetary policy. There might continue to be some very modest in

creases in prices, particularly during the third quarter of this 

year. Mney wages evidently were rising a bit more rapidly at 

present than they had earlier in the recovery. And no doubt the 

record corporate profits of the first half of the year would 

continue for awhile to take their toll. Against whatever upward 

pressure on money wages existed at the moment, however, it was 

necessary to set the downward pressure generated by some reduction 

in resource utilization which he, at least, saw coming in the 

immediate future.

7/13/65 -56-



7/13/65 -57

Mr. Galusha complimented the Board's staff on the excellent 

appendix on prices contained in the current issue of the green book.  

He had found it most helpful, and, to a point, reassuring. It was 

interesting to note that price increases of the recent expansion 

had so far been smaller than those experienced in the recovery of 

1959-60. It also was interesting to note that, in the nonagricultural 

sector at least, the most dramatic of recent price increases--in 

nonferrous metals and elsewhere--had not onl. been selective, as many 

had observed, but also were of the sort that would give the United 

States' international competitors little if any advantage. Adjusting 

for those dramatic price changes, he saw not too pessimistic a price 

performance.  

Of course, Mr. Galusha said, were the fundamental economic 

outlook for greater expansion than he foresaw, he would have to 

favor some increase in the degree of monetary restraint. His 

expectations about coming months, however, made him favor no change 

in policy at this time.  

Nor did Mr. Galusha think that the U.S. balance of payments 

position, superficially so much improved, would in present circum

stances benefit perceptibly from a modest move in the direction of 

greater monetary restraint. Beyond the boundaries of the United 

States the most pressing problem remained sterling, but he did not 

see the Committee's monetary posture as offering immediate help.



7/13/65 -58

Going to the Board staff's unanswerable final question, 

Mr. Galusha remarked that what little evidence he knew of suggested 

that if free reserves remained in the range of recent weeks and if 

discount rates remained unchanged, the bill rate would locate in 

the range of 3.80 to 4.00 per cent, and most likely around 3.90 per 

cent. Putting his view differently, he knew of no special circum

stances that would suggest a marked change in the bill rate, assuming 

the level of free reserves was not altered sharply.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that economic prospects in the Seventh 

District for the rest of 1965 remained favorable. A strong demand 

for workers was reported in nearly all District centers, reflecting 

the boom in autos, steel, and machinery. In some areas labor 

markets were the tightest in a decade or more, with unemployment 

at very low levels (2.7 per cent of the work force in the Chicago 

area for May) and business firms making intensive efforts to 

recruit workers. Unemployment compensation claims continued to 

decline in all District States.  

Current worker recruitment problems were increased by the 

decision of some firms to forego usual plant-wide shutdowns in July 

or August because of present demand pressures, Mr. Scanlon said.  

Because of liberal vacation plans for their permanent work force, 

many of those firms were taking on temporary summer workers as 

well as seeking permanent additions to their payrolls.



7/13/65 -59

Mr. Scanlon remarked that declines in new orders in the 

District for some types of capital goods in the past month or two 

and slower increases in shipments were related to stretch-outs in 

promised delivery time as well as to shifts in orders for defense 

and steel. In some cases there had been a spillover of demand 

into the used equipment market; sales of used machine tools had 

been reported at prices close to original cost. Orders of structural 

steel fabricators were at a record high in May, and demands were 

pressing on capacity to an extent that work in progress at some 

District plants was falling behind schedule.  

Demands upon men and resources had been accompanied by an 

upward creep in prices, Mr. Scanlon said. People with whom he 

talked felt that in those circumstances labor was probably becoming 

less efficient on the average, with an accompanying slowing of 

productivity gains. There was little evidence, however, that 

profit margins were being eroded appreciably. Of course, to the 

extent that the pressure upon resources was related to the 

abnormally high rates of production of steel and motor vehicles, 

relief from current stringencies should be noticeable during the 

second half of 1965.  

Farm cash receipts in the District States were expected to 

continue the 4 to 5 per cent increase over a year ago, Mr. Scanlon 

observed. That expectation reflected higher prices for meat animals, 

corn, and soybeans, and an increase in production of crops.



Mr. Scanlon went on to say that the rate of savings increase 

at financial institutions, while below last year's high rate, did 

not compare unfavorably with years prior to 1964. Consumer spending 

apparently was about in line with income increases this year.  

In June, Mr. Scanlon continued, bank credit expansion in 

the district was somewhat less vigorous than in the nation but 

was moderately larger than in June 1964. A 3 per cent rise for 

business loans in June indicated a resurgence in credit demands, 

at least temporarily. The District loan increase had been less 

broadly based than that of the nation, with large increases in the 

metals category--doubtless reflecting inventory accumulation--and 

in the public utilities group, where changes tended to be related 

to the timing of security issues.  

The Chicago Reserve Bank's June quarterly survey showed a 

slight rise from March in average interest rates on business loans 

for all size groups and for term loans, Mr. Scanlon reported. Four 

of the eight banks in the lending practices survey stated that their 

rates were firmer than three months ago. Four reported that loan 

demand was stronger than three months ago and seven said it was 

stronger than a year ago. "Increased loan demand" had been cited 

more frequently as a reason for using the discount window in recent 

weeks. Although the major Chicago banks had been meeting credit 

demands without severe strain, their basic positions had declined

7/13/65 -60-



7/13/65 -61

rather sharply over the past two weeks. They had replaced only 

part of the CDs that matured in June. Borrowings by other reserve 

city banks had been rising noticeably, with some indication, he be

lieved, of reluctance to pay 4-1/8 per cent for Federal funds.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said he found the choice between 

the two suggested alternatives for the directive a difficult one 

today.1/ He believed that the possible change in policy under dis

cussion was a very small one. Conditions in the Seventh District 

would certainly encourage his support of such a move. On the other 

hand, like Mr. Irons, he doubted that a small increase in net 

borrowed reserves would be very effective in restraining the rate of 

expansion in bank credit. Moreover, he felt that any further firming 

would move the Committee a step closer to forcing a technical adjustnent 

of the discount rate. Indeed, it might be that a Federal funds rate 

consistently at the 4-1/8 to 4-1/4 per cent level might, in itself, 

force that adjustment. It seemed to him that it would be desirable 

to make no charge in policy today and to see whether the trends 

indicated by the June figures continued. On that basis he would 

prefer alternative A of the staff drafts of the directive.  

1/ Two alternative drafts of the directive prepared by the staff 
are appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



7/13/65 -62

Mr. Clay commented that, in general, the domestic economy 

continued to perform in accordance with the pattern of activity that 

had been anticipated. As such, it involved a pace of expansion that 

was considerably slower, and that probably would continue to be 

considerably slower, than the pace of the first quarter. While the 

rate of expansion was more moderate, the growth of manpower and 

industrial capacity continued to make productive resources more 

available. That combination of developments should be a restraining 

factor on nonagricultural commodity prices, tending to prevent any 

marked upward movement of prices in the period ahead. Price 

developments on both the demand and cost sides would bear watching, 

however.  

Bank credit expansion, including the growth in business 

loans, had been large, even though less than early in the year, 

Mr. Clay noted. The rate of growth in business loans should 

moderate from the June pace. On the other hand, business loan 

expansion in recent months might reflect a greater dependence on 

outside funds on the part of business, leading to larger credit 

requirements to cover its needs, including receivables, inventories, 

and capital outlays. Under those circumstances, a given pace of 

economic growth might require a larger increase in business credit 

than earlier in the upswing when internally generated funds were

more adequate.



7/13/65

The international payments record obviously was better than 

earlier, Mr. Clay said. That did not mean that the payments problem 

had been solved. It did afford an opportunity to await further 

payments developments and to devise additional methods of dealing 

with the problem.  

At the present time, it appeared best to Mr. Clay to continue 

essentially the recent monetary policy. In his opinion, the present 

and prospective rate of economic expansion did not merit monetary 

policy restraint. The increases in agricultural commodity prices 

were not business-cycle oriented, and other price movements were 

not sufficient to call for a more restrictive policy under present 

economic circumstances. The growth in bank credit also needed to 

be interpreted in terms of the outlook for a moderate rate of 

economic expansion in the months ahead. In Mr. Clay's judgment, the 

international payments situation also facilitated the continuation 

of recent monetary policy. Alternative A of the staff drafts appeared 

appropriate for the current economic policy directive.  

Mr. Wayne said the current business picture in the Fifth 

District looked quite similar to that in the nation. High level 

activity continued in all major industries, but the rate of expansion 

apparently had slowed somewhat and business optimism had dimmed 

noticeably. Responses to the Richmond Bank's latest business survey 

were less optimistic than at any time this year.

-63-



7/13/65 -64

Generally, the outlook for the second half was favorable, 

Mr. Wayne remarked. He expected the rate of improvement to 

resemble the moderate pace of the second quarter, with business 

capital outlays, consumer demand, and the government sector 

providing the principal strength. Business optimism had quite 

definitely been dampened in recent weeks, owing in part at least 

to the recent stock market break.  

It seemed to Mr. Wayne that recent productivity and cost 

developments would indicate continued high level business profits 

and little pressure on product prices from the cost side. Because 

of productivity gains stemming from increasing capital spending, 

labor cost per unit of output in manufacturing was lower now than 

at the beginning of the current upswing. Even in recent months, 

following rather generous wage settlements in a number of industries, 

the index of labor cost had moved up only fractionally.  

Recent economic and financial developments in other countries 

had resulted in a less favorable outlook for world trade and for 

U.S. exports, Mr. Wayne noted. The rate of expansion over much of 

the continent had leveled off and the United Kingdom might well 

be forced into measures which could hurt U.S. sales abroad. The 

uncertaintiesin the current situation, coupled with the recent 

increase in U.S. imports, raised doubts respecting the contribution 

of the trade surplus to a solution of the country's overall paymets 

deficit.



7/13/65 -65

Mr. Wayne remarked that the sharp increases in bank credit 

and the money supply in June were due primarily to heavy mid-year 

business borrowing and to changes in Government deposits. Short-run 

fluctuations of that kind were to be expected. He was more impressed 

with the fact that, despite the large June increase, bank credit in 

the second quarter expanded at a rate somewhat below that in the first 

quarter. He anticipated that continuing high levels of business 

activity and consumer spending would result in strong demand for 

bank credit over the near future, although he would expect this 

demand to be less robust than in June.  

Mr. Wayne saw nothing in either the domestic or the inter

national picture that warranted a change of policy at this time.  

Therefore, he favored maintaining the present posture, seeking 

neither more firmness nor more ease. He would expect the seasonal 

need to absorb reserves over the next two weeks to put upward pres

sure on bill rates, but he believed that somewhat higher rates were 

desirable. Mr. Wayne preferred alternative A of the draft directives.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

The domestic economy, all things considered, has 
performed pretty well in the second quarter, certainly as 

well as might have been expected. We have not yet seen 
any serious maladjustments arising out of the rapid first 

quarter expansion. And taking the first and second quarters 

together, the expansion in gross national product appears 

to have been not far from the reasonably rapid pace that 

developed after mid-1963.



7/13/65

Whether such a pace can persist, I do not know. There 
are cautionary signs, apart from the stock market, which at 
the moment appears to be settling down. For instance, steel 
inventories are still at advanced levels, and they may begin 
exerting some downward pressure or steel output in the months 
ahead. Also, whether the still high level of automobile 
sales will continue is certainly a questionable matter.  

The excise tax cuts might help some in that respect.  
However, their full effect on the economy will depend not 
merely on additional car sales, or jewelry sales, but also 
on increased spending throughout the whole range of consumer 
goods and services generated by the money saved when people 
purchase that second car or that anniversary present which 
it is very likely they were going to buy anyhow. And how 
this will work in practice as a stimulus to production and 
employment is something that is especially difficult to 
foretell.  

In the period ahead, the impact of excise tax cuts on 
spending will be reinforced, however, by the new social 
security program. And the two combined could serve as an 
important expansionary force. At least the full employment 
surplus data presented by the staff indicate that an 
additional fiscal stimulus in the order of $6 billion can 
be expected in the third quarter of the year, and without 
much ground being lost in the fourth.  

While the economy in the second quarter has performed 
well in the sense that it seems to have been freer than 
we might have hoped of inventory maladjustments leading 

to a decline in economic activity, it has also performed 
well with respect to inflationary pressures. Prices have 
continued to rise slightly on average, it is true, but 
supply factors in agriculture have been a major element 
in that respect. Industrial prices have continued to creep 
upwards, and while this has not yet signalized any sub
stantial build-up of inflationary forces, such price rises 

do represent a possible trouble spot if they accelerate in 
a rapidly expanding economy. This would be especially true 
if we enter a period when our balance of payments no longer 
reflects the initial (and, to a degree, one-time) benefits 
of the voluntary credit restraint program and when, therefore, 

we will have to look more searchingly at such factors as 
our export performance if the improved payments position 
is to be sustainable.

-66-



7/13/65

My reading of present economic developments does 
not lead me to suggest any change in the stance of policy 
now--of either an easing or a tightening nature. The 
forthcoming Treasury financing, though it seems as if it 
may be a routine affair, is a further consideration 
leaning toward no change.  

But with respect to policy, I would like to note 
that net borrowed reserves have consistently run above 
$150 million in the past few weeks--averaging about $175 
million in June and coming in at $185 million (before 
revision) in the first week of July. I have somewhat 
mixed feelings about this. In general, I would prefer 
to see them fluctuating on either side of $150 million.  
However, in the past several weeks we have had a rapid 
growth in money supply and in required reserves. Under 
those circumstances, it is understandable if some of the 
above normal or above expected growth in required reserves 
absorbs additional free reserves as banks satisfy rapidly 
expanding credit demands.  

This being so, I would also anticipate that if 
required -eserves begin to grow at a s.ower rate than 
expected, net borrowed reserves would begin to come in 
at less than $150 million, In other words, it would be 
only prudent then, with credit demands weakening, not to 
exert quite as much restraint on bank reserve positions.  

Mr. Robertson added that he favored alternative A of the draft 

directives, calling for no change in policy.  

Mr. Shepardson said that the staff's reports and other infor

mation seemed to indicate strength in the economy and a healthy 

outlook. He thought that the policy the Com mittee had been following, 

of gradually moving to a somewhat firmer position, had been a con

structive one. In his judgment, prospects for prices and for the 

balance of payments indicated the desirability of further probing in 

that direction. Thus, he agreed with Mr. Ellis' recommendation for

moving toward some further lessening of ease.

-67-



7/13/65 -68

However, Mr. Shepardson continued, there was merit in 

Mr. Irons' observation that such probing probably would not have 

a great effect and that at some point it might be necessary to 

implement a move toward less ease by a discount rate increase.  

He would favor discount rate action if cred.t expansion continued 

at its recent rate. Meanwhile, a modest move toward a slightly 

firmer policy would provide a more solid basis for a possible discount 

rate change if that proved necessary. On the other hand, if a definite 

downturn should develop, he felt that the Committee could move much 

faster toward easing than it had toward restraint. He favored 

alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Mitchell said that at nearly every recent meeting of 

the Committee at least one person had referred to bank credit ex

pansion in the United States as being "unsustainable," and some 

had implied that the economy would ultimately have to pay for this 

credit binge. He had borne the drip of this argument, which he 

considered specious, in silence for a long time but today would 

make a mild remonstrance.  

Mr. Mitchell started with the comment that if the word 

"unsustainable" was used, it ought to be associated with this 

Cassandra-like condemnation on the consequences of credit or growth, 

not with the growth of bank credit itself. To him, it seemed clear 

that much of the surge in bank credit over recent years was a



7/13/65 -69

one-shot affair and simply the result of enhanced competitiveness 

of banking institutions. The ability to buy deposits under current 

Regulation Q ceilings enabled banks to out-compete other financial 

intermediaries, and many money and capital narket instruments as 

well. Thus, to a large extent, what was being witnessed was a 

substitution of bank credit for other forms of credit rather than 

a net addition to credit available to the economy.  

If the System should truly be concerned about the growth 

in bank assets, Mr. Mitchell continued, an antidote was at hand; 

it was certain to work and it would show immediate results. The 

remedy was a reduction in the ceiling interest rates payable on 

deposits under Regulation Q--a reduction below present market 

rates. That action would slow bank asset growth based on purchased 

deposits to a whisper.  

Mr. Mitchell did not recommend such action even though he 

was sure that not all recent bank investment had been wise or 

conducive to stable economic growth for the United States. However, 

banks as generalized lenders had, and by and large exercised, the 

potential for putting such savings of the economy as they could 

attract to a greater range of alternative uses than most inter

mediaries. For that reason, he was prepared to see banks exploit 

the competitive advantages that higher Regulation Q ceilings provided.



7/13/65

Nor should the Committee use monetary contraction to 

curb bank credit expansion, Mr. Mitchell said, if it was mainly a 

substitution for other forms of credit--a substitution that 

occurred as funds were channeled to commercial banks that would 

otherwise have flowed to other financial institutions or directly 

into market securities.  

To spell out his reasoning a bit, Mr. Mitchell said he 

would start by noting two changes in the rules of the game: (1) 

increases in allowable time deposit rates (effective dates of 

change after 1936 were: January 1, 1957, January 1, 1962, July 17, 

1963, and November 24, 1964); and (2) the recent development of 

negotiable CDs. Those changes had made possible the accelerated 

growth of time accounts on the books of commercial banks. From 

where did those funds come? Here it was useful to recognize both 

the immediate and the subsequent effects. Right after a change 

in Regulation Q. there was some switching from other assets to the 

now more attractive time accounts; for example, holders of demand 

deposits might convert to time deposits or holders of Treasury 

bills might sell them and acquire time accounts. As time went 

on, the flows of funds also would be altered. Funds that would 

have gone into market securities or to savings and loan associations 

or into demand deposits went instead to time deposits at commercial 

banks.

-70-



7/13/65

Thus, Mr. Mitchell said, the faster growth of time deposits 

represented a diversion of funds from demand deposits, from other 

savings institutions, and from market instruments. The Committee's 

problem was to try to estimate how much came from demand deposits 

ard how much from the other two flows. Suppose, to take an extreme 

assumption, that the faster growth of time deposits had come completely 

from demand deposits. Since at any given time that represented simply 

a change in the form of bank liatilities rather than a diversion of 

funds from other institutions or market instruments, it would not 

in itself entail any change in the rate of growth of bank assets.  

In that extreme case, it would, of course, free reserves proportional 

to the difference in requirements and induce subsequent asset growth.  

On the other hand, Mr. Mitchell went on, suppose that all 

the additional funds going into time deposits represented a diversion 

from Treasury bills and other market securities. In that case, banks 

would be purchasing the additional Treasury bills (and other financial 

assets) that the time depositors previously would have acquired 

directly. The accelerated growth of bank time deposits would be 

necessary just to maintain the status quo in credit markets.  

Similarly, Mr. Mitchell said, the additional time deposits 

representing funds which otherwise would have gone to savings and 

loan associations should be reflected in expanding bank assets.  

Otherwise, the smaller acquisitions of assets by savings and loan



7/13/65 -72

associations--made necessary by the smaller inflow of funds--would 

exert a restrictive influence. Thus, in general, the extent to which 

the more rapid bank credit expansion was stimulative or merely ac

commodating to a shift in the structure of financial flows depended 

upon the mix of the sources of funds from which the additional time 

deposits came.  

As Mr. Mitchell looked at and analyzed the data, it appeared 

to him that that mix was such that a relatively small part of the 

extra build-up of time deposits in recent years had come from 

demand deposits; most of the accelerated growth of time deposits 

in the hands of the public had been at the expense of holdings of 

securities and of accounts with savings institutions. To that extent, 

the accelerated growth of bank credit was necessary to prevent a 

tightening in the availability of credit, in all forms together, 

to the economy.  

Further systematic work on those substitution relationships 

needed to be done, Mr. Mitchell said, and when results were available 

the Committee needed to study them carefully. Meanwhile, he hoped 

it was clear that, by themselves, data on the annual rate of growth 

of total bank credit as compared with, say, GNP gave little guide 

to what monetary policy was or should be.  

Turning to policy for the next month, Mr. Mitchell concurred 

with statements that had been made that alternative A was appropriate



7/13/65 -73

for the directive. Briefly, his reasons for favoring no change in 

policy were that the present international situation did not call 

for action, ard that the domestic outlook was quite uncertain. He 

was becoming increasingly of the view that a downturn in activity 

was likely in the latter part of the year; if any change was to 

be made in poicy, he would favor a snift toward ease.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that the first sentence of alternative 

A, as drafted by the staff, read: "The economic and financial 

developments reviewed at this meeting indicate continuing expansion 

of the domestic economy, although at a somewhat slower pace 

than in the first quarter." He would revise the second clause to 

read, "although at a considerably slower pace . . ." in view of the 

facts that the second-quarter increase in GNP was now estimated 

at about $7 billion, only half the first-quarter rise, and that 

the industrial production index apparently would rise only by about 

one point in the second quarter, after averaging an increase of 

about a point per month in the first quarter. It might also be 

well to work into the directive an acknowledgment of what, he thought, 

was the most likely source of disturbance to the economy--the inventory 

adjustment which he felt was in the offing. However, he had no 

specific language to suggest in that connection.  

Mr. Daane said he favored no overt change in policy at 

this time and would certainly prefer alternative A of the draft



7/13/65 -74

directives. Having said that, however, he would note that he had 

some sympathy with those who expressed uneasiness about the price 

developments, both recent and prospective, and--despite Mr.  

Mitchell's analysis, to which, he thought, the Committee would 

want to give careful attention--with recent developments in the 

bank credit area. To some extent his uneasiness had been reinforced 

at the Paris meetings, where he had first described the Committee's 

policy as being "mildly restrictive" and then had found himself 

adding that the current pace of U.S. bank credit expansion, while 

below the first-quarter rate, was still above last year's high 

rate.  

Mr. Daane thought that it had been useful for Mr. Irons 

to remind the Committee that the maintenance of any given level 

of net borrowed reserves implied accommodation of whatever demand 

for bank credit emerged--whether that demand was strong or weak.  

In view of that fact, he preferred in his own thinking not to 

characterize an increase in net borrowed reserves of, say, $20 

million as a shift in policy. In operational terms, however, he 

would still say that he would accept some increase in net borrowed 

reserves if the demand for bank credit continued strong. He would 

not recommend any specific figure as a target for the Desk's 

operations, but he would not favor action to prevent a higher 

level of net borrowed reserves from developing if it resulted 

from strong credit demands.



7/13/65 -75

Mr. Maisel said it appeared to him that, in contrast to 

this morning's presentation, the green book gave a story that was 

mixed, both more optimistic and more pessimistic than the staff 

interpretation. He disagreed particularly with the interpretation 

given to the price story of the green book, seeing in that excellent 

study more of what Messrs. Galusha and Clay did.  

The study of industrial prices seemed optimistic to 

Mr. Maisel. While prices had risen, the types of rise appeared 

normal for a period of active demand. There was no indication 

that they were moving up as a result of any structural shift; rather, 

the opposite w.s the case. The economy appeared to be in a period 

of fluctuating prices around a very stable base, and the long-run 

price level gave no sign of an upward movement.  

From the point of view of the balance of payments, Mr. Maisel 

continued, the rise in prices appeared even better. Most of the 

increase in recent periods had been in industrial materials. Given 

the structure of U.S. foreign trade, those increases which were 

international in nature almost certainly had improved the competitive 

situation of the United States. Thus, the wholesale price situation 

seemed particularly favorable, and in his judgment it offered no 

constraint on any type of desired monetary action.  

Also optimistic, Mr. Maisel continued, was the fact that 

the country had been able to increase its output at approximately



7/13/65 -76

the rate of growth of supply while decreasing its relative liquidity 

in terms of banks' position and of the money supply. He agreed 

that it was important to note that a considerable part of the recent 

increase in bank credit had resulted from a slower rate of growth 

in other liquid assets.  

Less optimistic and more serious were the warnings of 

potential danger, Mr. Maisel said. Inventories, the Committee 

was told, might have been increasing at a rate which in the past 

had proved not to be viable--a rate which usually had been followed 

by serious contractions. If that was so, it meant that even though 

the U.S. was still considerably below full utilization of its capacity, 

the expansion in demand--in contrast to output--had failed to equal 

the growth in productive capacity.  

That failure of demand to expand as fast as potential 

production was serious in and of itself, Mr. Maisel remarked. More 

importantly, if too large a share of current production had gone 

into inventories, a recognition of that fact might well be seen.  

In the past such changes had been rapid and had led to needs for 

sudden and drastic shifts in monetary policy.  

Mr. Maisel felt that small increments were preferable to 

sharp ones and that, therefore, the Committee should start to 

move towards greater ease. If the present directive was one of 

an average of $150 million in net borrowed reserves, he would



7/13/65 -77

prefer to stay with it. He would hope that during the period until 

the next meeting the shortfalls necessary to attainment of that 

average would cccur. At the same time, the Committee could look 

forward at the next meeting to a new directive calling for less 

restraint.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that business news in June was a 

mixed bag, but on the whole was better than he had expected earlier.  

A number of series had moved upward, including steel production, 

auto sales and employment. Nevertheless, he continued to expect a 

slower rate of expansion in GNP in the second half, and a leveling 

in the index of industrial production, including some individual 

months of actual decline. Such a pattern would reflect the 

liquidation of large steel inventories and associated factors, 

only partly offset by the stimulus of Federal fiscal measures.  

The recent adjustment in stock prices had probably been healthy; 

although it might contribute to some slowing in consumer spending 

and capital expansion, he did not believe its influence would be 

serious enough to alter the general path of business.  

That general view of the business outlook had received 

strong support at a meeting of Fourth District business economists 

held recently at the Cleveland Reserve Bank, Mr. Hickman noted.  

Not a single one of the 24 economists attending expected that 

industrial production in the third quarter would average higher



7/13/65 -78

than in the second quarter. For industrial production in the 

second half as a whole, most of the economists foresaw a slight 

weakening.  

Mr. Hickman commented that unit labor costs in manufacturing 

were likely to increase in the months ahead. While the April and 

May figures, which were the latest available, did indicaLe an 

inching up of costs between the first and second quarters, no 

clear change in trend was evident. Thus far this year, the adverse 

implications for profit margins had been offset by a slight rise 

in the ratio of prices to unit labor costs in manufacturing. The 

latest readings, however, suggested that price pressures were abating; 

that, coupled with a leveling of production, could mean lower profit 

margins.  

With reference to the staff's question on world trade, 

Mr. Hickman thought the outlook would probably be influenced by 

two major adverse factors. The first was a leveling in business 

activity that was apparently developing in a number of major 

countries The second was the resurgence of mercantilistic 

measures in many countries in an effort to encourage domestic 

production and to decrease imports. The United States' own effort 

to discourage capital outflows would not stimulate, and perhaps 

might temporarily retard, expansion of world trade. For a variety 

of reasons, the U.S. trade balance was likely to be lower this



year than last. U.S. exports in 1965 were unlikely to exceed last 

year's record volume, and imports might rise, perhaps by as much 

as 10 per cent. Thus the trade surplus could be reduced by as 

much as $2 billion.  

The record of Federal debt management in the first half 

of 1965 was erratic and therefore difficult to extrapolate into 

the second half, Mr. Hickman said. There was a massive shift in 

ownership of the public debt to the Federal Reserve and to State 

and local governments, as well as a sharp reduction in the amount 

of short-term securities outstanding. In coming months, further 

demands for short-term issues might be expected from public funds, 

corporations withholding funds from overseas, banks experiencing 

slackening loan demands, and from the Federal Reserve in its 

seasonal program to supply reserves. It would be helpful if the 

Treasury would satisfy its second-half borrowing needs in the 

short-term market insofar as possible and ii the Federal Reserve 

would participate by lowering reserve requirements rather than by 

absorbing part of the outstanding supply of bills. Such a joint 

effort would have desirable interest rate effects. Short-term 

rates would be likely to rise moderately, and long-term rates 

would show little change or perhaps even decline slightly. The 

balance of payments program would thus be reinforced and private 

capital formation would be encouraged.

7/13/65 -79-



7/13/65 -80

With reference to the question on bank credit and money 

supply, Mr. Hickman said, the resurgence of bank credit in June, 

coupled with a reduction in U.S. Government cash balances, was 

reflected in a sharp rise in the money stock, reversing the 

combination that had contributed to an equally sharp decline in 

the money supply in May. Reduction in Government balances during 

the second half of the year, coupled with further growth in both 

bank credit and time deposits, should contribute to continued, 

but less erratic, gains in the money supply.  

Mr. Hickman added that a recent study at the Federal 

Reserve Bank of Cleveland showed that the ratio of total debt 

to GNP had virtually a level trend recently, as had the ratio of 

total liquid assets to GNP. Those results indicated to him that 

bank credit growth had not been excessive recently, although he 

did think it had been excessive at times last year.  

In view of uncertainties in the business outlook, Mr.  

Hickman favored a modest retreat f-om the current levels of net 

borrowed reserves and member bank borrowings. He would prefer to 

see net borrowed reserves in a range of $50 to $100 million and 

borrowings around $400 million, as he had suggested at the last 

meeting. Recent events indicated that rates on U.S. Treasury bills 

were more responsive to supply and demand factors than to changes 

in reserve factors alone, at least under present money market



7/13/65 -81

conditions. The bill rate should be maintained or increased 

slightly by appropriate actions by the Treasury and Federal 

Reserve. Alternative A was clearly preferable to alternative 

B for the directive, although he would prefer a third alternative 

calling for a roll-back to conditions prevailing in late March 

and early April. If the Committee adopted alternative A, he would 

suggest deleting the word "somewhat" from the first sentence.  

In his opinion that would be preferabl, to substituting the word 

"considerably." as Mr. Mitchell had suggested.  

Mr. Bopp reported that credit extended by Third District 

member banks in June mirrored the sharp increase experienced in 

the nation as a whole. At all member banks in the District, total 

credit outstanding rose by 2.8 per cent, compared to an average 

monthly increase of only 0.4 per cent for the first half of the 

year and of 0.7 per cent for June of last year. Business loans 

at weekly reporting member banks rose by a little over 4.5 per 

cent, compared to a rate of only 0.6 per cent on average during 

the period January through May. The increase in business loans 

was spread throughout a wide range of industrial categories.  

A discussion with District reserve city bankers, Mr. Bopp 

remarked, revealed that the June tax date had been responsible for 

a sizable part of the credit increase and that seasonal expansion 

in several District industries was also important. In the opinion



7/13/65 -82

of those bankers, prospects were for a more moderate rate of 

growth in credit in the near-term future.  

Mr. Bopp went on to say that discussions during the past 

few days with several large manufacturing concerns in the District 

produced some interesting side-lights on recent and prospective 

trends in prices, profits, productivity, and costs. In chemicals 

and petroleum, nothing like a profit squeeze, was in prospect, 

according to those discussions, although industry officials expected 

some slowing from the exceptionally good profit rates turned in 

during the first half of 1965. Two steel economists disagreed in 

emphasis; one thought no squeeze was in the offing for the industry, 

and the other put more emphasis on the probability of a wage settle

ment such that wage increases would outrun productivity increases.  

No one saw in his industry such pressures on capacity that increasing 

costs would be a problem because of production passing the optimum 

point for efficiency. In steel, one economist pointed out that some 

companies had gone outside for financing, and that could be a problem 

if expected rates of utilization of new facilities were not achieved.  

The only people who saw any problem at all with wage costs outrunning 

productivity were those in steel.  

As for prices, Mr. Bopp said, chemicals and petroleum 

companies were getting increased prices in some staple lines--heavy 

chemicals and gasoline--that "would not have held a year or two ago."



7/13/65 -83

There had been spotty increases in a few input commodities used by 

chemicals manufacturers. The general impression from the interviews 

was that input prices were not a worry, and that prices of final 

products were firm, in chemicals and petroleum.  

With regard to policy, Mr. Bopp continued to feel that the 

degree of restraint prevailing at present was appropriate to the 

near-term business outlook. With the adjustment in steel in

ventories still to come and with a decline in automobile output a 

likely prospect, the increases in economic activity would probably 

slacken relative to the fast rate of the first quarter. Superimposed 

upon such a slackening expansion in demand, prospective increases in 

supplies of goods and in capacity to produce might serve to contain 

the selective upcreep in industrial prices which had occurred in 

recent months. On the other hand, an increase in prices in the steel 

industry might occur if the wage settlement was overly generous. Such 

an increase was by no means certain, however, and even if it came, 

competitive pressures might moderate it both in amount and with respect 

to the range of products affected.  

Bearing those factors in mind and considering also the con

tinued success of the voluntary restraint program, Mr. Bopp would 

make no change at present in the general posture of monetary policy.  

He favored alternative A for the directive, with the deletion of 

the word "somewhat" from the first sentence.



7/13/65 -84

Mr. Bryan reported that economic activity had continued 

to expand in the Sixth District, judging by such data as those on 

employment, unemployment, consumer income, and consumer spending.  

The insured unemployment rate continued to decline. Spending plans 

for new and expended manufacturing facilities announced in the 

second quarter of this year totaled $600 million, an all-time high 

for the District.  

So far as the outlook for business expansion was concerned, 

Mr. Bryan said that he and his staff had discovered nothing signif

icantly new in the period since the previous meeting of the Committee, 

and he had no basis for developing a conclusive answer to the question 

of the business outlook. He did have a rather intuitive feeling, 

however, that stresses should be developing when the economy came as 

close to full utilization of capacity as the U.S. had at present.  

But he could not prove the existence of strains. Available evidence 

seemed to suggest continued expansion in business activity over the 

rest of the year, although at a somewhat slower pace than in the 

first quarter. However, six months was relatively long in present 

times of rapid change, and he was prepared to be surprised.  

Mr. Bryan went on to say that one reason he was dubious 

about the view that further expansion would be orderly was his 

belief that it would be difficult to avoid further pressure on 

prices and profits if expansion proceeded at the expected rate.



7/13/65 -85

As the economy approached full employment some decline in output 

per manhour seemed inevitable. He was told that current rises in 

prices were attributable to temporary factors, including supply 

conditions for meat; nevertheless, the rise in consumer prices 

would have some permanent effects because many labor contracts 

took account of the consumer price index, often automatically.  

Admittedly, it was hard to find any major forces pushing up 

prices, but enough minor forces could have, and in his judgment 

were having, the same effect as single large ones.  

Generally, Mr. Bryan remarked, it was assumed that the 

margin of unutilized capacity set the limit to economic activity.  

But there were many factors that could limit activity. At present, 

he thought, a limiting factor existed in the skills of those who 

currently were unemployed, unless the new plant and equipment 

coming on stream was of a type that required a lower level of 

skills. Despite all the talk of automation, it seemed to Mr. Bryan 

that the requirements increasingly were for higher levels of skill; 

and in his opinion the combination of that factor and the policy 

of increasing the minimum wage level would limit the gains in 

activity, regardless of the amount of fixed investment.  

Mr. Bryan observed that Mr. Mitchell's analysis had not 

wholly reassured him about recent banking developments. In June, 

he noted, the seasonal increases in total, required and nonborrowed



7/13/65 -86

reserves were estimated at $64 million, $42 million, and $63 million, 

respectively. The System certainly had accommodated those seasonal 

needs; indeed, the actual increases in the three measures of reserves 

had exceeded the seasonal rises by $161 million, $164 million, and 

$139 million, respectively. Since March, total reserves had in

creased at a 6.1 annual rate, nonborrowed reserves at a 4.9 per cent 

rate, and required reserves at a 6.5 per cent rate. While he might 

be mistaken, he did not believe such rates were sustainable without 

developing an inflationary potential.  

Mr. Bryan said that he wished the Committee's policy choice 

was not formulated in terms of the alternatives of "no change" and 

"firmer". What he favored might be called, for want of a better 

term, a "tight rein" policy. His difficulty with the concept of 

"no change" was that under it the Committee's policy had been 

simply one of supplying all the reserves demanded. That, in his 

judgment, was tantamount to having no policy at all. At the same 

time, he certainy did not favor an overt tightening action. It 

seemed to him that, contrary to Mr. Irons' view, it was necessary 

to put the banks into a somewhat heavier borrcwing position--to 

have them obtain a larger proportion of their reserves through the 

discount window. Accordingly, if a free reserve target were to 

be used--and, as he had often noted, he did not like such a target-

he thought the level of net borrowed reserves to be sought should 

be raised a little.



7/13/65 -87

In sum, Mr. Bryan said, he advocated neither "no change" nor 

"greater firmness," but a "tight rein" policy. He did not favor a 

change in the discount rate at the present time because of the risk 

that it would have large undesirable reprecussions on the economy.  

Mr. Shuford reported that growth in economic activity in 

the Eighth District during the first half of 1965 had been similar 

to that of the nation. There had been a strong rate of expansion, 

but with some evidence of moderation from the unusually high rate 

during last fall and early winter. Payroll employment had increased 

at a 2 per cent annual rate since December, compared with a 3.3 per 

cent rate from August to December. Manufacturing output had expanded 

at a 7 per cent annual rate since December, compared with an 18 per 

cent rate in the last four months of 1964.  

In line with the national trend, Mr. Shuford said, loans 

and investments at District banks had expanded at a substantially 

faster rate since December than in late 1964. Business loans in the 

District had beer especially strong, increasing at about a 20 per 

cent annual rate since last fall.  

Since the beginning of May, daily average borrowings by 

member banks from the St. Louis Reserve Bank had been double the 

average for the first four months of the year, Mr. Shuford continued.  

Some of that borrowing had been secured by customer notes, and 

inquiries had been received from two others of the larger banks



7/13/65 -88

in the District regarding use of such notes for collateral. Those 

developments pointed up the fact, already noted in connection with 

another District, that bank liquidity was being reduced as the heavy 

demand for bank loans was being met.  

Farm prospects in the District had improved in recent months, 

Mr. Shufor observed. Higher prices for livestock, primarily beef 

cattle and hogs, had been the chief factors. Crop prospects also 

were quite good, as timely showers had fallen over most of the area 

during the past month.  

The moderation in national business activity since the first 

quarter of the year indicated to Mr. Shuford that the growth rate 

of the economy was returning to the trend which had prevailed during 

most of the current expansion. A continuation of that movement of 

activity back to the rate which had prevailed since early 1961 would 

seem desirable, for he thought there had been some indication of 

excessive total demand.  

Mr. Shuford believed that the continued upward movement in 

prices was significant. Prices in recent months had been rising 

faster than their longer-run trend, and their movement could not be 

attributed entirely to seasonal forces or to supply conditions in 

the agricultural sector. The consumer price index rose at a 1.9 per 

cent annual rate from January to May, whereas the average rate of 

increase during the corresponding months of the past four years



7/13/65 -89

was 1.1 per cent. Wholesale prices rose at a 3.8 per cent annual 

rate from January to June, compared with an average rate of decrease 

of 2.1 per cent for the same period of the previous four years. The 

industrial price component of the wholesale price index rose at about 

a 1 per cent annual rate over the past five months, in contrast to an 

average decline at an 0.8 per cent rate during those months of the 

previous four years. The implications of such comparisons depended, 

of course, on the starting date used, but averages for the four prior 

years of the present expansion seemed to provide a fair basis for 

comparison with the changes this year.  

Bank credit had continued to expand at a very rapid rate, 

Mr. Shuford said, although there had been some moderation since 

April. Money had risen at a 3 per cent annual rate since last 

November, compared with a 4.2 per cent rate in the previous 26 months.  

An upward movement in money could be expected during the balance of 

the summer as the Government reduced its deposits to normal levels.  

As the economy moved into the second quarter of 1965, 

Mr. Shuford said, it would be necessary to continue to give recognition 

to the contribution of the Federal budget, which would add considerably 

to aggregate demand.  

Mr. Shuford thought his position on policy was relatively close 

to Mr. Bryan's, and also, perhaps, to Mr. Daane's. In view of the 

recent turn toward moderation in the rate of economic expansion, he



7/13/65 -90

would not make an overt move toward additioral firmness today. On 

the other hand, he would like to see further moderation and would 

favor resisting any excessive demand that might develop. Reserves 

should not be supplied to support unduly large increases in total 

bank credit, and while some increase in the money supply was 

desirable it should be at a rate less than the 4 per cent rate of 

the period from September 1962 to November 1964. This year, he noted, 

through June the money supply had been expanding at a 2-1/2 per cent 

rate.  

Mr. Shuford commented that like some others he was reluctant 

to speak in quantitative terms; he shared the reservations that had 

been expressed about setting specific net borrowed reserve figures 

as guides for the Desk. But if references to specific figures 

were to be made, he would say that he would not be disturbed if the 

Treasury bill rate rose to 4 per cent or even a little higher, and 

if net borrowed reserves rose to above $200 million, as a result of 

the attainment of the goal he had indicated of resisting any excessive 

demand that might develop. He did not favor a change in the discount 

rate.  

Mr. Shuford thought his position was not too far from one 

favoring no change in policy, and the first paragraph of alternative 

A of the draft directives was satisfactory to him. But, to emphasize 

the need to resist excessive demand, he would prefer to have the 

second paragraph of the directive revised to call for operations



7/13/65 -91

"with a view to maintaining at least as firm conditions in the 

money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, and to permit some 

tightening if demands for credit strengthen." 

Mr. Balderston remarked that in the period of nearly twelve 

years that he had been a member of the Board he had observed that 

each time the steel industry had entered into wage negotiations, 

whether or not a strike ensued, the statistics for the industry had 

undergone large changes. This year was no exception. He found much 

of the economic data available to the Committee to be quite unreliable 

in many respects. Throughout the summer months the Committee was 

likely to suffer from some lack of visibility because of distortions 

in inventory and other figures.  

Mr. Balderston said he noted a tendency to explain away what 

trends were in evidence as "temporary," or "self-correcting." He was 

concerned by the seeming rationalization of developments that might 

otherwise disturb the Committee. He was disturbed by a number of 

particul .r phenomena, and his concern was deep-seated because, not 

knowing what the future held, it was especially difficult to decide 

what the right policy decision was at present.  

His first source of concern, Mr. Balderston said, was the 

possibility that recent inventory increases had been greater than 

the published figures indicated, as had been suggested by Mr. Gehman 

of the Board's staff. Secondly, the long-continued improvement in



7/13/65 -92

labor productivity, which certainly was unique, had now flattened 

out, with the result that unit labor costs were no longer declining.  

The impact of that development on prices, particularly of export 

goods, merited attention.  

Third, Mr. Balderston continued, the balance of payments 

outlook for the year--and he would accept Mr. Hersey's guess that 

the adverse payments balance might approximate $1.5 billion--was 

a continuing threat that certainly could not be ignored by those 

responsible for either fiscal or monetary policy. Therefore, he 

disliked the form of the reference to the second-quarter surplus 

in the payments balance that appeared in both alternative A and 

alternative B of the draft directives.  

Finally, Mr. Balderston said, the recent striking increase 

in bank loans could not go unnoticed. However, as he studied that 

development he found his conclusions supported some of Mr. Mitchell's.  

He recognized that the costs of borrowing from banks had been low 

relative to costs in the capital market and that the capital market 

had been congested at times. Also, trade concerns and metals 

manufacturers had accounted for about 40 per cent of the total 

increase in business loans at weekly reporting banks in the first 

half of 1965. That fact helped explain why commercial bank loans 

(other than to financial businesses) had risen by an average of $2.1 

billion per month (seasonally adjusted) from November 1964 through



7/13/65 -93

June 1965, as compared with an average rise of about $1.4 billion 

per month during the previous eight months. That increase of 50 per 

cent was large, but when allowance was made for the heavy borrowing 

by trade and metals companies the change was not as startling as it 

appeared at first glance.  

Nevertheless, Mr. Balderston continued, like Mr. Bryan he 

felt that a commercial bank loan expansion of the type that had 

been witnessed over the past seven months was something that the 

Committee had to worry about and to watch continually. The essential 

point was to discover, if possible, whether bank lending was for 

purposes that were constructive in the long run or for speculative 

purposes. That was difficult to do. From all that he observed, he 

suspected that the ebullience of the first few months of the year 

had been carried over to some degree, and that some bank borrowing 

was being misusec. In a related area, consumer credit continued 

high, not only fcr instalment buying of automobiles but for other 

purposes also.  

Mr. Balderston agreed with Mr. Bryan that the Committee's 

policy should be one that would press banks to obtain the additional 

reserves they needed by borrowing from the Reserve Banks. He would, 

therefore, favor a slightly firmer policy, and accordingly preferred 

alternative B for the directive. But he would revise the wording of 

the second sentence to read, "Despite a surplus in our international



7/13/65 -94

payments in the second quarter, reflecting the large initial impact 

of the Administration's balance of payments program, the prospect is 

for a substantial deficit for the year as a whole, with gold outflows 

continuing." 

Chairman Martin commented that the only important economic 

change since the previous meeting of the Committee, in his judgment, 

had been in psychology; he thought there had been a lessening of 

optimism about the economy.  

The kind of policy change that had been suggested today, the 

Chairman continued, was so minor that he found himself questioning 

whether it would have any real effect. After turning over the 

alternatives for policy in his mind before this meeting, he had 

reached the conclusion that Mr. Irons had expressed today--that the 

Committee should either make an overt move, including a change in 

the discount rate, or should hold to the status quo. He also had 

concluded that an overt move was not desirable at the present time, 

and nothing that he had heard in the discussion this morning had 

altered that view. Although he agreed with Mr. Ellis that the 

Committee's earlier probing steps had been appropriate, he doubted 

that a further probing operation now would be effective, and he was 

not prepared to see the discount rate changed at this time. On the 

other hand, he did not favor a move toward greater ease.  

There were many cross-currents at work in the economy at the 

moment, the Chairman remarked, as was suggested by the fact that good



7/13/65 -95

cases had been made in the discussion today for both of the suggested 

alternatives for :he directive. One might say that the water in the 

economic radiator had been boiling earlier in the year, but was not 

boiling now. Whether it would be again later was, of course, another 

question. The Committee might have a better picture of the situation 

at its next meeting.  

In his judgment, the Chairman said, monetary policy recently 

had been performing about as well as possible under the prevailing 

circumstances. While he recognized that the Committee might have 

to move in one direction or the other later, he favored the suggested 

alternative A for the directive today. He noted that deletion of the 

word "somewhat" from the first sentence of the draft had been suggested, 

and while the matter did not appear to be of great importance he was 

agreeable to that change. He then proposed that the Committee vote 

on a directive consisting of alternative A with the word "somewhat" 

deleted.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that Mr. Balderston's proposed 

revision of the balance of payments reference in the draft directive 

seemed worthy of consideration even if the majority favored no change in 

policy. In the ensuing discussion it was pointed out that the proposed 

language implied a forecast of developments to come of a type not 

customarily included in the Committee's directives. After further 

consideration it was decided to revise the statement relating to the



balance of payments from that in the staff drafts, without employing 

language that implied a forecast.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Mr. Ellis dissenting, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The ecoromic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate continuing expansion of the domestic 
economy, although at a slower pace than in the first quarter.  
Reflecting the large initial impact of the Administration's 
balance of payments program, there was a surplus in our 
international payments in the second quarter. In this situation, 
and with gold outflows continuing, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's current policy to reinforce the voluntary 
restraint program to strengthen the international position 
of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary 
pressures, while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve 
base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the 
forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market operations 
over the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
maintaining about the same conditions in the money market as 
have prevailed in recent weeks.  

Mr. Shepardson indicated that he had cast his favorable vote wi'h 

some reservations.  

Chairman Martin then read a telegram he had received from Senator 

Eugene J. McCarthy on June 25, 1965, in which the Senator had urged the 

Federal Reserve Board to reexamine money and credit policy "with the 

view of providing greater liquidity and relieve the tight credit sit

uation." The Senator had expressed the judgment that, with continuation

7/13/65 -96-



7/13/65 -97

of present conditions, "to place critical pressure on the British 

pound would eventually result in economic slowdown in the United 

States." 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, August 10, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Assistant Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 13, 1965 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive 
for Consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee 

at its Meeting on July 13, 1965 

Alternative A (no change in policy) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate continuing expansion of the domestic economy, 
although at a somewhat slower pace than in the first quarter. They 
also indicate a surplus in our international payments in the second 
quarter, reflecting the large initial impact of the Administration's 
balance of payments program. In this situation, and with gold outflows 
continuing, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current 
policy to reinforce the voluntary restraint program to strengthen the 
international position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of 
inflationary pressures, while accommodating moderate growth in the 
reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the forth
coming Treasury financing, System open market operations over the 
next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about 
the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent 
weeks.  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate continuing expansion of the domestic economy, 
although at a somewhat slower pace than in the first quarter, with 
some upward pressure on prices and rapid growth in bank credit.  
They also indicate a surplus in our international payments in the 
second quarter, reflecting the large initial impact of the 
Administration's balance of payments program. In this situation, 
and with gold outflows continuing, it is the Federal Open Market 
Committee's current policy to reinforce the voluntary restraint 
program to strengthen the international position of the dollar, 
and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, by moderating 
growth in the reserve base and bank credit.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to attaining 
slightly firmer conditions in the money market, while taking into 
account the forthcoming Treasury financing.


