









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington on Tuesday, February 2, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Daane 1/ 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Mills 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 
Mr. Shuford 
Mr. Swan 
Mr. Wayne 

Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Scanlon, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Brill, Garvy, Jones, Koch, Mann, 

and Ratchford, Associate Economists 
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



2/2/65

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Roberts, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Strothman, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Eastburn, Baughman, Tow, and Green, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Chicago, Kansas City, 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Brandt, Assi:tant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on January 12, 1965, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period January 12 through 27, 1965, and a supplemental report for 

January 28 through February 1, 1965. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that 

the gold stock would be reduced by $100 million this week in order



2/2/65 -3

to replenish the Stabilization Fund. He estimated that gold sales 

during the month of February would come to at least $85 million with

out taking account of the U.S. debt of $25 million to the Gold Pool.  

Unless the Russians came into the market with heavy sales, therefore, 

the U.S. probably would have to show another sizable reduction in 

the gold stock towards the end of this month or early March. On the 

London gold market speculative buying pressure had continued although 

in somewhat more moderate volume during the last week or so. The 

Gold Pool was now in deficit to the extent of $50 million despite the 

fact that the flow of gold from South Africa had been running well 

above normal levels. Mr. Coombs thought continuing pressure on the 

gold market could be expected until there was a decisive improvement 

in both the British and the U.S. balance of payments.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, sterling had 

held fairly steady with a minimum of intervention during the past 

three weeks. The report on January 18 of a much improved U.K. trade 

position in December had contributed to a better atmosphere and he 

assumed that the January trade figures, at least so far as imports 

were concerned, would look even better. Many of the market analysts 

who had been predicting a sterling devaluation now were beginning 

to take a more optimistic line and, in the absence of some new mis

adventure, the worst of the sterling crisis might have been seen.  

During the past two days the spot rate for sterling had moved up



2/2/65 -4-

fairly strongly and if this performance could be maintained for another

week or so the beginning of a return flow of funds might be seen.

This morning sterling was up to $2.7954 and the Bank of England had

taken in $70 million, making this their best day in some time.

However, Britain still owed $3.5 billion, and the situation remained

highly fragile.

The three-month credit facilities provided to the Bank of

England by various foreign central banks last November 25 would

reach the end of their term on February 25, Mr. Coombs said, and

some of the Common Market Central banks might be inclined to do

some bargaining over the terms and conditions of another three-

month renewal. This would be a prime subject of discussion at the

Basle meeting this coming weekend, but Mr. Coombs was hopeful that

it would prove possible to maintain the $3 billion package intact

for another three months. As of the end of January, the Bank of

England had drawn a total of $200 million on the $750 million swap

line with the System and nearly $600 million on the credit facilities

made available by the other central banks involved, for a total of

$800 million. They had engaged in forward operations in a volume

roughly twice this amount and in addition they owed $1 billion to

the International Monetary Fund. It was obvious that they still

had a long way to go in restoring their position.



2/2/65

So far as System drawings were concerned, Mr. Coombs said, 

the most troublesome problem was in connection with the Dutch 

guilder, where the System had drawn the full $100 million equivalent 

under the swap line, and had joined forces with the U.S. Treasury 

in executing a combined total of $50 million in sterling-guilder 

swaps and $190 million in guilder forward contracts. He noted that 

at the last meeting he had requested approval of renewals of swap 

drawings of $20 million and $10 million falling due on February 4 

and February 10, respectively. Since the Dutch meanwhile had 

expressed some concern that a turn-around in their surplus position 

might be delayed for a good many months to come, he had arranged 

with the U.S. Treasury to pay off one-half of the $20 million drawing 

maturing on February 4 in gold and to pay off the remaining $10 

million of this maturity by buying guilders with dollars frcm the 

Netherlands Bank. Unless the Dutch took in many more dollars during 

the next week or so, it might be possible to purchase enough 

guilders directly from the Netherlands Bank to pay off the $10 million 

drawing maturing on February 10. In view of the fact that there 

had not yet been a reversal of the inflows to the Netherlands it 

was desirable to chip away at these outstanding debts whenever there 

was an opportunity to do so, in his judgment.  

More generally, Mr. Coombs said, there were widespread expecta

tions in the market of selective measures to limit bank lending and



2/2/65 -6

direct investment abroad. New York banks were being deluged by 

inquiries from commercial and industrial customers as to whether tney 

should leave their earnings in foreign countries, and whether they 

should move funds abroad before such measures were taken. The com

mercial banks had stepped up their foreign lending in an effort to 

get in under the wire. Such market reaction to the prospect of 

Governmental action in the lending and investment area pointed up 

the necessity for moving as quickly as possible to bring the situation 

under ccntrol.  

In answer to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said the 

deficit in the Gold Pool was being financed temporarily by the Bank 

of England out. of its gold reserves. The British felt--in his judg

ment correctly--that they might have to sell gold in any case; and 

they were hopeful that within a month or so there would be a turn

around in the market situation that would permit liquidation of the 

deficit. There also was an advantage in deferring collection from 

the members of the Pool. As he had noted, the deficit stood at $50 

million now, and the total of the Pool's resources was less than 

$300 million. This was a delicate situation, and if some country 

wanted to throw a monkey wrench into the machinery a great deal of 

damage could be done.



2/2/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
January 12 through February 1, 1965, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Ccombs said he had no recommendations to make to the 

Committee at this time. He noted that on March 1 a $15 million swap 

of sterling against guilders would mature for the first time and he 

indicated that in his judgment a renewal of this swap for another 

three months would be appropriate unless a major turn in the guilde:

situation made it possible to reverse the transaction.  

The possible renewal for another 
three months of the sterling swap 
against guilders was noted without 
objection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operatiors in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period January 12 through 27, 1965, 

and a suplemental report for January 28 through February 1, 1965.  

Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented 

as follows: 

The market has experienced two distinct phases since the 
last meeting of the Committee. On January 12 the Treasury 

announced the results of its advance refunding. The extraor

dinary success of that operation was taken by the market as 

confirmation of its generally optimistic view of the outlook 

for interest rates. After a day or two of caution during



2/2/65 -8

which dealers waited to see if any significant volume of 
speculative holdings would be offered into the market 
(they were not), prices began to move higher, and rose 
almost steadily for several days in the middle of the 
recent period. Prices also moved up it, the corporate and 
municipal bond markets. On January 19, an Aaa-rated 
utility issue was reoffered at a yield of 4.37 per cent-
lower than yields on such issues before the discount 
rate increase. And on January 26 an A-rated corporate 
issue was reoffered at 4.44 per cent--the lowest yield 
on such an issue since February of last year. The 
market had some awareness during that period of the 
deterioration of the balance of payments in the fourth 
quarter. But it was not fully aware of the extent of 
the deterioration, and it felt that any official 
action taken to deal with the payments problem might 
well be confined to selective measures.  

Early last week this situation changed. The market 
began to focus on the fact that the 1964 payments deficit 
might be in the neighborhood of $3 billion. Putting 
that fact together with the news that the President 
was planning to submit a balance of payments message 
to Congress in early February, the market drew the 
conclusion that there would indeed be further official 
action to deal with the payments deficit and that such 
action was likely to include a moderate shift in 
monetary policy toward less ease. In consequence, 
dealers, who had made rather good progress in distributing 
their large holdings of the issues acquired in the 
advance refunding, became restive with their remaining 
holdings and undertook to pare their inventories further.  
They have been quite successful in this effort, although 
they have had to make price concessions of 6/32 or so 
to ahieve that success. As of last Friday night, dealer 
holdings of over-20-year bonds in trading accounts were 
$373 million, compared with $440 million two days earlier 
and about $600 million at the time of the last meeting.  
Their holdings of 5-10 year bonds in trading accounts 
stood at $304 million as of Friday night, compared with 
$351 million two days earlier and $565 million on January 12.  

Rates on Treasury bills moved lower in the wake of 
the advance refunding, but the decline was short-lived.  
Dealers were cautious about acquiring additional inventory 
at the 3.76-3.77 per cent level to which rates had fallen,



2/2/65

particularly since they expected their financing costs 
for such bills to continue to range upward from 4 per 
cent. Rates quickly moved to about 3.83 per cent and 
stabilized around that level for several days. With 
the development last week of the feeling that monetary 
policy might shift, the rate moved further upward, and 
the average issuing rate in the auction yesterday was 
3.89 per cent for the three-month bill (and 3.97 per 
cent for the six-month issue). One may thus conclude-
as indeed the market has concluded--that in the bill 
market, as well as in the market for longer-term 
obligations, a slight shift in policy has been partly 
discounted already.  

It was in the course of the market's adjustment 
that the Treasury sold yesterday its 21-month, 4 per 
cent note for cash. When the operation was announced 
last week, the market reception was highly favorable, 
and expectations were that allotments would be about 
10 per cent. But with the erosion of prices during 
recent days the initial enthusiasm has dimmed, and by 
the close yesterday expectations of allotments had risen 
to the neighborhood of 15 per cent. We probably won't 
know until late today or tomorrow how the financing 
actually came out.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period January 12 through 
February 1, 1965, were apprcved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

The staff economic and financial review at this meeting was 

in the fcrm of a visual-auditory presentation on balance of payments 

developments, for which Messrs. Hersey, Katz, and Dahl joined the 

meeting. Copies of the text of the presentation and of the accom

panying charts have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Hersey,

was as follows:



2/2/65

The U.S. payments deficit--however measured--was smaller 
last year than in any year since 1957. But for the seventh 
successive year, the deficit was still substantial--$3 
billion on the "regular transactions" basis and $1-1/2 billion 
on the "official settlements" basis. Adjustment toward 
equilibrium has been disappointingly slow. In view of the 
sterling crisis, abnormal activity in gold markets, and 
sharp worsening of the U.S. deficit in the fourth quarter, 
it seems urgent that a substantial reduction in the deficit 
be attained this year and next.  

A much larger part of this year's deficit will have to 
be covered by gold sales. Last year, as shown in the upper 
panel of the chart, commercial banks abroad increased their 
balances in this country by an unusually large amount--about 
$1-1/2 billion, or 25 per cent. There was also a sizable 
increase, shown in the second panel, in U.S. liabilities 
to foreign official holders (including Roosa bonds). The 
gold stock declined by only $125 million. For this year, 
things look very different. Commercial banks abroad are 
most unlikely to add another $1-1/2 billion to their assets 
here. And European central banks are resisting further 
increases in their claims on this country.  

The U.S. gold stock has declined by $7-1/2 billion, 
or one-third, in the past 7 years. To make clear that the 
remaining $15 billion is available as needed to maintain 
the present gold value of the collar the Administration 
has proposed eliminating the statutory gold reserve require
ment against the deposit liabilities of Reserve Banks, thus 
increasing the so-called "free" gold by nearly $5 billion.  
But this will in no way lessen the importance of coming to 
grips with the payments problem.  

Large U.S. payments deficits have had their counter
part in payments surpluses of other countries. The combined 
"official settlements" surpluses of the Group-of-Ten 
countris other than the U.S. and U.K. (shown in the top 
line) declined by half between '60 and '62. But this down
ward tr:nd was halted in '63 and '64. The rest of the world 
(the bottom line in the chart) developed increasing surpluses 
in 1962-63, but began last year to reduce them again. Reduc
tion in the U.S. "official settlements" deficit in '64 was 
materially aided by increased exports to this last group, 
as well as by the inflow of foreign commercial bank funds 
mentioned earlier.  

The dramatic new payments development last year was 

the deterioration in the U.K. position. If both the U.S.

-10-



and the U.K. positions are to be substantially improved 
this year, there will have to be a reduction in the combined 
surpluses of other members of the Grou; of Ten, and of 
some large reserve gainers among the nonindustrial countries.  

France has had the largest and most persistent payments 
surplus in the past 5 years, adding more than $4 billion 
to its reserves, including $2-1/2 bill.on in gold. This 
year France is expected to take all its gains in gold, and 
to hold its dollar balances near the level of approx
imately $1.1 billion to which they were reduced by last 
month's gold purchase. Germany has taken more than half 
of its reserve gains in gold since 1959, but, since early 
last year, Germany has not been in over-all surplus. Spain 
continues to run a large surplus, and :s currently buying 
$210 million of gold in 7 monthly instalments. Other 
continental European countries, and Canada and Australia, 
also added to reserves last year.  

We turn now to the British situation which has recently 
been, the focus of international financial attention. Consid
eration of its elements makes an appropriate beginning for 
today's review of the U.S. payments problem.  

Mr. Daane entered the meeting during the course of Mr. Hersey's 

remarks.  

The concluding portion of the review, presented by Mr. Young, 

was as follows; 

The problem of bringing U.S. payments into balance has 
become one of major international import. In contrast with 
other international problems, it is one for which the United 
States alone has primary responsibility. After seven years 
of large disequilibrium, averaging on regular transactions 
some $3-1/2 billion, it is surely vital to reduce this deficit 
substantially this year, with a target of attaining tolerable 
balance next year.  

How can this be done? It will indeed be hard to improve 

the current account surplus much in '65. An indispensable condition 
for further satisfactory growth of exports is assuredly continued 
U.S. cost and price stability.

2/2/65 -11-



2/2/65

On Government account, large reduction in spending 
abroad presents difficult military and political deci
sion. Spending in the European area is for military and 
security ends, rather than for aid. Our economic aid is 
mainly to less developed areas. Though largely tied to 
U.S. exports, this aid does make it easier for such areas 
to use their own export earnings to purchase European 
products.  

On private capital flow, there arc powerful economic 
incentives in a wide range of credit markets to encourage 
foreign residents to borrow dollars and U.S. institutions 
to seek foreign business. The capacity and variety of 
U.S. credit markets, the ample availability of our credit, 
and the lower level of U.S. interest rates--all these 
factors contribute to sustaining the various types of 
private capital outflow.  

U.S. bank rates charged prime domestic borrowers are 
lower than rates charged by European banks to their 
prime domestic customers. The rates quoted on the chart 
are, of course, only crude measures, since they do not 
allow for the cost to borrowers of the minimum balance 
requirements of U.S. banks or for various commissions or 
fees usually charged by European banks. Also, the rates 
U.S banks typically charge foreign bo-rowers are above 
the prime rate. In considering these loan rate differen
tials, it is well to have in mind that, as European and 
Japanese businesses extend their interrational operations, 
they are becoming better credit risks. U.S. bankers are 
fully aware of this, which is another reason for the 
recent extention of U.S. banking operations internationally.  

Some narrowing of the gap between U.S. and European 
interest levels could be achieved by a lowering of interest 
rates abroad. But persistent inflatiorary pressures in 
Europe, combined with strong financing demands pressing 
on less-than-adequate supplies of savings and inadequate 
capital market facilities, make it difficult to foresee 
much easing of interest levels there.  

So persistent, indeed, has been the creeping infla
tion problem in Europe that European financial authorities 
increasingly argue the duty of a deficit country, such as 
the U.S., to raise its interest level not only to solve 
its payments problem, but also to help contain their own 
inflationary pressures. While the European authorities 
pride themselves in using fiscal policy to foster economic

-12-



2/2/65

growth, they seem less persuaded of their ability to use 
it in support of monetary policy to combat current 
inflationary tendencies.  

From the United States point of view, any judgment 
made now about a less stimulative monetary policy and 
higher interest levels domestically must weigh such help 
as this would give the balance of payments against the 
consequences it might have for domestic expansion. In 
the past four years we have had a well-balanced economic 
expansion that has raised real GNP by 20 per cent and 
has reduced unemployment to 5 per cent. With the con
tinuing strength of consumer demand, with demand pressures 
on capacity strong enough to encourage widespread plant 
expansion with the present buoyancy of profit expectations 
and also of the prices of equities as well as of many 
goods, further stimulus to business and consumer invest
ment through ready availability of bank credit and low 
long-term interest rates is no longer so desirable, in 
my personal judgment, as it was at an earlier stage.  

Whatever evaluation of domestic economic factors 
may be arrived at individually, consideration needs also 
to be given to what may happen if, to avoid any brake on 
the currert cyclical expansion, no monetary action is 
taken and the U.S. payments deficit continues large. In 
that case, if and when economic downturn later sets in, 
monetary policy may find itself unable to give much help; 
in short, it may have surrendered, at last for the short
run, much of its countercyclical flexibility.  

In his Economic Message, the President has emphasized 
the urgency of full correction of the U.S. payments deficit 
and has indicated that a special messag setting forth a 
prog-am to this end will be forthcoming soon. Presumably, 
selective fiscal and moral suasion actions directed at 
reducing the capital account deficit will be primary 
elements in this program. Presumably, too, monetary 
policy will be asked to participate both in a selective 
and in a generally reinforcing role. E:perience with 
the IET points not only to temporary effectiveness but 
also to erosion of that effectiveness through leakages 
as borrowers search out new ways of getting the funds 

they need. The bolstering of one selective measure by 

another tends to suggest to the market a step-by-step 
retreat toward more and more Governmental restriction on 

financial transactions. The less effective the chosen 

selective measures prove to be, the stronger and more

-13-



2/2/65

generalized any subsequent actions, including those of 
monetary policy, may have to be.  

In essence, our payments problem is a matter of 
bringing our total outpayments on Government and private 
capital accounts within the limits set by our earnings 
from exports and investment income, bearing in mind that 
these earnings are partly generated by Government and 
private capital flows. The Administration and the 
Congress have some hard thinking to do to determine how 
far action should be taken to cut back Government 
spending abroad and how far in policies constraining 
private transactions. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve 
is responsible for finding the monetary and credit 
policies for coming months that will best serve the 
two vital and interrelated objectives of maintaining 
well-balanced economic growth and of sustaining world 
confidence in the dollar.  

Either action or inaction involves risks, but risks 
of different kind. A failure tc take effective measures, 
including effective monetary action, to strengthen the 
U.S. payments position at this time would clearly involve 
serious future risks for the U.S. economy. Recent 
developments across the Atlantic warn us against allowing 
an international currency to drift in:o a position where 
really drastic and burdensome actions on the monetary 
and on other fronts may be forced upon an unwilling 
nation.  

Mr. Hayes remarked he thought the presentation had been an 

excellent one He had a footnote to add to a comment by Mr. Katz 

about the vital need for the British to free resources for produc

tion of export goods. One aspect of the situation that was worrying 

many people was Britain's program of public spending, and it seemed 

to him that this was an area in which they might well exercise great 

restraint.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that one chart, relating to various 

countries' shares of world export markets, had indicated that in

-14-



2/2/65 -15

recent years France and Germany had gained substantially and the 

United States and Britain had not gained. In the period covered 

by the chart the Common Market had become effective and tariffs 

among the member countries had been reduced. He asked whether the 

impression given regarding trends in the U.S. share of exports would 

not have been quite different if the figures portrayed in the chart 

had excluded exports of one Common Market country to another.  

Mr. Katz replied there was indeed some statistical bias in 

the figures charted because of the inclusion of trade among Common 

Market countries. However, it was worth noting that the tariff 

reductions within the European Economic Community affected not only 

the experts of member countries to one another but also to the rest 

of the world. The typical French or German business concern now 

could compete more effectively in world markets because its costs 

had been lowered through the greater competition within the Common 

Market following the reduction in internal tariffs. At the same 

time, these concerns had a strong incentive to maximize efficiency 

because of their knowledge that Italian firms, say, would displace 

them if they did not.  

Mr. Mitchell said he thought it was important to recognize 

that the U.S. and Britain had been placed at a competitive disadvan

tage by the development of the Common Market.



Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions and responses for consideration by the Committee.  

These materrials were as follows: 

(1) Business activity and prices--In view of the 
strength in new orders for durable goods, the recent sharp 
step-up in inventory investment, and the marked acceleration 
of production of business equipment over the past year, what 
are the prospects for sustaining economic expansion with 
continued broad stability of commodity prices? 

Production for inventory, partly to replenish stocks 
depleted in last fall's auto strikes and partly in anticipa
tion of a steel strike this spring, has been contributing 
support for recent advanced levels of industrial activity 
and for continued strength in new orders for durable goods.  
There are indications that current rates of output in some 
industries exceed sustainable levels While record auto 
sales to consumers have limited the rise in dealer stocks 
of new cars, output of other consumer durable goods has 
continued to advance at a rapid rate even though retail 
sales of these products leveled off some time ago. Inven
tory accumulation also is evident in some nondurable goods 
areas, notably textiles, where mill production has risen 
about one-tenth since mid-1964, much more rapidly than 
consumption of textile products.  

Over all, it is estimated that about 4 per cent of 
total industrial production is now going into inventories 
in constrast to a more usual volume of 1 per cent. There 
is no evidence that inventory stocking will slacken before 
steel wage negotiations are terminated. Preliminary and 
partial data suggest little further advance in industrial 
production in January, but this appears to reflect mainly 
capacity considerations in autos and steel rather than 
achievement of desired inventory levels.  

Ba:ring an unlikely early settlement in steel, inventory 
demands and strong consumer takings of new autos probably 
will sustain a high level of production activity for the 
near term. Whether final demands will be adequate to sustain 
the pace of aggregate activity after inventory demands 
subside in the late spring is less certain. Business 
spending for plant and equipment, which exceeded expecta
tions last year, is now anticipated to rise at a somewhat

2/2/65 -16-



2/2/65

slower rate in the second quarter, and Federal spending 
is scheduled to remain at recent levels. Much will hinge 
on consumers' willingness and ability to increase their 
spending to historically high rates relative to available 
incomes, on continued expansion of State and local govern
ment demands, and on the maintenance of housing activity 
at levels no lower than the reduced pace of recent months.  

One heartening aspect of recert developments is the 
continued general stability of industrial prices, despite 
peak strains on production resources. Upward pressures 
have been evident in some commodity lines--most recently, 
petroleum and textiles--but improvement in supplies has 
reduced pressure in the nonferrous metals markets, where 
the largest price advances occurred last year. Unit 
labor costs in manufacturing declined in December to 
their lowest level for this expansion period. The current 
and prospective increases in materials supplies and 
production capacity, and the continued public pressure 
on both labor and industry to keep wage settlements within 
productivity bounds, should help to maintain general price 
stability.  

(2) Balance of payments.  
A. What are the basic elements in Britain's longer 

run payments difficulties, and are the measures 
so far taken adequate to close their payments 
gap? 

B. What are the prospects for, and limitations on, 
achieving a reduction in U.S. capital outflows 
from recent record rates? 

(Staff responses were given in course of chart presentation.) 

(3) Bank credit and money--What do recent developments in 
bank credit, money, and time deposits suggest with respect 
to both demands for credit and changing liquidity needs? 
How may banks be expected to adjust the structure of their 
assets and/or liabilities if recent credit trends persist? 

In January, there was a marked strengthening in 

business loans at commercial banks, a sharp rise in the 
inflow of time and savings deposits, and continued sub

stantial growth in the money supply. These developments, 

along with the moderate volume of capital market financing,

-17-



2/2/65 -18

suggest (a) that the current pace and structure of industrial 
activity--particularly the strength of inventory buying--are 
focusing credit demands on the commercial banking system, 
and (b) that commercial banks are competing successfully 
for savin.s flows under the new higher Regulation Q ceilings.  

The rise in business loan demands has been general, 
with smaller than usual declines in loans to most seasonal 
industries and increased borrowing by others. While inven
tory accumulation undoubtedly has been a contributing 
factor, the industry distribution suggests that strength 
of loan demands is more broadly based. Part of the rise 
in loans may be attributable to increased foreign lending, 
possibly related to expectations that the I.E.T. may be 
extended .o banks.  

The January acceleration in savings deposit inflows 
to banks probably represented in large measure a diversion 
of funds From other financial institutions. There has also 
been a surge recently in the inflow of other time deposits 
at commercial banks, about two-thirds of it in CDs. Reserve 
pressures at some large city banks early in January and 
anticipaton of large CD maturities later in the month may 
have figured in bank solicitation of these funds. That 
this inflow has been much larger than in the comparable 
period of any other recent year suggests that funds 
available for liquidity reserves, at least in some sectors 
of the economy, are sizable.  

Following a relatively small increase in December, 
money supply growth was substantial in the first half 
of January, reflecting in part a more-than-seasonal 
decline in U.S. Government deposits. Some decline is 
projected for the second half of January, and growth for 
the month as a whole is likely to be about in line with 
the pace since last July.  

Banks are not expected to encounter significant 
difficulty in satisfying continued strong loan demand 
in the near term, in view of the likelinood of continued 
large savings inflows and of seasonal repayments in some 
lines of business loans. While banks ordinarily allocate 
a large share of their savings inflows to such assets as 
mortgages and municipals, they might not do so if strong 
loan demands materialize, particularly in view of the 
recent high rates of acquisition of municipals. Banks 
might also make some further inroads in their liquidity 
positions. This could involve run-offs of Treasury bills



2/2/65 -19

and sales of other short-term Governmerts, and for some 
of the large banks, reduction in loans to dealers and 
brokers.  

Finally, banks still have some leeway to increase 
the attractiveness of CDs. Most recently, offering rates 
on CDs at New York City banks have receded a bit to a 
range of 4 to 4-1/8 per cent. Even so. the cost of these 
funds is relatively high, and some large banks have cut 
back on their issuance of CDs. Most banks, however, would 
willingly resort to this source of funds to meet the 
credit demands of their regular customers.  

In summary, banks appear to be well situated to meet 
a strong loan demand in view of their large savings inflows 
and their ability to compete more aggressively for CD 
money, to reduce acquisitions of municipals, and to reduce 
their liquidity positions somewhat further. Such adjust
ments, however, would have rate implicitions for both 
short- and long-term financial markets.  

(4) Money and credit markets.  
A. In light of recent and prospective demand and 

supply developments in long-term credit markets, 
does the current level of long-term yield appear 
generally sustainable? 

B. Taking into account the Treasury's recent advance 
refunding and the mid-February refunding, what 
market constraints, if any, will there be on the 
conduct of monetary policy for the next few weeks? 

A. Under current conditions of reserve availability 

and savings flows, prospective demands for long-term credit 
are likely to be met at about prevailing levels of long
tern interest rates. The large public exchange in the 

Treasury's recent advance refunding and the subsequent 
strong performance of bond markets suggest that the 
dominant expectation of market participants was for stable 
or perhaps declining yields. Most recently, however, as 
is indicated under 4B below, some hesitancy has developed 
as concern has increased over balance of payments implica
tions for the future course of monetary policy.  

Looking first at demands for long-term credit, at this 

point in time any increase in the aggregate appears likely 
to be moderate and to come mainly from the business area.  

External financing needs of corporations were tending upward 

in the latter part of 1964 as profits leveled off, inventory



2/2/65

spending accelerated, and funds needed for plant and equipment 
outlays and accounts receivable financing continued to grow.  
Although corporate profits are expected to rise in early 
1965, partly reflecting the second instalment of the tax 
cut, cash flows required to meet the speed-up in current
year tax collections will more than offset this gain.  
However, much of the increase in external financing is 
likely to be met by commercial banks, partly through 
term loans, which should reduce upward pressure on 
corporate bond yields.  

Other capital market demand., are not expected to 
increase significantly. Construction of 1-4 family housing 
is projected to do little more than held its own, and funds 
needed for new multi-family and commercial properties may 
actually decline. Heightened competition among lenders 
may encourage more refinancing of existing properties, but 
such an increase is not likely to be large.  

No additional supply of long-term Treasury bonds is 
in prospect for the near term because the cash surplus in 
the first half of this year is expected to be somewhat larger 
than usual and because the recent: Treasury advance refunding 
has already accomplished substantial debt lengthening.  
State and local government financing has been heavy in re
cent months, and municipal demands for funds could mark 
time for a period. Offerings thus far scheduled for 
February seem on the light side, which should help municipal 
dealers to distribute the sizable inventories accumulated 
in recent weeks.  

Long-term savings have continued large and there has 
been some recent acceleration in flows to commercial banks, 
perhaps in large part at the expense of other depository 
institutions. Net inflows to institutions receiving savings 
under cortractual arrangements, such as life insurance 
companies and pension funds, are apparently continuing to 
grow at a steady rate.  

These savings flows, in conjunction with the prospective 
credit denands outlined above, should result in fairly 
balanced supply/demand conditions in capital markets and 
relatively stable long-term interest rates. But a sig
nificant change in commercial bank capacity to acquire 

long-term investments resulting from reduced reserve 

availability and increased loan demands would upset this 

balance.  
B. There are no hard and fast rules for determining 

how far into the period of market "digestion" of Treasury



2/2/65

issues the System's responsibility for even keel should 
extend. This FOMC meeting takes place about three weeks 
after the subscription books closed for the January advance 
refunding and one day after the books were opened for the 
small February refunding.  

As noted in the Green Book. dealers have made somewhat 
better progress in secondary distribution of the recent 
advance refunding than they did over a comparable period 
in July. As of January 26, they had a little over $900 
million of securities maturing an over 5 years in portfolio, 
including over $500 million in the over 20-year area. In 
the past few days dealers have become more concerned over 
the balance of payments and have undertaken to reduce their 
positions further. As of January 28, their portfolio of 
securities maturing in over 5 years was $719 million, 
including $390 million in the over 20-year category. This 
further reduction in their inventories involved price 
declines running to 4/32 - 6/32 in the long-term area.  

Constraints on monetary policy arising from the 
February refinancing, payment date for which is February 15, 
are clearly of a lesser order than those stemming from 
the January refunding. This offering of a 21-month note 
for cash to refinance $1.7 billion of publicly-held issues 
should prove routine, except that dealer allotments in 
the financing will represent a net addition to their total 
holdings of coupon issues.  

In a similar situation last August, when public 
holdings of the maturing issues were $2.2 billion, dealers 
took into position about $430 million of a new 18-month 
note. These takings, together with the remaining large 
holdings from the July advance refundings, began to be 
pressed actively on the market later in August, and 
interest rates on notes and bonds moved somewhat higher 
until mid-September.  

Given the combined overhang of the two Treasury 
financings and the still bullish state of investor expecta
tions, any change in policy at this time could put some 
upward pressure on intermediate- and long-term rates for 
both public and private issues. Even a minor change in 
policy could produce at least a short-lived reaction in 
bond yields, but if it were put into effect gradually 
(as in mid-August last year) the extent and duration of 
such a reaction would be moderated.

-21-



2/2/65

(5) Monetary and fiscal policy--What does the Federal 
Budget message imply for the impact of fiscal policy on 
the economy in the first half and the second half of 
calendar 1965? 

The proposals contained in the January 1965 Budget 
m essage (outlined in the Green Book 1/) are likely to result 
in a more stimulative fiscal policy during the second 
half of 1965 than in the first half. For the current 
January-June period, the surplus in the cash budget now 
is estimated at $6.6 billion, somewhat more than in other 
recent years. Expenditures are expected to remain steady 
and tax receipts to rise more than seasonally. Thus, 
the impact of fiscal policy will be less stimulative in 
the first half of this year.  

The first-half surplus will probably be followed by 
a much larger than seasonal swing to deficit in the 
second half of 1965--perhaps to a deficit of around $13 
billion, one-fifth more than in July-December last year.  
Because of the timing patterns of receipts and expendi
tures implicit in the proposed Budget, the second-half 
deficit is likely to be followed by another sharp swing 
to surplus in the first half of calendar 1966. Similar 
swings in the degree of fiscal stimulation are shown 
when the projected Federal activity is calculated on 
the national income account and the full employment 
surplus bases.  

The additional fiscal stimulus expected in the 
second half of this year stems mainly from increased 
expenditures, and to some extent from proposed excise 
tax cuts. Reduction in excise taxes is planned for the 
beginning of the third quarter, but additional taxes to 
pay for increased social security benefits and medicare 
are not scheduled to come into effect until January 1, 
1966. Practically none of the increase in expenditures 
represents direct Federal purchases cf goods and services.  
Rather, greater outlays are projected for transfer pay
ments (primarily increased social security benefits) and 
grants to State and local governments (for increased 
educational programs and public assistance). The largest 
increase in expenditures is anticipated in the third 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-22-



2/2/65

quarter, when the additional social security benefits 
are scheduled to begin and when a lump sum payment to 
cover retroactive benefits is expected to be made. But 
expenditures still remain well above first-half levels 
thereafter.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statemert: 

1. Business Activity and Prices. Economic activity 
advanced strongly in December, as evidenced by data on 
industrial production, retail sales, and new orders for 
durable goods. January seems likely to have brought 
further gains--new car sales especially appear to have 
been extremely strong. The prospects for sustained 
economic expansion in the comin months are very bright.  
Indeed, barring a steel strike and taking into account 
the stimulus that the Federal budget may exert in the 
second half of the year, sustained expansion through 1965 
seems likely--although perhaps at a somewhat slower pace 
than in 1964. In this environment of business expansion, 
there is a risk, still latent, that inflationary pressures 
may develop.  

2. Balance of Payments. The sharp deterioration in 
the U.S. balance of payments in the fourth quarter is less 
significant for its own sake than as a sobering reminder 
that our chronic payments problem of the past seven years 
is still far from solved. It appears that much of the 
sizable December deficit was due to capital outflows which 
were reversed after the end of the year--so that neither 
the December nor the January figures are especially mean
ingful by themselves. But after full allowance for special 
factors it is still clear that capital outflows have played 
a large and growing part in producing the deficit in the 
past year, and bank credit to foreigners has been especially 
important, including substantial term lending to Europe.  
Canadian issues were very heavy in the fourth quarter but 
much more moderate in the year 1964 if the four quarters' 
figures are spread equally over the entire year.  

While I have reluctantly concluded that some form of 
selective restraint to stem capital outflows is now warranted

-23-



2/2/65

as part of a many-pronged attack on our payments problem, 
they are likely to prove ineffective urless we reduce the 
availability of reserves. A move toward reduced monetary 
ease would reinforce the impact of selective measures, 
for it would improve our chances of containing the pres
sures that make funds seek higher returns abroad, whether 
through bank loans, through investments in foreign money 
markets, or through direct investments.  

The relative calm in the exchange markets in the past 
couple of weeks should not obsecure the fundamentally 
dangerous situations confronting both the pound and the 
dollar, and the vital need both here and in Britain to 
take strong remedial and mutually supporting measures.  

3. Bank Credit and Money. As for domestic credit 
developments, business loans rose more rapidly in 1964 
than in the preceding years, and partial data for 
January suggest continuing strength. Moderate increases 
in interest rates have been no hindrance to monetary 
expansion in an optimistic economic climate. While 
loan-deposit ratios are high, and the banks do not have 
as nuch of a Government securities cushion as they did 
a couple of years ago, they do not seem to view the 
historic measures of their liquidity positions as 
calling for as much restraint on lending as such ratios 
once implied--one reason being the change in the mix 
of demand and time deposits. Business and the public 
are still in quite a liquid position; and while velocity 
has been moving sideways for at least half a year, it 
would not be wise to count on such leveling out as 
much of a restraint while the business outlook is as 
good as it is.  

4. Money and Credit Markets. There would appear 
to be a pretty general consensus that the current level 
of long-term rates is sustainable. Were it not for 

some expectation of a possible change toward a less easy 
monetary policy, the weight of opinion would probably 
be on the side of some net downward pressure on long 
rates. With the yield curve as flat as it is, however, 
it would seem probable that a moderate lessening of 
monetary ease might find some reflection in higher long
term rates, but only slightly higher. Indeed, it is 
likely that the market has already gone some distance 
toward discounting a modest policy move.  

The Treasury's February refunding is so small and 
so routine in nature that it does not call for the

-24-



2/2/65

customary "even keel" restraint on the part of the System.  
Of somewhat greater concern is the fact that dealer 
holdings arising out of the January advance refunding 
have not yet been worked down to satisfactory levels, 
although the dealers have made particularly good progress 
in reducing their holdings of bonds over the last few 
days. But while this suggests the need for a gradual 
approach in any policy move on our part, it does not 
preclude some cautious change of policy at this time.  

5. Fiscal Policy. As I have already indicated, 
fiscal policy is likely to provide a quite substantial 
stimulus to the economy in the second half of 1965, whereas 
in the fi:st half the stimulus should be very small.  
Our analysis suggests that the expenditures side of the 
budget provides a moderate positive and rising stimulus 
during the year. On the other hand, the tax side will 
probably provide a powerful stimulus in the second half 
as contrasted with a small drag on the economy in the 
first half. The second-half stimulus could of course 
be increased further, should this later appear desir
able, by enlarging the size of the proposed excise tax 
cuts.  

6. Monetary Policy. In the light of our serious 

international problem, combined with the strong domestic 
outlook, I believe monetary polic should move toward a 
lessening of ease. A reduction in reserve availability 
is desirable both to push the bil. rate gradually up 
to the discount rate and to slow down the growth of bank 
credit. Such a decline would tend to reduce the pace 
of bank lending abroad and would not, in my judgment, 
harm the domestic economy. On the contrary, it might 
even prolong the life of the business advance by providing 
some protection against excesses.  

This is clearly an appropriat, moment for the System 

to make some move toward less ease, especially as the 

President's balance of payments message, due in a few 

days will alert the public to the seriousness of the 

whole balance of payments problem. It will be well 

understood that the System should have some part to play 

in an effective solution, and it would be desirable 

for the record to show that we have been alert to our 

responsibilities.  
Open market operations should be conducted with a 

view to permitting free reserves to decline gradually in

-25-



2/2/65 -26

the coming four weeks to about the zero level, with 
fluctuations perhaps on both sides. Since Friday, 
February 12, is a holiday, the arnouncement of lower 
free reserve figures for the coming week ended 
February 10 could not affect the market before Monday, 
February 15, when the new securities will be delivered.  
Hence a start could safely be made right away.  

The directive should be amended to indicate that 
priority is now being given to strengthing the dollar's 
international position. Also, the specific reference 
to Treasury financing is no longer needed, though the 
Committee might wish to substitute a clause indicating 
some desire on our part to moderate any impact of our 
operations on the longer-term market. The staff's 
alternative B seems to me eminently satisfactory. 1/ 

Mr. Shuford remarked that business activity had continued to 

rise in recent months, and average prices had changed only slightly 

and continued to be reasonably stable. In any business upswing, he 

noted, some sectors of the economy rose more rapidly than others.  

Since early 1951, the over-all economy had expanded fairly smoothly 

although there had been some spurts ard some reversals of production 

and sales in individual lines.  

There had been some precautiorary buying of steel, Mr. Shuford 

continued, and recent data indicated a step-up in total inventory 

investment and a rise in new orders for durable goods. Those develop

ments, along with future wage and price developments, had to be 

watched closely, and it might become necessary for monetary action 

to become more restrictive. But it seemed to him that it was premature 

to say that the economy now was confronted with a general price rise.  

1/ The two alternative draft directives prepared by the staff are 

appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



2/2/65 -27

Turning to international developments, Mr. Shuford said the 

rise of industrial production in Great Britain during October and 

November and the favorable December trade figures suggested that a 

turning point in the U.K. trade balance might be developing, although 

this was not clear. British imports might be expected to decline over 

the next few nonths, reflecting the impact of the surcharge and a de

cline of inventory accumulation. Over the longer run, however, theLr 

basic problem was to raise exports, and whether they could do so 

would depend in large part on whether there was sufficient flexibility 

in the U.K. economy to permit the shift of resources from production 

for home markets to production for foreign markets.  

Capital outflows from the U.S. had been large, Mr. Shuford 

observed, and considered in conjunction with the net balance on other 

U.S. transactions, they were of serious proportions for the U.S.  

international liquidity position. In his judgment monetary actions 

had played a significant role in limiting capital outflows and addi

tional steps might still be needed. However, it was doubtful that any 

general monetary actions which the Federal Reserve, standing alone, 

might take could substantially reduce the capital outflows. Although 

he disliked the interference in individual market decisions that 

followed from attempts at moral suasion or from selective controls, 

under existing international payments mechanisms these actions might 

be necessary if more fundamental actions to improve the balance of 

payments were not taken soon.



2/2/65 -28

Total member bank reserves and the money supply had continued 

to rise since the increases in the discount rate and short-term 

market rates Last November, Mr. Shuford noted. The higher short-term 

yields had been desirable in view of the international situation, but 

he also was pleased that the money supply, considered over a period of 

time, had continued to expand at a moderate rate.  

Long-term interest rates seemed to Mr. Shuford to have been 

appropriate for domestic activity in recent months. He believed, 

however, that interest rates should remain flexible to adjust as 

changes in the supply and demand for funds ccveloped. In the short

term market there currently was a seasonal contraction in credit 

demands, and maintenance of the present level of short-term rates 

might be possible only by restraining the growth in bank reserves, 

bank credit, and money. He was not certain what position should 

be taken with respect to the Treasury's recent advance refunding and 

the mid-February financing, but it seemed that stability in the 

money market would be desirable for a period unless a strong case 

was made to the contrary at this time.  

According to the standard measures, Mr. Shuford said, 

fiscal policy currently was operating in a contractionary way on 

the economy. It appeared that a significant deficit would develop 

later in the year if the Administration's programs were enacted.  

However, it did not now appear that within the next few months the



2/2/65 -29

budget would move significantly toward greater stimulation to the 

economy so that monetary actions could be more restrictive, permit

ting continued economic expansion with higher interest rates.  

It seemed to Mr. Shuford the Committee again had come to 

one of those periods in which the issue was one of timing. There 

was no question but that the balance of payments problem and the 

international financial situation were sericus. As he had indicated, 

there might be a need for a more restrictive monetary policy at this 

time. On balance, however, he wculd favor no change in policy now, 

partly in view of the Treasury financings--which, he observed, the 

Committee customarily took into consideration--even though the 

February financing was of minor proportions. He noted that dis

tribution of the securities issued in the advance refunding was 

still in process. He would favor keeping money market conditions 

at about current levels, with short-term interest rates ranging 

between 3.75 and 3.95 per cent or even pressing up to the discount 

rate. He suspected that these conditions would be consistent with 

continued moderate expansion in the money supply and bank reserves, 

but probably at reduced rates; at least, he would hope so. For the 

directive, he preferred alternative A of the staff's drafts.  

Mr. Bryan said he had reluctantly concluded that the Committee 

should move at least slightly in the direction of less ease. Ac

cordingly, if he might abstract from the Treasury financing, he



2/2/65 -30-' 

favored moving toward a lesser availability of reserves. He came 

to that conclusion partly because of the international situation 

which, while not disastrous, was alarming; he was deeply concerned 

about possible eventual developments in that area. His judgment 

also was influenced by the belief that the recent growth rates in 

the various reserve measures--since last August, for example--were 

higher than the rates consistent in the long run with a sound de

velopment of the economy and lack of inflationary pressures. Accord

ingly, he would favor free reserves averaging about zero and 

fluctuating in the range of plus and minus $50 million. For the 

longer run he thought the Committee should reduce its sights for 

the growth rate in total reserves to a maximum of 2 per cent or perhaps 

even lower.  

Mr. Bryan thought the questions and aswers prepared by the 

staff for this meeting were extremely good on the whole. However, 

he would take exception to the staff responses on one point--he 

was not as confident about the eventual stability of the average 

price level as the staff was. He also thought his views differed 

a little from those of the staff on the balance of payments. Along 

with others at the table, he felt that some selective credit controls 

would be needed to deal with the balance of payments problem. This 

was a painful conclusion for him because he did not believe in 

selective controls in principle, and he doubted that any member of



2/2/65 -31

the Committee did. He was afraid that they would mushroom into a 

full-fledged panoply of controls. Nevertheless, he thought that 

selective measures would be necessary because monetary policy, in 

his judgment, could not be tightened sufficiently to deal with the 

problem without doing great damage to the economy--although, as he 

had indicated, he regarded some firming as appropriate.  

Mr. Bopp said he would limit his remarks this morning 

principally to the question of bank liquidity rather than comment 

on each of the questions prepared by the staff. A survey recently 

undertaken by the Philadelphia Bank indicated that some rather 

fundamental shifts were taking place in country bank participation 

in the Federal funds market in the Third District. Those shifts had 

interesting implications for bank liquidity and for monetary policy.  

With almost 90 per cent of District country banks responding 

to the survey, 121 banks, or more than one-third of the total, were 

now found to be active in the Federal funds market. This was a very 

significant increase in participation in a very few years; before 

1961, only 18 per cent of the banks now participating were in the 

market. Moreover, of the 121 banks now in the market, 37 per cent 

first became active in 1964 and 32 per cent first became active in 

1963. Thus, the majority of country banks had never had experience in 

the market during a period of tight money.  

Another interesting finding to emerge from the study, Mr. Bopp 

noted, was that 80 per cent of the banks now in the market only on



2/2/65 -32

the selling side indicated a willingness to buy funds if the need 

arose. Moreover, a sizable proportion of banks which had never been 

in the market on either the buying or selling sides indicated a 

willingness to buy funds if needed.  

This large increase in country bank participation in the 

Federal funds market, and the declining cushion of excess reserves 

held by country banks, meant that a move toward greater restraint would 

tend to result in a quicker and more pervasive tightening, Mr. Bopp 

said. Adjustment conditions might be strained for individual country 

banks with limited experience in the Federal funds market, especially 

for those expecting to purchase Federal funds when such funds in fact 

were not available. Larger correspondents might also be affected, 

both as the availability of funds from country banks diminished and 

as the larger banks were called upon to supply funds. This could 

create problems in the administration cf the discount window.  

Turning to policy for the next four weeks, Mr. Bopp observed 

that that the climate of business continued to be affected signif

icantly by the effort to build inventories. Still, however, there 

appeared to be no general over-heating of the economy. Prices remained 

unusually stable, as did unit costs; and, although capacity might be 

strained in certain areas, this condition did not pervade the entire 

economy. On the financial front, credit demand had been strong and 

growth of the money supply recently had been rapid. Though the



2/2/65 -33

behavior of money and credit warranted close attention, he would not 

take restrictive action unless the rate of increase continued unduly 

high for a longer period.  

On the balance of payments front, Mr. Bopp said, it was 

discouraging to see the marked increase in the deficit during the 

fourth quarter, especially after the apparent progress earlier in 

the year. Without minimizing the problem, it was important to note 

the temporary factors that were at work--a spurt in Canadian bor

rowing, withholding of the British payment on the 1947 sterling debt, 

and some outflow of short-term funds to meet year-end pressures in 

the Euro-dollar market. Yet, beyond those temporary factors the 

fact remained that the U.S. payments deficit was large and continuing, 

and many observers viewed the deficit, if not with apprehension, then 

certainly with concern. Under those conditions, a significant reduction 

in the deficit during 1965 would appear the advisable course of action.  

In Mr. Bopp's opinion, however, a general tightening of mon

etary policy to reduce capital outflows would be ill-advised. To 

assure a significant reduction in capital flows would require a sig

nificant shift toward less ease, and the risks to the domestic economy 

seemed to him too great. Thus, even though he also disliked the notion 

of selective controls, he thought it was important to explore other 

avenues to reduce the deficit.



2/2/65 -34

On balance, weighing both domestic and balance of payments 

considerations, Mr. Bopp would make no change in the general posture 

of monetary policy, even in the absence of need for an even keel.  

He preferred alternative A for the directive. In a concluding remark 

Mr. Bopp observed that after the discussion this morning he was less 

positive about this position than he had been for some time.  

Mr. Hickman commented that business continued to expand, paced 

by unsustainable levels of output in autos and steel. Perhaps the 

most important recent news had been the emergence of large-scale in

ventory building, a phenomenon that frequently occurred in the late 

stages of business expansions. The inventory expansion appeared to 

some degree to have been associated with some upward pressure on prices.  

The increase in the industrial component of the wholesale price index 

during the fourth quarter of 1964, of about seven-tenths of a point, 

was the largest for any three-month period since late 1958.  

A preliminary analysis of the Budget Message and Economic 

Report left Mr. Hickman with the feeling that more vigorous steps 

would be needed than had been thus far proposed to avert a serious 

slowdown in growth in 1965. He personally welcomed the effort towards 

countercyclical fiscal policy, but under the circumstances would prefer 

greater stimulus for the second half of the year. On the basis of 

the full employment surplus figures provided by the Board's staff,



2/2/65 -35

he estimated that the Federal sector in the second half of 1965 would 

provide only about half as much stimulus as needed to achieve desired 

growth. To him this suggested rising unemployment, lower industrial 

production, and perhaps a larger budget deficit after all, unless 

steps were taken to promote additional growth.  

In respect to the near-term outlook, Mr. Hickman continued, 

the auto and steel sub-cycles that he had referred to at the previous 

meeting appeared to be approaching their peaks. Auto sales had about 

made up the losses due to last fall's strikes. Thus, total car sales 

(including imports) over the four months October through January, when 

expressed on an annual-rate basis, worked out to 8.1 million cars, 

which was the same as actual total sales for 1964. Even assuming that 

car sales in 1965 would surpass 1964, it seemed clear that the recent 

spurt had not much further to go.  

Fourth District business activity had roughly paralleled the 

national pattern thus far in 1965, Mr. Hickman said. Steel production 

was still rising in the District and retail sales were still very 

strong. He had just learned of another huge electric power project 

on the order of a quarter of a billion dollars that soon would be 

started in the eastern part of the District. On the other hand, 

slightly adverse changes in unemployment and electric power output 

were common in the District in January and were reflected in the 

national totals.



2/2/65

With reference to international developments, Mr. Hickman 

said that the British balance of payments problem seemed roughly 

divided between current account and capital account. The trade bal

ance had improved in December, and presumably there would be some 

further improvement as a result of steps already taken. However, 

the Labor Government's egalitarian proposals might not remedy the 

fundamental difficulty of under-investment in the United Kingdom.  

It was difficult to see why or how the Labor Government's program 

for nationalizing steel and adjusting taxes would attract foreign 

capital.  

Insofar as the U.S. was concerned, Mr. Hickman was pleased 

to note that the Administration was coming to grips with the fact 

that this country had a serious balance of payments problem and he 

awaited the proposed remedy with interest. One broad approach would 

be the application of selective controls over many sectors of the 

balance of payments. Another approach would be the classical one of 

monetary restraint coupled with, in this case, reduced military and 

economic aid, and perhaps some use of moral suasion to reduce bank 

lending overseas. He leaned towards the latter approach, but without 

much hope that it would be chosen.  

On the domestic financial front, Mr. Hickman commented, the 

apparent preference of the public to hold large amounts of time and 

savings deposits rather than money had induced banks to purchase

-36-



2/2/65 -37

longer-term, higher-yielding assets. In the Fourth District and in 

the nation, banks had continued to add municipal securities, 

mortgages, and longer-term assets to portfolios, and had reduced 

shorter-term liquid assets. Some light was shed on this matter by 

the Cleveland Bank's most recent semi-annual survey of municipal 

holdings of reporting banks in the District. Preliminary figures 

revealed that during the second half of 1964 banks continued to 

acquire municipals in large amounts, ith almost all the net change 

occurring in the group with maturities of over five years.  

So long as the public continued to shift from demand balances 

to time and savings deposits, Mr. Hickman said, and so long as 

monetary policy remained easy, banks would compete with other long

term investors for the limited supply of long-term investments. Unc'er 

those conditions, bond yields probably would remain steady or move 

lower. However, if the System were to tighen to the extent that 

short yields moved above the ceilings under Regulation Q, time and 

savings deposit; would decline, banks would withdraw from the long

term market, and long-term yields would rise.  

As for policy over the next four weeks, Mr. Hickman thought that 

the small magnitude of the Treasury's February cash refinancing provided 

no serious constraint on System operations. The money supply in 

December and January seemed to have increased at a rate of 3.5 per cent 

or so, which was in accord with guidelines that he had suggested



2/2/65 -38

earlier. Bank credit, on the other hand, had shown considerable vigor, 

and over the two-month period had expanded at a rate higher than he 

thought desirable over the long pull. For that reason, and also 

because of his concern over the balance of payments situation, as 

described so clearly by the staff this morning, he would prefer 

slightly lower free reserves than had obtained recently (say, $50 

million plus or minus $50 million) and a 91-day bill rate slightly 

above its current level but below the discount rate. The type of 

change he had in mind would be so small as to be virtually imperceptible.  

If the Committee made any change in policy before the next meeting, 

he would prefer not to temporize by purchasing more than token amourts 

of intermediate- and long-term bonds, and would therefore choose 

alternative A of the staff's policy directive drafts rather than 

alternative B. Of course, a great deal depended on the Administration's 

program for coming to grips with the balance of payments problem.  

If that progran called for more drastic steps on the Committee's part, 

Mr. Hickman would be prepared to support them. However, he did not 

think it would be appropriate for the System to lead the way at the 

moment.  

Mr. Daane remarked that, as the Committee knew, he had been 

clearly among those who had resisted any move toward less ease, even 

the "almost imperceptible" move of last August that had become quite



2/2/65 -39

perceptible later. Now he felt strongly that despite Treasury 

financing--and he would include not only the routine February 

financing in process but also the continued large size of dealer 

holdings of securities issued in the January advance refunding--that 

the time had come for the System to move. He agreed heartily with 

those who had observed that monetary policy alone could not solve the 

problems of the balance of payments and the position of the dollar.  

He felt, however, that the Committee had to do its part in dealing 

with what to his mind was largely a problem of confidence in the 

dollar ard was becoming increasingly so. In his judgment the Committee 

should move in the direction of less credit availability as rapidly 

as possible against the background of Treasury financing.  

As to possible domestic repercussions of such a move, Mr. Daane 

thought there sometimes was a tendency to exaggerate the consequences 

of relatively marginal changes in reserve availability as exemplified 

in the free reserve figures. In particular, he did not think a shift 

in free reserves from plus $50 million to minus $50 million would have 

any drastic, or even perceptible, repercussions on the domestic 

economy, which in his judgment was exceedingly strong at present.  

He believed that such a change could be accomplished with no great 

effects on the availability of credit for continued worthwhile ex

pansion of the economy. Moreover, he sensed some speculative overtones



2/2/65 -40

in the economy at present. This admittedly was hard to document, 

but he thought there was evidence of it in the stock market; and 

more generally, there seemed to be a growing feeling of ebullience.  

In sum, he was inclined to discount the possibility of injurious 

effects of a policy change on the domestic economy and he agreed 

with the obseration that the Committee might in fact promote the 

sustainability of the expansion by reducing credit availability at 

this point. But he favored a policy change mainly on the grounds 

of confidence in the dollar and in the belief that the Committee 

should participate in what clearly would have to be a national effort.  

Operationally, Mr. Daane agreed in general with the objec

tives Mr. Hayes had described, but would perhaps go a bit further.  

He would like to see the Committee make a perceptible move, with free 

reserves fluctuating on the negative side of zero. He would then 

expect the short-term bill rate to be at the discount rate, and, from 

time to time, a few basis points above it.  

On the directive, Mr. Daane leaned toward the spirit of 

alternative B cf the staff's drafts but: was not happy with the language.  

He thought the directive should make it clear that the Committee was 

moving in the direction of lessened availability of credit in the 

interest of a strong dollar internationally and in light of the definite 

strength of the domestic economy. Also, he thought it would be unwise 

to delete altogether the reference to Treasury financing, as in



2/2/65 -41

alternative B. The Committee was concerned with both the February 

financing and the continuing effects of the advance refunding, and 

if it decided to change policy today it should do so in such a way 

as to take account of the financings. In his judgment the directive 

should reflect that fact.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that the urge to do something to relieve 

the balance of payments constraint or to remove the anxiety of a 

continuing deficit seemed to mount at successive meetings of the 

Committee. It had been a bad time for both fears and hopes, so often 

proved unfounded and unrealized. Over the years since the "constraint" 

became an overt factor in its deliberations the Committee had nudged 

and ratcheted through two 1/2 per cent increases in the discount rate-

Treasury bill rates from less than 2.5 per cent to nearly 4 per cent.  

And under "operation twist" long-term Treasury rates had held to a 

paltry 1/4 of a per cent rise, while rates on tax exempts, mortgages, 

and corporates had been unchanged or had declined. Now there was an 

unnatural relationship between long and short yield, with both 

borrowers and lenders susceptible to official action. Borrowing short 

as U.S. banks were doing and lending long or longer might be precarious 

business if a significant change occurred in the short-long rate 

relationship. The Committee was in a position to affect this relationship 

dramatically by a careless or advertent boat rocking.



2/2/65 -42

Would an increase of 25 to 50 basis points bring long and 

short Government yields together or would short rates rise above 

long rates? Or, Mr. Mitchell continued, had "operation twist" ex

hausted its twistability? If the Committee moved now should it 

expect a full reflection of its action in long rates? What public 

advantage was gained from maneuvers of this size? 

On the side of the real economy, Mr. Mitchell said, recent 

consumer buying rates and business inventory accumulations were ex

plainable as the effects of strikes and anticipation of shortages.  

If there was more to them than that, it would only be that consumer 

expenditures stimulated by the tax cut were showing a larger reaction 

than had appeared likely, but not a larger reaction than sought when 

it was hoped tnat the tax cut might achieve a lower rate of unemployment 

than 5 per cent. If such a stimulus appeared to be evident in the 

current figures, it should not be tranquilized by monetary restraint 

in the face of the contractive effects of a steel strike or settlement, 

a working-off of automobile demand, and a less expansive Federal budget 

in the coming months (cash or income accounts). He did not expect 

recession to begin in May of this year but it was not an unreasonable 

possibility, and he certainly would not like to see it heralded or 

triggered by a contractive maneuver by the Federal Open Market Committee.  

The balance of payments deficit was something the Committee 

could not remove without abuse of its powers, Mr. Mitchell said,



2/2/65 -43

but he doubted that any member would want to withhold aid to 

accomplishing that devoutly desired goal if the Committee could see 

how it might help. Developments over the past three years had 

convinced him that the U.S. trading position was good and was con

tinuing to improve as Europe's prosperity inflated. The figures 

looked better than they were because of tied aid and compensatory 

purchases, and in some degree they benefited from the direct and 

indirect finarcing of exports. As long as the boom in Europe con

tinued, he would expect the U.S. trading position not only to hold 

its own but to grow stronger. He could not judge how much additional 

contribution to reducing the net outflow might take place as a result 

of changing the Government's aid program, but he assumed it would be 

small.  

In Mr. Mitchell's view the balance of payments problem today 

was not one of making the U.S. more competitive in the sale of goods 

and services, welcome as that might be. Rather, it was one of dealing 

with a capital outflow induced by interest rate differentials arising 

from differences in the marginal productivity of capital in capital

short countries with rudimentary capital markets. Those interest 

differentials were not a temporary phenomena to be met by temporary 

expedients. One could not hope to match in the domestic interest 

rate structure the earning opportunities offered in Western Europe or

in the less-developed countries.



2/2/65 -44

It was possible, Mr. Mitchell said, for the problem to be 

solved fortuitously by outbreaks of political unrest in Western 

Europe, Communist expropriation, or other events which would arouse 

fears for the safety of foreign investment. It was to be hoped that 

the problem would not be solved in this way. It could be solved by 

some dramatic change in U.S. saving propensities or investment 

opportunities, which was possible but unlikely.  

Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that if the United States was 

determined to solve the problem with policy instead of chance it 

really had only two broad alternatives. The first was to raise 

domestic interest rates drastically, with a sharp rise in the dis

count rate, an immediate contraction in the money supply, and a 

consequent fall in the price of outstanding debt. The ultimate goal 

would be to make the contraction sufficiently drastic to reduce funds 

available for business, housing, State and local governments, and 

individuals, so that the rates that would have to be paid would be 

competitive with those in Western Europe and less-developed countries.  

He doubted that this action would be effective for long in maintaining 

high interest rates and he was sure that it would drastically deflate 

the economy.  

The other alternative, Mr. Mitchell said, was to adopt a measure 

or measures that either insulated the U.S. interest rate structure or 

made it competitive with those in other countries. Moral suasion was



2/2/65 -45

an effort to insulate U.S. from foreign interest rate levels by 

restricting or barring foreign investments to U.S. nationals, 

corporations, and banks. For a short-run remedy it had much to 

recommend it, he thought.  

But the problem was likely to persist for a longer period, 

Mr. Mitchell observed. It was better to be armed with a device that 

was more durable. His preference was for something akin to the 

interest equalization tax imposed on loans, direct investment, and 

deposits of all U.S. citizens, corporations, and financial institu

tions. The rate should be administratively flexible. The only 

exemption should be for the financing of U.S. exports and the burden 

of proof should be on the taxpayers to show that that was the case.  

With such a device the capital outflow could be regulated according 

to the nation's capacity to support it by earnings on current account 

and by the willingness of foreigners to hold dollars.  

The balance of payments deficit doubtless would remain a 

constraint on Committee actions for some time, Mr. Mitchell concluded, 

but he hoped the Committee shortly could look to measures to solve it, 

not to keeping it alive. On these philosophical grounds he would 

favor no change in policy now.  

After observing that the staff presentation today had been 

excellent, Mr. Shepardson said that the domestic economy at present 

seemed to him to be in a vigorous, continuing expansion. Admittedly,



2/2/65 -46

both anticipations of a possible steel strike and efforts to make up 

the output lost in the automobile strike were having temporary effects 

on activity, and there might be some let down in the not-too-distant 

future when these effects ended. On the other hand, the Administration's 

fiscal progra seemed to him definitely expansive for the rest of 

the year and the period beyond. In general, he did not see a prospect 

of an immediate or near-term slackening.  

In fact, Mr. Shepardson continued, present levels of activity 

caused him to question the staff's optimism on the subject of price 

stability, as Mr. Bryan had. The pressure on wages continued and the 

prospect that wage increases would not exceed the Administration's 

guidelines did not seem promising. Upward pressure on prices would 

persist unless wage increases in goods-producing industries were kept 

in better alignment with productivity gains and there were some 

resulting price reductions in those areas to offset the inevitable 

price crawl in service industries. In his judgment the Committee would 

have to continue to be concerned about price developments.  

Mr. Shepardson thought the balance of payments problem was 

acute and something had to be done about it. He agreed that it was 

not appropriate for the Committee to undertake monetary policy action 

extensive enough to bring about a solution; the use of other measures 

also was necessary. But monetary policy had a part to play, not as



2/2/65 -47

the principal instrument but as a supporting instrument. With busi

ness conditions as they were at present he thought the Committee 

could take some step without impairing the domestic economy.  

Therefore, Mr. Shepardson said, it seemed appropriate for 

the Committee to make some move now toward a lesser availability 

of funds; it had waited about as long as it could. He did not favor 

a sharp change, but rather a small adjustment made gradually. He 

had in rrind having the 90-day bill rate work up to around the dis

count rate and a free reserve level in the zero plus or minus $50 

million range.  

Mr. Shepardson favored the essence of alternative B for the 

directive. He doubted, however, that it was either necessary or 

appropriate to include the final clause, reading "while moderating 

the impact of these conditions in markets for intermediate- and long

term securities." The Committee might want operations along that 

line, but much would depend on the particular situation that developed.  

Also, he was not particularly happy with the wording of the first 

paragraph of alternative B and would prefer a somewhat different 

emphasis. Specifically, he suggested the following wording: 

In light of the economic and financial developments 
reviewed at this meeting including the generally strong 
and continuing expansion of the domestic economy and the 

continuing adverse position of our international balance 
of payments, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's 
current policy to accommodate growth in the reserve base,



2/2/65

bank credit and the money supply but at a more moderate 
pace than in recent months as it seeks to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures and to support other 
measures that may be taken to strengthen the international 
position of the dollar.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

On the domestic scene there appear to be two principal 
new developments recently, both of which may be potentially 
disturbing. One is the clearer emergence of stepped-up 
inventory accumulations, not only from steel but from other 
output, and also an apparently unsustainable pace of auto
mobile sales. Another is the expansionary Federal budget 
for fiscal 1966 presented to Congress, but with the fiscal 
stimulus pretty much concentrated in the second half of this 
calendar year.  

These developments give me pause, but do not yet suggest 
the need for changing the course of policy. The automobile 
and steel situation is not being accompanied by any inflationary 
price developments--or even, it seems from staff reports, by 
any rise in labor costs. I doubt that basic demands are so 
fragile that possible temporary overexpansion in automobile 
and steel will be followed by a recession in activity. But 
even if so, it is not clear that the situation would be 
improved by a tightening of policy now.  

As to the budget, while the persuasiveness of President 
Johnson should not be underestimated, the programs still have 
to be approved by Congress. In any event, they are six 
months away and to that degree conjectural, while we are 
still confronted with a larger than seasonal surplus in the 
first half of this year that has been generated out of the 
current budget. Finally, the expansionary effects of the 
new programs are difficult to assess, involving as they do 
excise tax cuts, transfer payments, and grants-in-aid rather 
than what had been more usual, income tax cuts and direct 
spending.  

Our balance of payments news is less favorable than one 
would have wished. As the Committee knows, I am not among 
those who think we are doomed if we do not instantly bring 
the outflow and inflow of capital into balance. As a matter 
of fact, although I favor taking reasonable measures to deal 
with the problem, I am not inclined to panic at the current 
news. Nevertheless, I hope that the adverse character of

-48-



2/2/65

the news serves to speed up the Administration's search 
for a policy adequate to deal with the problem. At the 
same time, I must say that I am not aware of any information 
that would suggest to me that we shoulc risk a slowdown of 
domestic economic growth through a more restrictive monetary 
policy. I cannot go along with those who seem to feel we 
must buy voluntary banker efforts to diminish their loans 
abroad, by promising a tighter monetary policy with its 
accompanying higher bank loan rates. Any beneficial in
fluence on our external payments that might stem from a 
restrictive policy change, within the realm of reason, would 
be too insignificant to warrant even a small risk to our 
domestic economy. A change in monetary policy adequate to 
reduce substantially the capital outflows--and hence have a 
beneficial effect on our balance of payments--would have 
to be so :arge as to unquestionably affect the domestic 
economy severely. Thus, it is my view that the remedy or 
remedies lie elsewhere.  

Finally, the still sizable dealer oldings of long-term 
securities after the advance refunding, the recent market 
weakness, and the new mid-February financing all speak to 
keeping policy on a steady course in the four weeks ahead.  

Mr. Robertson added that he would prefer alternative A for the 

directive.  

Mr. Mills said that as he was counting on the adoption, at 

long last. of fiscal measures as the chief plan for attack on the 

balance of payments problem, his comments tocay would be directed to 

the domestic situation. He then made the following statement: 

During thirteen years of service as a member of the 
Federal Open Market Committee, I have been party to the 
buildup of a mammoth credit inflation which in its present 
stage reveals a topheavy and creaking superstructure of 

credit carried on an all too narrow equity base. In order 
to prevent at some future point of time an unfortunate credit 

deflation, it is essential that a good-size proportion of 

outstanding credits be terminated through the normal service 

and performance of the obligors so that a broader and stronger

-49-



2/2/65 -50

equity base can be placed under the credit superstructure.  
Incidentally, a Federal Reserve System credit policy geared 
to attaining such an objective by virture of restraining the 
expansion of credit would at the same time conserve the 
underpinning given by our gold reserves to the entire credit 
structure, and would thereby relieve the current concern 
that has been expressed regarding the future credit expansive 
limitations of our gold reserves.  

I continue to believe that a policy shift toward 
moderate credit restraint is overdue and, therefore, would 
approve Alternate B of the proposed current economic policy 
directive. Leaving aside the long-range factors bearing on 
adoption of an appropriate monetary and credit policy, near
run factors also argue for credit restraint; namely, actions 
to exert a cautionary influence at a time of latent infla
tionary pressures, overconfidence in business prospects, and 
definite indications that the commercial banks are becoming 
overloaned and illiquid.  

Mr. Wayne noted that business activity was definitely high and 

rising in December and the evidence seemed to indicate that the trend 

had continued in January. While steel and automobiles were responsible 

for much of the strength, gains were widespread throughout nearly all 

of the economy A check of 11 major indicators for which December 

data were available showed that ten moved favorably, several of them 

by substantial amounts, while only unemployment moved in an unfavor

able direction This record was equaled or exceeded in only two 

months of the past three years, during which the economy was generally 

moving upward at a fair rate. Additional strength was reflected by 

the large backlog of manufacturers' unfilled orders and the very sharp 

rise in construction contract awards in the last four months of 1964, 

which would seem to provide some assurance of high levels of activity



2/2/65

in manufacturing and construction in the months immediately ahead.  

Several other major industries were operating at or near practical 

capacity. On the other hand, it seemed fairly clear that production 

rates in steel and automobileswere not sustainable and must decline 

before long. The recent high rates of business activity had been 

accompanied by only moderate price pressure and most price indicators 

had probably been more stable in the past month than they were in 

the closing months of last year.  

Other domestic indicators seemed to be consistent with the 

behavior of business activity and prices, Mr. Wayne said. Bank credit 

and the money supply apparently made significant gains in January 

after fairly large average gains in the lat:er part of last year.  

Both long-term and short-term interest rates had been generally stable 

with nothing in sight to cause any significant change. The Federal 

budget was des:gned to contribute a substantial stimulus to the 

economy in the second half of the year when some weaknesses might be 

expected to develop in the automobile and steel sectors. As a whole, 

then, the domestic picture was one of strength and high activity 

with a few sectors of the economy verging on overheating. The domestic 

economy could stand some moderate restraint if it did not actually 

require it. The deciding factor would seem to be the international 

situation.

-51-



2/2/65 -52

The basic long-run elements in Britain's payments problem, 

Mr. Wayne continued, were the large trade deficit and the capital 

outflow, as the staff had pointed out. The measures taken thus far 

to correct them were largely short-run and of a stop-gap nature.  

They might provide some respite but they did not offer a solution.  

On the basic and longer-run problems there had been plans and talks 

but little specific action. British exports had not grown as rapidly 

as imports in recent years, and the share of Britain's exports in 

total world trade had fallen substantially. Part of this could be 

attributed to the formation of the Common Market (which had also 

hurt Britain's long-term capital position), but the failure of 

British exporters to hold their own in world competition was also an 

important factor. A solution to the letter problem would require 

more fundamental changes in the British economy. At the moment, 

prospects for such changes did not appear good.  

As for the U.S. position, Mr. Wayne said, the sharp deterioration 

in the U.S. capital accounts was a matter of serious concern. More 

action than had been taken thus far was required but he was not sure 

just what form that action should take. Some reduction in reserve 

availability might exert some influence toward curtailing bank lending 

abroad and, if the interest rate effects of such action were allowed 

to be transmitted to the long end of the market, some nonbank outflows



2/2/65 -53

might be reduced as well. He was aware of the hazard involved in 

disturbing the long end of the rate structure, but in view of the 

persistence of the balance of payments problem and the magnitude 

of the recent deterioration, he felt that this course of action had 

to be given serious consideration.  

Like Mr. Hayes, Mr. Wayne was reluctantly disposed to accept 

some intervention in the market for foreign credits as necessary 

under present conditions. At the same time the Committee should, he 

believed, support such efforts by moving toward a lowering of the 

ready availability of reserves with moderate firming in the rate 

structure. He concurred fully with Mr. Mitchell about the hazards of 

a drastic move, but that was not the kind of action that he contemplated.  

Outside the area of monetary policy, Mr. Wayne remarked, a 

number of courses, not necessarily mutually exclusive, might be con

sidered. Extension of the interest equalization tax to bank term 

loans had already been widely discussed. He was not entirely convinced 

that this woul be wide, largely because he feared it might prejudice 

the financing of some U.S. exports and because it would distort the 

market mechanism. Action to reduce taxation incentives that favored 

foreign over domestic direct investment might offer a better hope.  

Finally, it might be possible to alleviate the problem somewhat through 

imposing limitations on the activities of Canadian agency banks.



2/2/65 -54

In the policy area, Mr. Wayne said, it seemed clear that the 

money supply and bank credit had been growirg at high rates in recent 

months. Business activity was high and the price structure was finn 

with some tendency to edge up. The prospect was for a substantial 

stimulus from fiscal policy later in the year, and that stimulus might 

be moved forward somewhat by discounting. All these domestic factors 

suggested the desirability of a modest reduction in the availability 

of credit and that suggestion was strengthened substantially by 

international considerations. The sharp deterioration in the U.S.  

international payments position in December, which was caused to a 

considerable extent by bank loans, indicated a definite need to reduce 

the availability of reserves. In recent months banks had had sufficient 

reserves to enable them to continue increasing their loans at the sub

stantial rate which had prevailed over the past three or four years 

and at the same time they had stepped up the rate at which they had 

acquired investments. Therefore, some reduction in the availability 

of reserves should not impair their ability to make appropriate loans.  

For both domestic and international reasons Mr. Wayne favored a some

what firmer policy for the next four weeks, with one goal being a bill 

rate somewhere near the discount rate. That would quite likely require 

net borrowed reserves, which he would not oppose.  

For the directive, Mr. Wayne preferred alternative B, but 

Mr. Shepardson's suggested wording for the first paragraph appeared 

to him to be worthy of serious consideration.



2/2/65 -55

Mr. Clay remarked that, following the developments of the 

last quarter, the international payments problem had come to the center 

of the stage. Even so, its ramifications had been difficult to judge 

adequately because of the limited information available as to the 

factors involved in the enlarged deficit and as to the extent that 

they might be of a temporary nature.  

Nevertheless, Mr. Clay continued, it appeared clear that the 

United States needed to take action to meet the situation. Unless the 

Committee was willing to risk severe repercussions upon the domestic 

economy, the program for dealing with the deficit had to be formulated 

primarily in terms of special measures rather than general monetary 

policy. That involved action largely by the Administration and pos

sibly the Congress rather than by the Federal Reserve. In fact, a 

program resting heavily upon monetary policy would appear to be out 

of the question. That did not mean that monetary policy could not be 

changed at all, but the range of maneuver probably was quite narrow.  

If monetary policy were used, Mr. Clay said, it probably 

would involve some reduction in credit availability. That could be 

expected to stiffen interest rates all along the maturity scale.  

Under present circumstances, the impact of such action both directly 

and through its effect upon expectations could be severe and jolting 

to the money and capital markets and to the economy, unless the 

monetary policy move were of small proportions and deftly handled.



2/2/65

Apart from such an immediate risk of any pronounced move in 

monetary policy, Mr. Clay added, the main concern over the impact of 

monetary policy on domestic economic activity was with reference to 

activity some months hence rather than now. The strong push to 

economic activity at the present time from steel, autos, and inventory 

stockpiling was not likely to be deterred by a small shift in monetary 

policy. The inevitable turn-around in those sectors later would put 

the economy through a readjustment, however, and at that time monetary 

policy would have to be a supporting and not a restraining influence.  

Accordingly, monetary policy would need to remain flexible in the 

weeks and months ahead.  

Under the circumstances, Mr. Clay felt some firming of policy 

probably was in order, although it should be viewed as only one part 

of a concerted attack on the international payments deficit. Alterna

tive B of the staff drafts for the economic policy directive would 

appear to serve that purpose. In his judgment to go further than that 

would be unwise in terms of the domestic economy, and even that shift 

would need to be carefully implemented. At the same time, it should 

be recognized that that action by itself would not solve the interna

tional payments problem.  

Mr. Scanlon turned directly to the staff questions.  

1. Business activity and prices. Available evidence indicated 

that the advance in output, employment, income, and sales in the Seventh



2/2/65 -57

District had continued into 1965 with considerable vigor, Mr. Scanlon 

said. He suspected that the Midwest was concerned, even more than 

the nation generally, with the fact that production of steel and 

autos in January had been far above the most optimistic predictions 

of rates for the year as a whole. Even if estimates of the year's 

total output proved to be on the low side, it was clear that sharp 

cutbacks would occur in those important industries once inventories 

had been increased to desired levels. An inportant unknown in the 

current picture was the extent to which the current inventory building 

in those commodities was responsible for the buoyant flavor of eco

nomic activity in general.  

Mr. Scanlon observed that producers of durable goods other 

than automobile and steel--including most types of industrial machin

ery and equipment, railroad equipment, appliances, consumer electronic 

products and, especially, furniture--looked forward to further gains 

in output in 1965. Farm machinery firms hoped to hold even with 1964 

while construction machinery producers appeared reconciled to a 

decline from the very high levels of last year. There was little 

concern in the District over prospective declines in defense orders 

because very few firms there were heavily dependent upon that work.  

Machine tool producers were running two and three shifts and would 

increase output further if skilled manpower were available. Reports 

of the Purchasing Agents Association of Chicago reflected a continuous



2/2/65 -58

vigorous rise in output, inventories, employment, and orders. New 

order lead times had lengthened further.  

Forty per cent of the Chicago purchasing agents reported paying 

higher prices on the average for raw materials and supplies in 

December, compared with 28 per cent a year earlier, Mr. Scanlon noted.  

Announcements of price changes continued to show a ratio of increases 

to decreases of about 2 to 1. Prices of capital goods nevertheless 

had not been increased appreciably on a broad front despite heavy 

demand. Certainly, the situation did not resemble that prevailing in 

1956 and 1957. Over-all, a moderate rise in the wholesale price index 

appeared likely to him. Thus, his views on the price outlook were 

slightly different from the staff's.  

Employment gains continued in the Seventh District, given 

allowance for seasonal changes, Mr. Scanlon said. Unemployment 

compensation claims were well below a year earlier in all District 

States in December and January. Decreases were appreciably greater 

than for the nation. Want ads for employees in Chicago newspapers had 

been well above last year in recent months and had been at the highest 

level since early 1957. Lists of specific labor shortages prepared 

by local employment offices continued to emphasize the usual types of 

skilled or semi-skilled office, service, and factory workers. Employers 

continued to report that the bulk of the unemployed who applied for 

jobs or apprenticeship training were inadequately prepared in basic



2/2/65 -59

academic skills, including the "three rs." Supervisors of programs 

operating in the Chicago area under the Manpower Development and 

Training Act reported good results. However, those programs were 

still on a small scale with only "several hundred" workers placed in 

jobs as a result of their activities commenced over 18 months ago.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that business failures had been at a low 

level in recent months. In the fourth quarter the number of failures 

in the District was 21 per cent below the level of a year earlier, 

compared to an 11 per cent decline for the United States. For both 

the District and the United States the number of business failures in 

the fourth quarter was the lowest for the period since 1955.  

Farm land values as reported by country bankers rose in the 

fourth quarter, Mr. Scanlon noted, and were about 5 per cent above a 

year earlier in January. In contrast to expectations a year ago, 

a majority of those bankers expected a further rise in farm land 

values in the months ahead.  

2. Balance of payments. Mr. Scanlon agreed with the staff 

views as supplemented by Mr. Hayes. The long-run disequilibrium in 

Britain's payments balance arose from her inability to improve the 

balance on current account, where surplus was necessary for financing 

of long-term capital outflow into the areas where Britain by long 

tradition had been an investor, and for reduction of the liability

reserve ratio that since the war (and particularly since the return



2/2/65 -60

to convertibility in 1958) had been a source of official concern.  

Improvement in the current balance had to come from a greater com

petitiveness of British exports, the prices of which had been, since 

early 1963, rising relative to those of her major competitors. De

creases in costs through increases in productivity (new investment) 

and dampening of domestic demand were essential. Present measures, 

although in the right direction, probably had to be intensified in 

order to achieve this. Additional selective controls to stimulate 

exports and investment probably were necessary, to bring export prices 

down. A refinancing of the short-term financial assistance so far 

given to the pound might be necessary to gain time for implementation 

of these measures.  

Mr. Scanlon said that the slower rise in industrial activities 

on the continent that might be expected as a result of strong anti

inflationary policies of most countries there probably would bring about 

some reduction of U.S. capital outflow due to decreasing profit prospects.  

Also, measures by continental countries to restrict foreign investment 

(such as adopted by Germany and proposed by France) might act as a 

deterrent. However, only an intensification of direct controls upon 

capital outflows (such as an increase and broadening of the present 

interest equalization tax) might be effective in reducing substantially 

the U.S. capital outflow, since the rate-of-return differential probably 

would remain in favor of foreign investment.



2/2/65 -61

3. Bank credit and money. Mr. Scanlon agreed in general 

with the staff answer to the question on this item. There had been 

some further shift to commercial bank savings from other financial 

institutions in response to increased rates--a number of Seventh 

District banks had raised rates paid on CDs issued to individuals 

above 4 per cent. This shift represented a substitution of bank for 

nonbank credit and some reserve growth was necessary to accommodate 

it. Additions to share accounts at savings and loan associations and 

sales of savings bonds had been somewhat below the year-ago levels.  

Those developments suggested that credit demands remained 

strong, Mr. Scanlon observed. Whether this would entail a liquidity 

squeeze on the banks would depend on the rate at which reserves for 

additional deposit growth were provided. District country banks 

responding to a recent survey expected a stronger demand for nonreal 

estate farm loans in the first quarter than in the year-ago period.  

Little change was expected in interest rates charged. Country banks had 

been increasing rates paid on savings deposits.  

Chicago banks had shown fairly easy reserve positions in the 

past two weeks. That appeared to be largely attributable to the 

issuance of a substantial amount of CDs after the turn of the year.  

Those banks normally showed increasing reserve pressure through February 

and March as they acquired the bills needed prior to April 1.



2/2/65

If recent trends persisted, Mr. Scanlon said, the larger banks 

could be expected to continue to rely on CDs, and perhaps on increased 

purchases of Federal funds. If the current rate of reserve growth 

was reduced, finds from those sources probably would be more difficult 

to obtain and, of course, more costly. Some further liquidation of 

Governments was possible, although total holdings of Governments were 

the lowest since mid-1960.  

4. Money and credit markets. Mr. Scanlon commented that he 

was more sanguine than the staff was that long-term rates would not 

rise perceptibly even with a moderately less easy monetary policy.  

In light of the recent and prospective demand and supply developments 

in long-term credit markets, the current level of long-term yields 

appeared vulnerable to downward pressure in coming months. The 

Treasury's posture probably would be seasonally passive in the first 

half, mortgage demand probably would show little change, and business 

demand for long-term funds was expected to remain moderate. This left 

State and local government uses of long-term funds as about the only 

major category expected to display continued vigorous expansion.  

Given those considerations, and the likelihood that savings growth 

would continue during the period at its recent rate, long-term 

interest rates could well soften somewhat.  

The Treasury would borrow about $2.2 billion on February 15, 

Mr. Scanlon noted, through cash sales of new 4 per cent notes maturing

-62-



2/2/65 -63

November 15, 1966. The notes were to be priced below par to yield 

4.09 per cent and could not be paid for by credit to Treasury tax 

and loan accounts. The funds would be used to redeem the maturing 

2-5/8 per cent bonds which would be accepted at par in payment for 

the new notes. Books were open Monday, February 1, only. With the 

notes attractively priced (the 3-3/8 per cent bonds on November 15, 

1966 yielded 3.88 per cent while the 4 per cent notes of August 15, 

1966 yielded 3.98 per cent) and with the books closed before today's 

Open Market Committee meeting, it did not seem that monetary policy 

had to be greatly concerned with this financing during coming weeks.  

Policy actions probably did not need to be restrained by the January 

advance refunding any longer.  

5. Monetary and fiscal policy. Mr. Scanlon's views on this 

subject were consistent with those of the staff. The President's 

Budget Message described a generally expansionary fiscal program.  

Reductions in Federal excise taxes and stepped-up benefits under the 

Social Security program appeared likely to exert a distinctly stimula

tive effect once they took effect.  

For the first half of calendar 1965, however, it seemed probable 

that the Federal sector would provide little additional thrust toward 

economic expansion, Mr. Scanlon remarked. For one thing, underwith

holding of individual income taxes last year meant that perhaps three

quarters of a billion dollars in 1964 tax payments would have to be



2/2/65 -64

made by April 15. Furthermore, the excise tax cuts that the message 

promised were not to take effect until the beginning of fiscal 1966.  

Uncertainty over which taxes would be reduced or eliminated might 

induce some would-be buyers to postpone purchases until final action 

had been taken, or until the second half. Finally, the proposed 

7 per cent increase in benefits under the O.A.S.D.I. program, 

retroactive to January 1, was expected to be disbursed in a lump 

sum at about mid-year.  

Prospects for the second half of 1965 were that Federal fiscal 

operations would be expansionary because of the factors mentioned 

above, Mr. Scanlon continued. The impact might be even greater than 

the Budget Message and supporting materials implied if, as was widely 

supposed, Congress widened the range of excise tax reductions, and if 

expenditure programs now largely in the planning stage were firmed 

up and adopted. Thus, intensified emphasis upon the poverty program, 

aid to Appalachia, education aids, and similar measures seemed likely 

candidates for spending beyond that now proposed. If the private 

economy was headed for a sidewise movement after the first half of 

1965, as many analysts appeared to believe, emergence of a strong 

expansionary impulse from the Federal sector--after relative quiescence 

during the continued upward thrust from the private sector in the first 

half--should have a salutary effect.



2/2/65 -65

With respect to policy, in Mr. Scan..on's judgment there appeared 

to be a close choice as this time between "no change" and "slightly 

less ease." He would favor a very modest change in policy, but the 

evidence of need for a change was not so persuasive as to call for 

quite as severe a move as alternative B seemed to suggest to some people 

around the table. He agreed with the changes in the directive suggested 

by Mr. Shepardson, but his ideas as to the appropriate degree of change 

coincided more closely with those of Mr. Hickman and Mr. Wayne.  

Mr. Strothman said his comments would relate primarily to the 

first and third of the staff questions. Information for the Ninth 

District suggested that the economic outlook, for the coming few 

months at least, was essentially encouraging. The Minneapolis Bank's 

District survey pointed toward continued economic expansion and price 

stability. A majority of the respondents believed that coming months 

would bring advances in output, employment, and, to a lesser extent, 

profits. This sentiment seemed compatible with what available 

statistics suggested.  

There was one cautionary note with respect to the outlook, 

Mr. Strothman said. He seemed to detect the incipience of a "poor talk" 

psychology based on apprehension about the results of underwithholding 

on Federal income taxes. Some of the comments suggested a possible 

dampening of demand disproportionate to what would be justified by 

the actual figures.



2/2/65 -66

As to District banking developments, Mr. Strothman noted 

that bank credit, which typically declined in the beginning of the 

year, actually increased rather considerably in the first half of 

January. Moreover, loans increased much more than investments. The 

increase in loans was concentrated in the commercial and industrial 

category which, of course, usually declined in the first part of the 

year. Still, it appeared that District banks were not under undue 

pressure. The loan-deposit ratio for weekly reporting banks was well 

below its post-1959 high and well below the national average for 

such banks. Similarly, District nonweekly reporting banks, if some

what tighter relatively than reporting banks, were less fully loaned 

up than all U.S. nonweekly reporting banks were on the average.  

Mr. Strothman noted that total deposits in the District 

declined slightly over the first three weeks of January as a reduction 

in demand deposits was almost offset by an increase in time deposits.  

This behavior of deposits was much the same as in the like period of 

1964 but was contraseasonal on a longer-term basis.  

There was no evidence, Mr. Strothman said, that interest rates 

on savings deposits had been increased. Rates on corporate deposits 

probably had edged up slightly, however, for there had been not a 

loss of such deposits but a gain.  

Mr. Strothman concluded with a comment on possible means of 

improving the balance of payments situation, especially as it related



2/2/65

to bank credit. He shared the view of those who feared that hortatory 

measures would not be truly effective in the face of competitive 

pressures. Possibly, however, something along the lines of the old 

Voluntary Credit Restraint program might succeed. Through such a 

program it would seem that lenders could act in concert without 

being inhibited by anti-trust law considerations.  

Mr. Swan observed that it was unnecessary to elaborate further 

on the strength of the current expansion. He would note only that 

the indications given in the staff document of inventory accumulation 

in addition to that of autos and steel struck him as significant. The 

strength of the expansion in the Twelfth District was indicated by the 

fact that in December the employment figu::es rose faster than in the 

nation and the rate of unemployment dropped somewhat more--although 

he should add that the December figures were still tentative. He 

agreed that the economy could stand some lesser availability of credit, 

whether or not it required it.  

Mr. Swan said that weekly reporting banks in the Twelfth 

District had shown a substantial further increase in savings and time 

deposits in the first three weeks of January, although not as large an 

increase as in the rest of the country. However, if one considered 

time deposics other than savings deposits and other than the negotiable 

CDs of $100,000 and over, the increase since the beginning of the year 

was much larger in the Twelfth District than in the country as

-67-



2/2/65 -68

a whole. The reasons for this were not entirely clear, but in part 

it seemed to reflect some response by individuals and small businesses 

to the offering of deposit certificates bearing higher interest rates 

than straight savings accounts did. Despite the fact that loan demand 

had been holding up well in the first three weeks of January, District 

banks had borrowed only modestly at the discount window and had been 

active sellers of Federal funds.  

Mr. Swan observed that he found it difficult to come to a 

firm conclusion as to the best course for monetary policy at present.  

He felt as Mr. Scanlon did that there was a narrow choice between no 

change and a slight lessening of ease. The latter alternative disturbed 

him on two grounds. First, as others had said, it was necessary to 

look elsewhere for measures that would have a significant effect on 

capital outflows; to attempt to do the job with monetary policy alone 

would require much more drastic action than was desirable in terms of 

the domestic situation. But if the Committee made only a modest step-

which was all he would be prepared to do--the situation might not be 

significantly improved, and the Committee then would have to take 

another modest step. He thought that less wculd be accomplished by two 

such modest steps than by one larger step later.  

Secondly, Mr. Swan said, a broader Governmental program to 

deal with the payments problem, involving measures in other areas,



2/2/65 -69

presumably would be announced shortly; moreover, the Government was on 

the eve of action with respect to the gold reserve requirement. There 

already had been some anticipatory reactions to the expected program, 

including some firming in the money market--the bill rate currently 

was close to 3.90 per cent compared with 3.77 per cent at the time of 

the previous meeting. He suspected that the reaction would proceed 

further even if the Committee did not change policy, and thought it 

would be wise not to try to offset it. However, if a broad program was 

announced promptly, at the next meeting the Committee would be faced 

with the questions of what sort of market reaction had developed and 

what sort of supporting action was needed, whatever decision it might 

make today.  

As he had noted, Mr. Swan continued, the issue came down to a 

choice between r.o change and a modest move. His feeling at this point 

was that action might better be delayed until the next meeting.  

Accordingly, he favored alternative A for the directive. If, however, 

the Committee decided that it was desirable to change policy today 

and adopted alternative B, he would agree with Mr. Shepardson's proposed 

revision of the first paragraph. He agreed also with the proposal to 

eliminate the reference to moderating the impact on intermediate- and 

long-term security markets, both because he thought this would be 

difficult to do and because, if policy was changed, in his judgment the 

Committee had to expect some reaction in longer-term markets.



2/2/65

Mr. Irons remarked that the general picture of economic 

conditions in the Eleventh District was one of strength and optimism; 

all indicators were at high levels or were showing further increases.  

In that respect District conditions were quite similar to those in 

the nation as a whole. Nationally, there were some disturbing factors, 

including the rate of inventory accumulation and the level of automobile 

sales, but the outlook for several months and perhaps for a year was 

on the strong side rather than on the weak on questionable side. He 

did not think the domestic situation called for a stimulative policy 

at this time; money was so readily available that stimulation was 

hardly necessary. In his judgment the domestic situation did not call 

for a restrictive policy either.  

Mr. Irons noted that the Committee had to take international 

developments into consideration along with domestic, and on international 

grounds he had reached the conclusion that it might well attempt to 

bring about a situation of less ease now. He did not favor an overt 

action--a sudden, sharp, or substantial move. But he did favor a move 

in the direction of somewhat reduced reserve availability, with free 

reserves declining to about zero, give or take $50 million on either 

side. He would not be concerned if free reserves were negative. He 

would expect short rates to be slightly higher, pushing up toward the 

discount rate.

-70-



2/2/65

Such action would not correct the balance of payments problem, 

Mr. Irons said, but it was the only means the Committee had for 

contributing to improvement with respect to capital outflows. Other 

measures might also be required, such as extending the interest 

equalization t.x to banks and using moral suasion to limit foreign 

lending. But it was desirable for the Committee to act within its 

own sphere, by taking a small step in the direction of making bank 

reserves less readily available than they had been for some time.  

Mr. Irons said he would accept alternative B for the directive.  

He had not been particularly happy with the language of the staff 

draft for the first paragraph, but Mr. Shepardson's proposed revision 

met his objections. He would delete the last clause in the second 

paragraph. The Desk probably would act to moderate the impact of the 

policy change on longer-term markets in any case, but he questioned 

the desirability of spelling out such an instruction in the directive.  

Mr. Ellis reported that economic activity in New England 

continued strong--somewhat stronger, in fact, than was normal for the 

winter season. The open winter that lasted through December advanced 

construction projects and supported employment levels. Machinery and 

equipment manufacturing also expanded in December, reflecting continued 

expansion in orders. The late arrival of good snow cover had caused 

serious concern in the many new ski developments, some of which had

-71-



2/2/65 -72

made substantial investments in new equipment and depended on liberal 

bank credit. Having lost the entire month of December, it would be 

difficult for them to meet their debt obligations unless the ski 

season lasted unusually late into the spring this year.  

First District banks, matching national experience, were 

finding their loan run-down so far this year substantially less-

specifically, 50 per cent less--than in 1964, which itself was a 

year of strong loan demand. With demand deposits declining, District 

banks had looked to expanding time deposits and borrowings in the 

Federal funds market to meet loan demands. Short-term Government 

securities had been sold off even more sharply than last year. The 

average loan-deposit ratios of District weekly reporting banks, at 

70 or 71 per cent, were running 3 points above both the national average 

and year-ago levels. At Boston banks the ratio averaged 75 per cent 

or higher in January.  

Mr. Ellis said he would commen: on the first three of the 

staff's agenda items. The principal new development he saw in the area 

of business activity and prices--a development that was well documented 

in the staff materials--was a strengthening of the business outlook 

for the second half of 1965. The Federal budget proposals pointed in 

that direction and seemed to have carried the outlook consensus along 

the same path. By the same token, immediate prospects seemed stronger 

and the latent danger of acceleration of the gradual price rise seemed 

somewhat greater.



2/2/65

With regard to balance of payments developments, Mr. Ellis 

noted that the chart in today's presentation dealing with the 

competitiveness of manufacturers in various countries had shown 

recent trends in these countries' shares of world markets. The main 

thing the chart revealed, of course, was the difference in the trends 

for Germany and France on the one hand, and the United States and 

the United Kingdom on the other. But he had been struck by the relative 

trends for the U.S. and the U.K.--the British experience had been 

quite similar to that of the U.S. in a period when the U.S. trade 

balance had been strong. He was more optimistic about the British 

position than the staff had been in the presentation today. Recently 

several knowledgeable economists had expressed the judgment that 

British products were not materially overpriced in world markets and 

that resolution of their balance of payments problem rested more on 

a slowing in their rate of income advance than on a roll-back of incomes 

and dramatic productivity advances. He was optimistically inclined 

to the views that the 15 per cent import surcharge and related measures 

would right their payments balance in the near term, and that their 

longer-term problem would be tractable.  

The U.S. balance of payments problem, Mr. Ellis said, now seemed 

to require specific action if the capital outflow was to be slowed 

down. He was inclined to favor actions in the tax sphere, including 

taxes on corporate investments abroad.

-73-



2/2/65

Mr. Ellis observed that it was apparent from recent credit 

developments that banks were competing actively and successfully 

both in placing loans and in securing funds. He noted that there 

had been a sharp run-up in CDs so far this year.  

As to policy, Mr. Ellis thought no one was suggesting that 

monetary policy itself could do the whole job of correcting the pay

ments deficit. But, as Mr. Shepardson had indicated, the Committee did 

have a role to play; a move toward less credit availability would 

help at the margin. He had been thinking about the "moot question" 

Mr. Holland had posed at the preceding meeting--whether or not a 

reduction in credit availability would focus on foreign lending--and 

had come to believe that banks generally would tend to meet the needs 

of domestic customers first, and would be inclined to curtail their 

foreign lending. That conclusion--which was fortified by Appendix B 

of the green book--coupled with the current surge in borrowing and 

credit expansion, led him to favor a move toward less ease. Such a 

move would restore policy to a posture that could be relaxed if the 

recession that had been mentioned did occur. The Committee did not 

now have a policy with sufficient leeway for it to be relaxed if 

necessary.  

Specifically, Mr. Ellis suggested lowering the free reserve 

target to zero, plus or minus $50 million. He would expect Federal funds

-74-



2/2/65 -75

to trade consistently at 4 per cent and higher; dealer loan rates 

to rise slightly; the Treasury bill rate to rise to 4 per cent; and 

member bank borrowings to average $400 million or higher.  

Mr. Ellis urged the Committee to consider again the desir

ability of a second paragraph for the directive that specified its 

intent in this direction. The directive might call for operations to 

be conducted with a view to reducing free reserves gradually to the 

range from minus $50 million to plus $50 million, with freedom to move 

outside that range if necessary to permit Treasury bill rates to rise 

gradually to the level of the discount rate or even above. He noted 

that this language was patterned after alternative B of the "trial" 

directive that had been prepared for this meeting, and he favored it 

because it was a more direct description of the Committee's intent 

than was contained in the draft of the regular directive. He also 

favored retention of the concluding statement relating to markets for 

intermediate- and long-term securities, because in his judgment the 

Committee did want to moderate the impact of the policy change on those 

markets. If the Committee was asking the Desk to accept this as a 

part of its instructions it was appropriate to include it in the directive.  

Any concern about possible conflict in the instructions could be met 

by inserting the words "while seeking to" before "moderate and impact 

of." Mr. Shepardson's suggested revision of the first paragraph was 

acceptable to Mr. Ellis.



Mr. Balderston noted that three weeks ago he had observed 

that the time was approaching for a policy change, and in his view 

that time now had arrived. The U.S. representatives at the mid

February meeting of Working Party 3 in Paris might well be met by 

strong and incisive questioning about American monetary policy. It 

was hard to see how their answers could carry conviction in the 

light of U.S. inaction after seven years of high balance of payments 

deficits, except for the actions of 1963 that had not borne much 

fruit. Perhaps they could sketch another paper program, but the facts 

would seen to belie this country's determination to put its house in 

order. He agreed with Mr. Mitchell that higher returns on capital in 

foreign countries would tend to draw resources abroad for a long time.  

He also agreed that selective controls had to be used, as much as he 

disliked them. But the System had a responsibility of its own; after 

all, the System and the Treasury were the two arms of the Federal 

Government that were primarily responsible fcr the nation's financial 

husbandry: and the Committee should not expect other agencies to take 

the lead. In his judgment the System should stand up and be counted-

it should lead the way with monetary policy.  

Mr. Balderston thought that the policy action should be clearly 

perceptible. He favored a free reserve target around the zero level 

with the expectation that there would be net borrowed reserves in some 

weeks and that the bill rate would go to or above the discount rate;

2/2/65 -76-



2/2/65 -77

he would not consider a bill rate of, say, 4.10 per cent to be 

undesirable. He thought that Mr. Shepardson's suggestions for the 

directive were appropriate to that end. Such a policy action would 

support by actual evidence the belief that the System was providing 

such underpinning to the solution of the balance of payments problem 

as was within the power of monetary policy.  

The crisis was so serious, Mr. Balderston continued, that he 

would recommend consideration of a further step--limiting Federal 

Reserve discounting privileges of the banks that were pushing funds 

abroad. Nine banks apparently had accounted for 80 per cent of the 

large volume of foreign term loan commitments in the fourth quarter.  

In general, Mr. Balderston said, what he was urging was that the 

Federal Reserve be not the last but the first to join in putting to

gether the package of measures that was required.  

Chairman Martin commented that the Committee always was faced 

with the problem of timing, and he personally was never sure that any 

particular moment was the perfect time to take action. He disagreed 

with some members of the staff with respect to the domestic economy; 

in his judgment there was some evidence of overheating in the economy 

right now. When he heard the question raised as to whether a small 

policy change would help the balance of payments he recalled the issue 

the Committee had faced 14 years ago, when it was working toward



2/2/65 -78

unpegging the Government bond market. The argument had been made then 

that a change of, say, 3/32 in bond prices would have no effect at all 

on the economy, and that it would be necessary to raise interest rates 

by three percentage points to have any effect. As things worked out, 

small changes in security prices did produce slight reactions all 

along the line.  

Everyone agreed that monetary policy alone could not deal with 

the balance of payments problem, the Chairman continued. Again using 

the analogy to the situation in the early 'fifties, he noted that 

then, after the domestic economic problem finally was widely recognized, 

many had urged use of various types of selective controls but had opposed 

use of general monetary policy. However, without the support of general 

monetary policy the selective controls had proved inadequate, and it 

became necessary to use every weapon.  

In his judgment, the Chairman said, there was a similar situa

tion today with regard to the payments deficit. Both general and 

selective measures were needed; and the quicker the country came to 

grips with the problem the less painful would be its solution. As to 

the argument that a policy change would retard the domestic expansion, 

he did not think that a change in interest rates of 1/4 per cent in 

either direction would make or break the economy. What was at issue 

was the flow of funds, and one could make a good case to the effect



2/2/65 -79

that pulling the sails in a bit would make the boat go faster, rather 

than the reverse. This admittedly was a difficult area and one could 

not be sure of his judgments.  

Mr. Ellis had made a point that was in his own (Chairman 

Martin's) mind when he suggested that the Committee should have a little 

ammunition to deal with any recession that might develop. Although 

he of course did not favor tightening policy just to be able to ease 

it if a recession came, he did think that policy had to have some 

flexibility in both directions if it was to be effective.  

In general, the Chairman said, he thought the present was a 

good time for a policy change. He assumed that the Administration would 

announce a program of selective measures soon. Most people who had 

worked in this area seemed at one time or another to come back to the 

point that selective measures had to be buttressed by general monetary 

policy. One or the other could be emphasized, and the present situation 

seemed to require emphasis on selective measures; but without support 

from general policy the latter were likely to be ineffective. The 

Administration had come to that conclusion in preparing the balance of 

payments program of July 1963, and a reference to an increase in the 

discount rate had been included in the President's message then. In 

the Chairman's judgment, if there had been no discount rate action at 

that time the program would have been much less effective, and it still 

had not solved the problem.



2/2/65 -80

What he advocated, Chairman Martin continued, was restoring 

reserve availability to about where it was before the increase in the 

discount rate in November. The second paragraph of alternative B of 

the draft directive appeared consistent with that objective, as well 

as with a higher bill rate. The Committee had tended to feel that 

an easier policy was required after the discount rate action because 

of the suddenness of that action and because of the sterling crisis 

and it had deliberately permitted free reserves to go up. That judgment 

had been quite proper; while it was not possible to separate cost and 

availability of credit entirely, it was nece.sary to take expectations 

into account. It would have been unwise to let free reserves become 

negative following the discount rate increase in November because such 

a development might well have upset the market drastically under the 

conditions existing then. But a restoration of the earlier level of 

reserve availability was now required, he thought. By adopting the 

alternative B approach today the Committee would not be leading the 

Administration; rather, it would be buttressing the actions that would 

be taken. Today's action could, of course, be reversed at the next 

meeting if that appeared desirable.  

The Chairman then noted that Mr. Shepardson had proposed both 

a revision in the language of the first paragraph of alternative B 

and deletion of the last clause of the second paragraph, relating to



2/2/65

intermediate- and long-term security markets. He liked Mr. Shepardson's 

first paragraph. However, the second-paragraph clause appeared to be 

consistent with the way the Committee had been operating.  

Mr. Swan commented that the question of consistency could be 

argued both ways. In view of the success thus far in keeping long-term 

rates from rising, inclusion of the final clause now might imply that 

no rise at all in such rates was expected. He saw no point in taking 

such a step.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Hayes, Mr. Stone remarked that, 

as he interpreted the discussion today, the Committee recognized that 

if it adopted alternative B for the directive there would be some 

reflection of its action in longer-term markets. Accordingly, the 

Desk would not attempt to offset such a development completely. However, 

he understood that the Committee would be concerned with the nature 

and extent of the response and would not want conditions in the longer

term markets to degenerate or run away. The Desk would make an effort 

to moderate any movement that appeared to be proceeding too rapidly 

or too far.  

Mr. Hayes commented that the latter possibility arose mainly 

from the fact that dealer inventories of securities issued in the 

Treasury's advance refunding were still relatively large.  

Mr. Daane suggested that the words "while taking into account 

Treasury financing" be inserted after "To implement this policy," in

-81-



2/2/65 -82

the second paragraph. This language, he thought, would convey the 

desired implication that the Committee was aware of the current re

funding and the overhang of the advance refunding, and it should give 

the Desk sufficient guidance on the matter at issue. The final clause 

then could be omitted.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that he had some doubts about the phrase, 

"the generally strong and continuing expansion of the domestic econ

omy" in Mr. Shepardson's proposed first paragraph. He did not think 

there was clear evidence that the expansion would continue. In his 

judgment, the economy was over-heated, and a reduced rate of growth, 

if not a turn-down, seemed likely.  

Mr. Hayes replied that the phrase seemed appropriate to him 

because the economy clearly was continuing to expand strongly at present.  

He did not think the phrase implied that the expansion would continue 

indefinitely.  

Mr. Swan asked what the Committee members meant to imply for 

free reserves by the phrase, "moving toward slightly firmer conditions." 

Chairman Martin remarked that there obviously were shades of difference 

in the targets different members had in mind. He personally was thinking 

in terms of a range within $50 million of zero--the general range 

prevailing before the discount rate action.  

Mr. Daane noted that free reserves at present were in the 

neighborhood of $50 million. The important point in which he thought



2/2/65 -83

a majority concurred was that, against the background of Treasury 

financing, free reserves should be moved cautiously in the direction 

of zero, plus or minus. He would prefer to see negative figures 

appear only after the digestion of the advance refunding issues was 

completed, but he favored a move in this direction and would be willing 

to accept negative figures whenever they appeared.  

Mr. Shuford asked Chairman Martin what level of bill rates 

he had in mind, and the Chairman replied that he was thinking in te.ms 

of bill rates around the 4 per cent discount rate.  

Mr. Swan said he felt obliged to return to the question of a 

numerical free reserve target. If what the Committee had in mind 

was a target range of zero to plus $50 million, he would find that 

acceptable. Mr. Balderston said such a range would not suit him.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he would consider a $50 million range 

to be too narrow. If it was necessary to quantify he would favor a 

range from minus $50 million to plus $50 million.  

Mr. Wayne commented that alternative B of the directive called 

for moving toward slightly firmer money market conditions, and he 

thought such an instruction would suffice. Mr. Hayes added that it 

was not practicable to pinpoint a free reserve target narrowly.  

Mr. Swan said he was prepared to grant that precise performance 

could not be expected, but he was still concerned about the target

range to be aimed for.



2/2/65 -84

Chairman Martin said he doubted that it was feasible to get 

agreement on precise figures; the Committee had been facing this 

problem all along. He thought the Committee should have a full debate 

on the subject of quantifying its instructions, but not in connection 

with a discussion of the directive for a particular meeting.  

Mr. Hickman said he understood that the free reserve estimate 

for the week ending tomorrow was about $50 million at the moment and 

Chairman Martin asked Mr. Stone whether this estimate was likely to 

be revised. Mr. Stone said he had just received a report from the 

Desk indicating that there had been another "miss" on the low side 

yesterday. After taking into account an upward revision of $70 million, 

the free reserve estimate for the current week was zero, and the Desk 

had gone into the market this morning to buy more bills. In connection 

with the preceding discussion, Mr. Stone added, he quite agreed that 

the free reserve figures could not be pinpointed; they swung around 

vigorously. However, if the Committee adopted the directive before it 

the Desk would undertake to move toward slightly firmer conditions ir 

the money market.  

In reply to Mr. Mitchell's question as to how he would interpret 

that phrase, Mr. Stone said he would anticipate that the bill rate, 

which was 3.89 per cent now, probably would move up to the neighborhood 

of the discount rate; that the Federal funds rate usually would be at 

the discount rate, and sometimes at a premium; and that member bank



2/2/65

borrowings might average about $100 million above the levels at which 

they had been running. The level of free reserves that would be 

compatible with those conditions would vary widely, depending on the 

distribution of reserves and the intensity with which they were utilized.  

Free reserves might come out at zero in one week, minus $25 million in 

the next, and perhaps plus $45 or $50 million in the week following.  

Mr. Shuford said that these guidelines were quite acceptable 

to him, and Mr. Hickman also expressed agreement with them.  

Chairman Martin then proposed that the Committee vote on a 

directive consisting essentially of Mr. Shepardson's first paragraph 

and of the second paragraph of the staff's alternative B, with 

Mr. Daane's amendments.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Messrs. Mitchell 
and Robertson dissenting, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 
and directed, until otherwise directed 
by the Committee, to execute transactions 
in the System Account in accordance with 
the following current economic policy 
directive: 

In light of the economic and financial developments 
reviewed at this meeting, including the generally strong 
and continuing expansion of the domestic economy and the 
continuing adverse position of our international balance 
of payments, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's 
current policy to accommodate growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply but at a more moderate 
pace than in recent months. This policy seeks to avoid 
the emergence of inflationary pressures and to support 
other measures that may be taken to strengthen the inter
national position of the dollar.

-85-



2/2/65 -86

To implement this policy, while taking into account 
Treasury financing, System Open Market operations over 
the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
moving toward slightly firmer conditions in the money 
market than have prevailed in recent weeks.  

Mr. Mitchell said that he had voted against this action because 

he thought the directive called for more than an imperceptible change 

in policy and he found it difficult to believe that a perceptible 

change would really aid the balance of payments situation or the 

domestic economy.  

Mr. Shuford, who had voted affirmatively, said he was not certain 

that this was the proper moment to change policy. However, he would 

go along with the majority judgment on the question of timing.  

Mr. Swan concurred in this statement.  

Chairman Martin suggested, for reasons that he mentioned, postponing 

the discussion of the general subject of specifying quantities in the 

Committee's directives that tentatively had been scheduled to follow 

today's meeting, and no objections were made to this suggestion.  

The Chairman then noted that barring unforeseen circumstances 

today's meeting of the Open Market Committee was the last that Mr. Mills 

would attend. He knew that all of the members had considered it a 

privilege to work with Mr. Mills and everyone would miss him.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be on 

Tuesday, March 2, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



Attechment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 1, 1965 

Draft Current Economic Policy Directives for Consideration by the Federal 
Open Market Committee at its Meeting on February 2, 1965.  

Alternative A (No change in policy) 

In light of the economic and financial developments reviewed at 

this meeting, and taking Treasury financing operations into account, 

it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to facil

itate continued expansion of the economy by accommodating moderate 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply, while 

seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures and to strengthen 

the international position of the dollar.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 

the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about 

the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent 

weeks.  

Alternative B (some firming of policy) 

In light of the economic and financial developments reviewed at 

this meeting, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy 

to strengthen the international position of the dollar by accommodating 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply at a 

somewhat slower pace than in recent months. The Committee also seeks 

to facilitate continued expansion of the economy and to avoid the 

emergence of inflationary pressures.



-2

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 

the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to moving toward 

slightly firmer conditions in the money market than have prevailed in 

recent weeks, while moderating the impact of these conditions in 

markets for intermediate- and long-term securities.


