









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washing:on, D.C., on Tuesday, November 23, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Patterson 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Carvy, Holland, Koch, and 

Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Solomon, Adviser [sic] to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Partee, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Garfield and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hersey, Adviser[sic], Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



11/23/65 -2

Messrs. Eastburn, Mann, Parthemos, Brandt, 
Jones, Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, 
Atlanta, St. Lou.s, Kansas City, Dallas, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. MacLaury, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings 
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 
November 2 and 4, 1965, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for 

the period November 2 through November 17, 1965, and a supplemental 

report for November 18 through 22, 1955. Copies of these reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said the Treasury was still debating whether to show a $50 million 

decline in the gold stock this week. The best indications at the 

moment were that in the absence of any renewed selling by the Russians 

during the next few weeks there would have to be a total reduction 

in the stock before the end of the year of perhaps $100 million. The 

question was simply one of timing. In the London gold market there



11/23/65 -3

had been no unusual developments during the recent period; the price 

had remained in roughly a 3 cent range from $35.10-13, and the gold 

pool was on balance unchanged from :he beginning of the month.  

The exchange markets had likewise been generally quiet, except 

for som fluctuations in the Canadian dollar. Sterling was at about 

the same levels spot and forward as at the beginning of the month.  

There was some pressure on sterling at the time of the Rhodesian 

declaration of a state of emergency on November 5, but as it turned 

out the limited selling associated with that political development 

only served to reestablish the rate at more easily defensible levels.  

Despite the quiet appearance of the pound market, the Bank of 

England had continued to make good progress in improving its exchange 

position this month; it had probably taken in close to $400 million 

from the market since November 1. A sizable part of that would be 

used to pay off maturing forwards, but a portion would also be used 

for repayment of short-term debts. It was expected that the $125 

million swap drawing scheduled to mature on Friday, November 26, would 

be paid off at that time, thus reducing outstanding British drawings 

to $475 million and at the same time reestablishing their first-line 

credit facility in case it should be needed at some point in the 

future.  

Mr. MacLaury noted that the Canadian dollar was quoted above 

$0.93 during the early part of the month but dropped rather sharply



11/23/65 -4

when the market learned on November 9 that the U.S. and Canadian 

Governments had agreed to cooperate in seeking postponement until 

1966 of delivery on a number of Canadian bond issues scheduled for 

the U.S. market during the remaining weeks of the year. The reaction, 

though fairly sharp, was short-lived, and the Canadian authorities 

had to provide only modest support before the rate turned around 

again, helped by bidding for U.S. funds by Canadian finance companies.  

Though the discount on the forward Canadian dollar was substantial 

(3/4 per cent), it still left an incentive of between a quarter and 

a half per cent on a comparison of finance paper rates in the two 

markets.  

Trading in continental currencies had been quite well balanced 

during the month, with only minor fluctuations in rates. The System 

Account had been able to make further progress in paying down the 

drawing under the swap arrangement with the Swiss National Bank; only 

$14 million equivalent remained outstanding and it was hoped to have 

that completely liquidated before the usual year-end repatriation of 

funds by Swiss banks began to put pressures on the National Bank's 

holdings. The only other change in the System's position under the 

swap arrangements during the period was the drawing of the remaining 

$10 million equivalent of Belgian francs under the standby portion 

of the facility with the National Bank of Belgium to absorb dollars 

taken in by that Bank.



11/23/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
November 2 through 22, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury then presented several recommendations. He noted 

that two swap facilities were scheduled to mature during December: 

the $100 million equivalent arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, 

with a term of 3 months, would mature December 15; and the $100 million 

arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium, with a term of 12 

months, would mature December 22. He recommended renewal of both 

of those arrangements.  

Renewal of the two swap arrangements 
was approved.  

The $50 million equivalent fully dr.wn portion of the Belgian 

National Bank arrangement was also scheduled to mature December 22, 

Mr. MacLaury said, and he recommended its renewal for another 6 months.  

The System's balances under this fully drawn portion were unutilized 

and thus available in case of need.  

The recommended renewal was noted 
without objection.  

Mr. MacLaury then referred to a memorandum on System participa

tion in forward lira operations, distributed to the Committee under 

date of November 18, 1965, in which Mr. Coombs, Special Manager of 

the System Open Market Account, recommended that the Federal Reserve 

participate with the Treasury in taking over from the Italian Exchange



11/23/65 -6

Office forward lira commitments and suggested certain implementing 

changes in the Guidelines for System Foreign Currency Operations and 

the continuing authority directive for such operations. (A copy 

of the memorandum has been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

Mr. MacLaury said Governor Carli of the Bank of Italy had 

requested that the U.S. authorities assume additional commitments in 

the amount of $500 million equivalent. As the Committee knew, the 

Treasury now had outstanding $1 billion equivalent of such commit

ments. The recommendation of Mr. Coombs for System participation 

in the operation was not prompted by an unwillingness on the part 

of the Treasury to extend its commitments further--clearly, if there 

had been any question on the part of the Treasury as to the usefulness 

of the operation, it would never have allowed its participation to 

reach present levels. Rather, it was felt that the Federal Reserve 

should itself be associated directly with the Italian authorities 

in their efforts to minimize the potentially disruptive effects of 

their large surplus on international financial markets and the U.S.  

gold stock. There was no need to dwell on the consequences for the 

U.S. and the rest of the world if Italy had followed the example of 

France during the past year. Instead, the Bank of Italy had consistently 

taken the initiative in seeking ways to strengthen the international 

financial system without undercutting the position of the dollar; 

insulating the system from the shocks of the sharp Italian payments



11/23/65 -7

swings had been an important contribution in that direction. Indeed, 

had the Italian authorities not channeled such a sizable volume of 

funds into the Euro-dollar market this past year, it seemed quite 

likely that the resulting strains would have required Federal Reserve 

intervention on a far larger scale than in fact was necessary. It 

seemed far preferable, therefore, that the Federal Reserve encourage 

the type of constructive policies being pursued by the Bank of Italy 

by associating itself with them rather than, in effect, find itself 

forced into salvage operations by the absence of such policies.  

As for the System's exposure to risk in taking on forward 

lira commitments, Mr. Coombs' memorandum had pointed out that the 

terms of the arrangement precluded any losses resulting from a 

revaluation of the lira, from exchange rate fluctuations within the 

existing margins, or from failure to delived on the part of an 

Italian commercial bank. Indeed, except in the case of a devaluation 

of the dollar vis-a-vis the lira, the U.S. would never have to acquire 

lire to pay off maturing contracts since it was agreed that the con 

tracts would be taken over again by the Italian authorities at the 

time of their final liquidation by the Italian commercial banks.  

Mr. MacLaury emphasized that the Committee, if it approved 

the recommendation that the System take on forward lira contracts 

in conjunction with the Treasury, would not be venturing into new



11/23/65 -8

areas or departing from previous policies. Except for the lesser risks 

involved, the Italian forward operation was not different in nature 

from other operations previously undertaken by the Federal Reserve.  

Only a minor change would be required in the Guidelines for System 

Foreign Currency Operations to authorize forward exchange trans

actions that would indirectly (i.e., by backing up the Bank of Italy) 

as well as directly supplement market supplies of forward cover to 

encourage retention or accumulation of dollar holdings by private 

foreign holders.  

There followed a discussion in which Mr, MacLaury responded 

to several questions bearing generally on how the proposed System 

operation would work in terms of the various parties involved, 

including the Federal Reserve, the Italian Exchange Office, and the 

Italian commercial banks. In the course of his explanation, 

Mr, MacLaury brought out that the System would in effect be providing 

a guarantee tc the Exchange Office against devaluaton of the dollar.  

This was the type of guarantee the System give when it drew under swap 

arrangements; it was not a gold guarantee.  

Mr. Scanlon asked whether the forward contracts would be for 

3 months or more, and Mr. MacLaury replied that they would be for a 

period of not more than 3 months. Mr. Scanlon then asked whether it 

could not be anticipated that they would have to be rolled over, to 

which Mr. MacLaury replied that they probably would be rolled over



11/23/65 -9

until there was some change in the Italian payments picture.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that he agreed completely that the Italians 

should be enccuraged to continue to do what they had been doing.  

But he questioned whether the proposed operation did not amount to 

getting into the longer-run area, and if so whether this would not 

require a broader amendment than had been suggested in the Guidelines 

for Foreign Currency Operations.  

Mr. Daane remarked that much would depend on the Italian 

payments position, which could shift very rapidly, as it had in the 

past. Meantime, it quite clearly served the U.S. interest to give the 

Italian commercial banks an incentive to hold dollars and avoid a drain 

on gold, part..cularly when there was no risk involved. While this 

was an operation that could not be pinpointed from a time standpoint, 

he did not think one could say it was definitely an operation of 

long duration, assuming the Italians continued their efforts to move 

back to payments equilibrium, 

Mr. Scanlon reiterated that he was not in disagreement with 

the proposal. He was merely raising the question whether the Guide

lines did not require some broader revision than proposed.  

Mr. Maisel said it appeared to him that a major change in the 

whole concept of System foreign currency operations was involved, 

which change the Committee was being asked to approve on an ad hoc 

basis. If there was no great urgency, he felt that the proposition



11/23/65 -10

should be turned back to the staff for re-examination in the light 

of the overall question. It seemed to him the Committee should not 

change its policies by acting on propositions that were brought 

before it one at a time on short notice.  

Mr. Daane said the type of operation currently being proposed 

would represent no departure from precedent from the Treasury stand

point, for the Treasury had initiated such operations in 1962. Nor 

did he believe that it would represent in principle any shift in policy 

from the Committee's standpoint. The principle seemed to him clear.  

It amounted to protecting the U.S. gold stock and assisting a country 

that had been trying to be helpful to the U.S. It was his under

standing that the Italian authorities had come to the U.S. authorities 

with a request, and he felt that action should not be deferred.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether, if the proposal was considered 

basically desirable, the Committee should not get down to the issues.  

He understood that the System would not be giving a guarantee 

different from what it had previously given in connection with swap 

operations. It would not be giving a gold guarantee, only a guarantee 

in terms of the lira. If so, the remaining question related to the 

duration of the operation. Mr. Scanlon might have a point in saying 

that there should be some broader modification of the Guidelines to 

accommodate an operation of this kind. Under the swaps, drawings were 

generally limited to 3 months, with at most 3 extensions if necessary.



11/23/65 -11

Mr. MacLaury commented that although one could not foresee 

exactly how long this kind of operation might be required, there was 

no reason to believe that the Treasury would be unwilling to take 

another look if the Committee felt at some future date that the 

operation was running on too long for a System operation.  

Mr. Hickman suggested that at the end of a year the Treasury 

might be asked to take over, and Mr. Daane said he felt sure that if 

at some point the Committee decided it was in the interest of the 

System to get out, the Treasury would be willing to provide a 

takeout, particularly since there was no rik involved.  

Mr. MacLaury observed that the Treasury had provided a 

takeout on a small number of occasions when the Committee felt that 

swap drawings had run on longer than desirable.  

Mr. Shepardson asked whether the System operation would be 

in addition to what the Treasury was doing, and Mr. MacLaury replied 

in the affirmative. The Treasury now had taken over $1 billion 

equivalent of forward lira commitments. If the System took on the 

proposed $500 million, the total taken over by the Treasury and the 

System would be $1.5 billion. Mr. Shepardson then asked whether, at 

the end of a year, if the Committee decided it wanted to get out the 

Treasury would take over the $500 million, and Mr. MacLaury said he 

felt sure it would. He reiterated that Mr. Coombs' recommendation 

that the System become involved was not based on any reluctance on 

the part of the Treasury to extend its commitments further.



11/23/65 -12

Mr. Shepardson then said that although he was not objecting 

to the proposed procedure, it was not entirely clear to him why, if 

the Treasury had been doing this and would have no objection to 

increasing its commitments, the System should step in.  

Mr. Hayes commented that the Committee had tried to move in 

parallel with the Treasury on most foreign currency operations, 

except where they were clearly long-term operations at the outset.  

As to the current proposal, there was no way of knowing at the outset 

how long an operation would be involved. However, judging from past 

experience the Italian balance of payments tended to involve swings 

of major propostions within fairly short periods, so there was a 

good chance of the proposed operation being a short-term self

liquidating proposition. Starting with that as a possibility, it 

made a lot of sense for the System to participate in partnership with 

the Treasury. It would fit in with the kind of operation the System 

had been conducting by means of the swap arrangements. The System 

would retain the opportunity to go to the Treasury and ask it to 

take over if the operation became a drag on the System, just as that 

privilege had been retained right along in connection with trans

actions under the swap arrangements.  

Mr. Daane noted that the operation clearly had the aspects 

of a central bank cooperative venture. From the Italian standpoint, 

it would enable the Bank of Italy to avoid getting into an 

embarrassing position by having too high a dollar ratio in its reserve



11/23/65 -13

position. The operation was a central bank-to-central bank gesture 

and thus was quite clearly within the purview of the System.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that it was essentially a substitute 

for a swap--and in his opinion a much more desirable relationship.  

It was one that not too many other foreign countries presumably 

would go along with. But he felt the Guidelines probably should 

contain some recognition of the potential duration and some kind of 

limitation. He suggested 9 months or a year as a time limit.  

Mr. Shepardson pointed out that the Committee had fixed a limit 

of a year on swap drawings remaining outstanding.  

Chairman Martin remarked that he saw no objection to so 

changing the Guidelines. He did not think it essential, however, 

because this was an experimental operation.  

Mr. Mitchell inquired whether, if the Committee approved 

Mr. Coombs' proposal, this would make it possible to enter into 

similar undertakings with countries other than Italy, or with the 

Italians again, and Mr. Young pointed out that the recommended 

change in the continuing authority directive was directed solely 

to the lira arrangement. Mr. MacLaury commented that the proposed 

minor change in the Guidelines did not prejudge in any way whether 

the Committee would wish to conduct this kind of operation again 

with the Italians, or any other country. As Mr. Young had indicated, 

the recommended change in the continuing authority directive was



11/23/65 -14

stated entirely in terms of the lira, but that directive could, 

of course, be revised at a later time if the Committee so desired.  

Mr. Mitchell repeated that he thought this method of 

operation was preferable to the swap arrangement, and that it 

should he encouraged if any other country was willing to go along.  

Mr. MacLaury said he would be reluctant to agree that it 

was a preferable method of operation. It was a viable alternative 

in this particular instance, but the System had used a number of 

operating techniques, all of which were potentially valuable, and 

any one of which might have special advantages in a particular 

situation.  

Mr. Hayes commented that if there was another case where it 

appeared desirable that a transaction similar to the Italian operation 

be entered into, that would have to be brought before the Committee, 

and Mr. Maisel said this was precisely the point about which he was 

concerned. It seemed to him that the Committee's policies should be 

thought out logically in advance. He was not going to dissent from 

the current proposal, especially in light of the reported pressure 

of time. But he considered it important that the Committee get 

some staff views on where it was going in the longer run in foreign 

currency operations, and on the relationships between various types 

of operations, so it would not be called upon to react to one 

proposal after another on an ad hoc basis, Adding one authority 

after another was a poor way of doing business.



11/23/65 -15

Chairran Martin then suggested approving the current 

proposition and asking the staff to give the Committee a memorandum 

on the broader subject, and there appeared to be general agreement 

with this suggestion.  

Mr. Hayes commented, however, that he did not think the 

Committee had been acting on an ad hoc basis to the degree Mr. Maisel's 

remarks suggested, following which Mr. Ellis. commented that he 

thought it would be appropriate to distingu:sh between what the 

New York Bank was directed to do and what it was authorized to do.  

The language of the continuing authority directive said the Bank was 

both authorized and directed to do various things. In the present 

case, in the absence of legal considerations with which he was not 

familiar, he thought all that was really needed was to authorize the 

Bank to operate in the manner proposed.  

Mr. Young brought out that the language proposed for the lira 

arrangement would be consistent with that found in other paragraphs 

of the continuing authority directive. However, the point raised by 

Mr. Ellis could be reviewed by the Committee's Counsel before the 

continuing authority directive came up for reaffirmation by the 

Committee next March.  

Mr. Daane then suggested that, in view of the questions raised 

by Mr. Maisel and Mr. Ellis, the staff take a complete look before 

the March meeting at the Guidelines and authorities covering System 

foreign currency operations.



11/23/65 -16

Chairman Martin proposed proceeding on that basis, and no 

objection was heard.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, paragraph 
2 of section 4 of the Guidelines for System 
Foreign Currency Operations was amended to 
read as follows, effective immediately: 

When it is deemed appropriate to supplement existing 
market supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly, 
as a means of encouraging the retention or accumulation of 
dollar holdings by private foreign holders.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the following paragraph 
was added to the continuing authority directive 
for foreign currency operations: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to assume commitments for forward sales of 
lire up to $500 million equivalent as a means of facilitating 
the retention of dollar holdings by private foreign holders.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account coverirg open market operations in US. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period November 2 through 17, 1965, 

and a supplemental report for November 18 through 22, 1965. Copies 

of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

The past three weeks have been interesting ones for 
those of us on the Trading Desk. As you will recall we 
started out the period after the last Committee meeting 
with a fairly poor reception of the Treasury's November 
refunding operation, with even keel considerations well



11/23/65

to the fore. Before that statement week was over we ran 
into the power blackout, which also blacked out any real 
knowledge as to where the New York money market banks 
stood with respect to their reserve positions or where 
the System stood with respect to nationwide reserve 
availability. Following the blackout--but with no causal 
connection--we had some recovery in the Government bond 
market and, for the first time since I became Manager of 
the System Open Market Account, a statement week--the 
week ending November 17--in which we conducted no operations 
in Government securities.  

The reserve statistics have of course swung rather 
widely as a result of the November 9 power blackout in the 
northeast. Despite a swing from free reserves of about 
$100 million in the week ending November 10 to net borrowed 
reserves of about $200 million in the week ending November 17, 
the money market has been more consistently firm than one 
might have expected. Federal funds traded predominantly 
at 4-1/8 per cent on every day except one, when a 3-1/2 per 
cent effective rate prevailed. As the written reports 
explain mo:e fully, the disruption in bank operations caused 
by the blackout made the free reserve figure a meaningless 
one. By the same token, the large reserves carried over into 
the November 17 week by the New York City banks were absorbed 
by the fall in over-all reserve availability and a buildup 
in excess reserves at country banks. The chief visible 
result of the gyrations in reserve statistics was the re
covery in average member bank borrowings from the Reserve 
Banks from $334 million in the first full statement week of 
the period to a more normal $489 million in the second.  

Over the period Treasury bill rates have edged a bit 
higher, but it is well to remember that the market has taken 
on $6.5 billion tax bills in the past two months. The 
market has functioned smoothly and dealers have had sufficient 
confidence in the viability of existing rate levels--and in 
System needs to supply reserves over the next few weeks--to 
build up substantially their portfolios of Treasury bills, 
including bills put out on repurchase agreements maturing 
over the December dividend and tax dates. The Treasury's 
auction of $2.5 billion June tax anticipation bills last 
Tuesday proceeded uneventfully, and the sale of the bills 
by the banks that bought them through the tax and loan 
accounts to the dealers has been progressing without diffi
culty. In yesterday's auction a good interest was evident 
with the 3- and 6-month bills going at about 4.10 and 4.25

-17-



11/23/65

per cent, respectively. Early bidding ideas for today's 
auction of one-year bills are in a range of 4.25 - 4.27 
per cent.  

Prices of Treasury notes and bonds declined to the 
lowest levels of the year in the early part of the recent 
period as a result of the rapid buildup of the calendar 
of new corporate offerings and the lukewarm reception given 
the Treasury's November refinancing. The initial market 
reaction to the results of the refunding was moderated by 
purchases of the new 4-1/4 per cent ncte for Treasury 
accounts. The new issue itself held up well thereafter, 
and System purchases of the when-issued securities-
discussed at the special November 4 telephone meeting of 
the Committee--were not required. Subsequently, a better 
atmosphere developed as the large volume of new corporate 
issues attracted a generally more favorable response, and 
at somewat lower rates, than had earlier been expected.  
Some market participants were also impressed by the 
Administration's success in rolling back the aluminum 
price, and the implications of this for monetary policy.  
Many market observers continue to expect, however, that 
yields are likely to work higher over the months ahead.  
Although the tone in the corporate market improved, yields 
on municipal bonds rose irregulacly throughout the interval.  
While dealers in the bond markets have been encouraged to 
some degree by the recent performance, the markets still 
remain susceptible to sudden changes in sentiment in 
response to changing conditions.  

Perhaps a word is in order about the special pressures 
that typically focus on the banks and the money market 
over the coming mid-December period. Bankers, Government 
securities dealers, and other participants in the short
term market are of course well aware of these special 
pressures, although they realize that the degree of pressure 
can vary considerably from year to year. Given the greatly 
enhanced importance of certificates of deposit, a great 
deal of actention is being focused on the problems that the 
commercial banks face over the forthcoming period of tax 
and dividend payments and simultaneous peak credit demands.  
New York banks are now generally offering rates of 4-1/2 
per cent for 3-month CD maturities, and banks generally appear 
to be stepping up their efforts to place unsecured promissory 
notes at rates that are above the Regulation Q ceilings 
for certificates of deposit.

-18-



11/23/65

Despite tensions and uncertainties, particularly with 
regard to the ability of the banks to compete for funds, 
the market appears to be generally confident that 
December--barring any sudden upsurge in credit demands-
will not bring undue stresses and strains. Reliance is 
being placed in part on a high level of cash flow of the 
automobile companies, and in part on expectations of an 
absence of any sharp change in capital market conditions.  
But the market is mainly relying on the Federal Reserve-
through open market operations--to make at least the 
customary provisions for the special demands of the period 
of peak pressure just ahead.  

As Ear as the Treasury financing schedule is concerned, 
the November refunding can now be considered to be pretty 
much out of the way. Payment for the second instalment of 
June tax anticipation bills is due on Wednesday, and as 
noted earlier there have been no problems thus far in the 
distribution of these bills. The Treasury will have to be 
back in the market again in January, with the likelihood 
that a cash financing covering at least part of January 
needs will be announced before the end of this year.  

Mr. Hickman referred to Mr. Holmes' comment that the November 

Treasury refunding could now be considered pretty much out of the way.  

Yet payment was not due until tomorrow on the tax anticipation bills, 

and presumably the distribution of the bills would go on for a week or 

more.  

Mr. Holmes replied that many banks had sold the bills on a 

when-issued basis. Thus, a good part of the distribution had been 

completed. There appeared to be no great pressure for distribution of 

the remaining bills.  

Asked about dealer positions, Mr. Holmes said they had been 

built up quite substantially in the belief that the Federal Reserve 

would be in the market to buy at least $1 billion of securities in

order to accommodate seasonal reserve needs.

-19-



11/23/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
open market transactions in Government 
securities and bankers' acceptances during 
the period November 2 through 22, 1965, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

The staff economic and financial report today was in the form 

of a visual-auditory presentation. (Copies of the charts have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.) 

The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Koch, 

was as follows: 

Progress this year has brought us much closer to 
achieving out national economic goals. Unemployment has 
declined, while production, personal incomes, and consump
tion have advanced. The economy, stimulated in part by 
increased military activity, is operating closer to full 
potential now than at any other time in nearly a decade.  
Fortunately, price increases thus far have continued to be 
selective, and no pervasive upward pressures on prices 
or costs have developed. Internationally, our payments 
balance, though far from satisfactory, has taken a turn 
for the better, as the voluntary foreign credit restraint 
program has proved effective.  

Appropriate policy decisions in an environment like 
this are especially difficult to make. It might not take 
much of a move toward ease or restraint of either monetary 
or fiscal policy to tip the scale towar. inflation on the 
one hand or recession on the other.  

Our analysis this morning deals with some of the major 
issues and problems of economic policy associated with 
increased use of resources, both nonfinancial and financial.  
It is selective, counting on the green book 1/ for a more 
detailed and comprehensive coverage of most recent developments.  

1/ A document entitled Current Economic and Financial Conditions 
prepared by the staff and distributed under date of November 17, 
1965; a supplement was distributed under date of November 19. Copies 
have been placed in the files of the Committee.

-20-



11/23/65

Mr. Hersey then presented the following discussion of 

international developments: 

Last February, the President announced a program to 
"achieve a substantial reduction in our international 
deficit during 1965, and secure still further improvement 
in 1966." The 1965 part of this objective is being ful
filled. The deficit on the "liquidity" basis will probably 
be about $1-1/2 billion, compared with more than $2-1/2 
billion in almost every one of the previous 7 years. The 
deficit on the new "official settlements" basis will 
probably be only about $1/2 billion, compared with $1-1/4 
billion last year and substantially more in earlier years.  
The 1965 deficit would have been even smaller had the U.K.  
Treasury not converted about $1/2 billion of its security 
portfolio into assets we count as liquid.  

This year's improvement has occurred despite a 
decline in the current account surplus. It has resulted 
from a very sharp reduction in the net outflow of U.S.  
private capital, from $6-1/2 billion, the average for the 
two halves of 1964, to an annual rate of about $3-1/2 
billion in the first half of this year, and also in the 
third quarter. Now, what is the prospect for capital 
outflows in 1966? 

This year, a sharp cut in bank credit outflow has 
been achieved under the voluntary restraint program, 
reinforced by the interest equalization tax and also by 
stronger domestic credit demands and more moderate demands 
from some foreign borrowers. With the restraint program 
continuing in 1966, outflows of bank credit (that is, 
loans and acceptance credits) may be held near this year's 
reduced average--about $150 million per quarter. The 
substantial reflow of U.S.-owned liquid funds (including 
banks' liquid claims as well as those of corporations) 
during the first half of 1965 was a once-for-all phenomenon, 
and the expected diminution of reflow, already apparent in 
the third quarter, will represent a sizable element of 
worsening between 1965 and 1966.  

Direct investment outflow expanded very sharply late in 
1964 and early this year. It has since diminished, but the 
year's total will be very large. The voluntary program is 
being strengthened to hold down such outflows in 1966; but 
there seems little prospect of a reduction sufficient to 
offset fully the expected shrinkage in reflows of liquid 
funds. Finally, outflows into foreign securities seem

-21-



11/23/65

likely to remain of moderate size, with the bulk continuing 
to go to Canada. Canadian issues have been exempted from 
the interest equalization tax on the understanding that they 
would not increase Canadian reserves.  

In fact, Canadian reserves have risen considerably 
since that understanding was reached in 1963, and have 
continued to rise this year, partly owing to large wheat 
sales to Russia. As a result, U.S. and Canadian authorities 
have taken action to obtain deferment of further new 
Canadian security issues in this country until next year.  

Changes in credit conditions this year may have begun 
to reduce incentives to U.S. capital outflow. Credit has 
tightened somewhat here, and has eased in Japan, Italy, 
France, and Belgium. But credit demands from Canada and 
the less developed countries remain strong. The United 
Kingdom may continue to attract flows from other countries 
as confidence in sterling recovers further. Interest rates 
are very high in Germany, and once they stop rising, the 
prospect of capital gains on German bonds may become 
attractive.  

Thus, balance of payments improvement in 1966 is 
probably not to be expected from a further net reduction in 
total outflows of U.S. capital, even with some strengthening 
of voluntary restraints. It must come mainly from renewed 
expansion of the current account surplus, with possible 
assistance from cessation of British sales of U.S. securities 

This year the current account surplus diminished to a 
$6 billion rate in the first half, but picked up in the 
third quacter to nearly the $7-1/2 billion level first 
attained Last year.  

A sharp rise in U.S. merchandise imports contributed 
to the current acccount[sic] deterioration during the first half 
of 1965. Now, as steel imports subside, total imports may 
settle back within their past range in relation to GNP.  
But the general tendency in recent years has been for imports 
to rise at least as rapidly as GNP.  

Exports dropped sharply during the first quarter because 
of U.S. port strikes, and the shortfall was not made up in 
the second quarter, partly because of slackening demand in 
Japan, in some European countries, and in some less developed 
countries. In the third quarter, exports rose encouragingly, 
to a level 7 per cent higher than a year earlier. But with 
imports up 12 per cent over the year, the trade surplus was 
not yet back to the 1964 highs.

-22-



11/23/65

One fundamental change in underlying trends has made 
achievement of a rising U.S. trade surplus more difficult.  
In the past two years, economic expansion has become more 
rapid in the United States than in Europe, where labor force 
growth has been very small. European import demands have 
risen faster than output, but have been weakened, until 
lately, by recession in Italy and slower growth in France.  
Renewed expansion is now under way in those two countries.  
However, their rising import demand may be offset by some 
easing of demand in Britain.  

On balance, the trade surplus next year may be near 
the third-quarter level. This would mean a gain for 1966 
over 1965. On other types of current transactions, little 
net change is anticipated. The gradual reduction of net 
military expenditures has now ended, and is beginning to 
be reversed. But further growth of net investment income 
is likely as a result of continued additions to U.S. direct 
investments abroad. Thus, it appears that the current 
account surplus will increase in 1966.  

Accordingly, there should be some further improvement 
in the over-all payments position, if outflows of U.S.  
capital are held down by the voluntary programs and if U.K.  
Treasury sales of securities end.  

But beyond 1966, it will become increasingly difficult 
to limit capital outflows by voluntary programs. Since 
the objective in any case should be to permit greater 
freedom, continued improvement in the current account will 
be needed. In this connection it remains of crucial im
portance to avoid inflationary developments in the U.S.  
economy, so as to take full advantage of price increases 
still occurring in most industrial countries abroad 
despite their anti-inflationary programs.  

Mr. Garfield commented as follows on domestic business 

developments: 

With a further substantial rise in GNP in the current 
quarter, the total increase from the fourth quarter of 1964 
to the fourth quarter this year will be about $48 billion.  
This is considerably larger than the rise over the previous 
four quarters, but after allowance for last year's auto 
strikes this year's increase in GNP is similar to last 
year's. So also is the increase in consumer expenditures.  
Increases in business fixed investment and in State and local 
government outlays also are similar, and residential construc
tion has shown little change for more than 2 years.

-23-



11/23/65

Inventory accumulation--although large for 1965 as a 
whole--in the current quarter is down appreciably from the 
fourth quarter of 1964 because of the shift to liquidation 
of steel stocks. Federal spending is up substantially 
from a year ago, mainly as a result of intensified operations 
in Vietnam.  

Continued expansion in business fixed investment and 
the upturn in Federal outlays have played major roles in 
maintaining the rate of increase in total output and thus 
in raising rates of resource utilization. That these 
categories of spending will continue to expand well into 
next year has become increasingly evident, and present 
uncertainties focus on the likely degree of expansion in 
relation to growth in available resources.  

Turning first to the Government's role, the impact of 
Federal activities in 1965 is not adequately described by 
the increase in spending for goods and services. Receipts 
rose sharply in the first half; the resulting shift to 
surplus in the national income budget and the growing 
full employment surplus once again provoked discussion 
of tax reduction to deal with "fiscal drag." In the second 
half, the cut in excise taxes, increasing expenditures for 
Vietnam, Government pay increases, and retroactive advances 
in social security benefits comb:ned to throw the budget 
back into deficit.  

Looking ahead, military spending and social security 
payments are expected to rise further in the first half of 
1966, and additional excise tax cuts take effect. However, 
increased social security and other tax receipts will more 
than compensate, and the actual deficit will be reduced.  

Clearer assessment of the impact of likely Federal 
operations must await the January budget announcement, 
which may have immediate effects on expectations and 
business decisions. But judgments about the impact of the 
budget must also depend in part on the strength of private 
demands.  

Business plans to add to plant and equipment remain 

strong. Although outlays for 1965 as a whole are up 13 
per cent from last year and almost 40 per cent from three 

years ago, the McGraw-Hill survey shows a further rise of 
8 per cent for next year. Spending might rise even more; 
in the past two years realized gains were 8 to 10 

percentage points greater than anticipated by the autumn 

surveys.

-24-



11/23/65

Business fixed investment, as shown in the GNP accounts, 
has been rising at an annual rate of 10 per cent. Over 
the past year, resources have been available to permit this 
increase and also the expansion it contributed to in other 
types of spending without a general rise in prices.  

The share of fixed investment in GNP increased some
what. further, almost to the 1956 proportion. Given the large 
expansion already achieved, the question arises whether 
investment plans for next year are solidly based on supporting 
faccors. First of all, would continued increases in output 
at recent rates maintain capacity utilization at recent 
advanced levels? 

Measures of change in capacity are available only for 
manufacturing, which accounts for a third of GNP and a half 
of plant and equipment outlays. The McGraw-Hill survey of 
last spring showed an increase in manufacturing capacity for 
this year of 6 per cent--a historically high figure but no 
higher than the rate at which manufacturing output has been 
increasing since early 1963. Next year's capacity increase, 
resulting partly from outlays already made, is likely to be 
greater--oerhaps 6-1/2 or 7 per cent. This would not be 
appreciably in excess of the 6 per cent rate of expansion 
in output since 1963; but any important slowing of the 
expansion in output could provoke downward revision of 
plans for further increasing capacity. Outlays for 
replacement and modernization, which still account for more 
than half of the total, are also subject to change with 
changes in expectations.  

If producers do fulfill their plans for increasing 
plant and equipment outlays, can the machinery industries 
cope with the resulting demands? Recently shipments of 
machinery have continued to trail new orders although 
reported operating rates in the machinery industries are 
not yet up to 90 per cent.  

Capacity in the machinery industries reportedly has 
increased 5 or 6 per cent this year compared with only 
3 per cent in 1964, and sharply rising investment expendi
tures by these industries suggest that expansion of their 
capacity is accelerating further. If so, it appears that 
new orders can rise almost as fast as they have been rising 
without unduly increasing backlogs. Appreciable upward re
vision in spending plans, however, would be likely to widen 
the gap between new orders and shipments, and would foster 
a climate in which upward pressures on prices and costs 

tend to mount.

-25-



11/23/65

Although rates of resource utilization have 
increasec further this year, business decisions are being 
made against a background of selective rather than widespread 
upward pressures on prices. The wholesale index has tended 
to level off following its increase in the first half of the 
year. The rapidity of that increase reflected mainly a 
rise in foodstuffs, as livestock prices increased sharply 
in response to curtailment in production, but the industrial 
index was also rising. In the 9 months from September 1964 
to June 1965, industrial prices rose at an annual rate of 
2 per cent; since June the rise has slowed to a 1 per cent 
rate.  

The selective nature of the rise is illustrated by the 
dispersion of changes among 70 groups of industrial commodi
ties. A large proportion of commodity groups were practically 
unchangec--32 per cent in the period from September 1964 to 
June 1965, and 46 per cent in the period from June to 
October. In both periods the proportion of groups increasing 
exceeded the proportion decreasing--by about three to one; 
but most changes were small.  

Nonferrous metals account for much of the rise of 1.7 
per cent in the industrial group since September 1964.  
Releases from the stockpile will help to meet increased 
military requirements for copper and aluminum. The copper 
situation threatens to become worse, w.th new strikes in 
Chile and uncertainty about supplies from Zambia and Katanga.  
The recovery in prices of petroleum products also made a 
large contribution to raising the industrial index.  

Most other major materials have shown little if any 
increase. Textile prices and mill margins are inflated in 
that fiber prices have declined while product prices have 
not. Among paper products and chemicals, increases have 
been scattered. Of 105 industria' chemicals, only 22 have 
increased from a year ago while 8 have declined and 75 have 
not changed; the average is up 1 per cent.  

Steel products have increased little since 1963, the 
nonmetallic minerals group has been stable, and lumber and 
plywood have been dominated by seasonal and other short-run 
influences.  

Altogether, increases in prices of industrial materials 
have been large in only a few cases, and while wage rates 
have continued to rise, increases in unit labor costs have 
been neither widespread nor large. Prices of finished in
dustrial products have not been subjected to pervasive upward 
pressures of costs, and the rise in the over-all industrial 
price index has been moderate.

-26-



11/23/65

Continuation of this relatively favorable price
cost performance may prove possible, provided business 

investmen: and Government outlays do not rise 
considerably faster than indicated by current plans.  

Projected increases for these and other outlays, given 
continued growth in industrial capacity and the labor 

force, would not appreciably change rates of resource 

utilization.  

Mr. Partee presented the following comments on financial 

developments: 

Financial markets, more than markets for goods and 

services, have shown evidence of strains on available 

resources this year. Bank liquidity has been reduced 

further, and interest rates have risen significantly.  

An attempt to identify the sources of ncreased financial 

market tensions--in particular, to differentiate basic 
forces of demand and supply from the effects of changing 

market expectations--should help to provide perspective 
on the probable course of financial developments in the 

weeks and months ahead. We turn first to a review of 
credit demands.  

Funds were raised by private domestic nonfinancial 
borrowers--individuals, businesses, and State and local 

governments--at an annual rate near $65 billion in each 

of the first three quarters of 1965. Though declining 

slightly in the third quarter, private borrowing has 

remained larger this year than last. Increased private 

spending has been primarily responsible, but the ratio 

of private credit expansion to spending also has risen.  

Federal borrowing, seasonally adjusted, declined 

in the second quarter--and also in the third, when the 

Treasury ran down its cash balance. Foreign borrowing 

also fell below the first quarter high, as the voluntary 

credit restraint program curbed bank lending abroad.  

As a result, total credit flows fell to a seasonally 

adjusted low in the third quarter. But this was, in 

large part, a consequence of Treasury debt operations 

that are now crowding a large volume of cash financing 

into the final three months.  

On the demand side of credit markets, pressures on 

available funds have come mainly from unusually large 

business borrowing, especially from banks. The annual

-27-



11/23/65 -28

growth rate of business loans has remained well above 
that of earlier years, though declining from quarter to 
quarter. Further tapering occurred after the steel 
settlement, but figures for recent weeks suggest some 
resurgence in loan demand.  

In contrast with business borrowing from banks, 
corporate security issues have risen over the course of 
the year, and the calendar for the weeks ahead is heavy.  
This reflects primarily the continuing expansion in 
plant and equipment spending, but may also be related to 
reductions in corporate liquidity. In the fourth quarter 
of last year, seasonal increases in corporate liquidity 
ratios were smaller than usual, ard reductions so far 
this year have been substantially larger than the trend 
of the past several years.  

Consumer borrowing also has been relatively large 
this year. Increases in total consumer credit have been 
at annual rates of about $9 billion in each of the past 
three quarters, compared with a $7 billion increase in 
1964.  

Municipal security issues, on the other hand, have 
been only moderately larger than in the past two years.  
Mortgage debt has continued to expand at about last 
year's $26 billion pace.  

The unusually rapid growth of business loans at 
banks has been broadly distributed by irdustry. The 
effects of the steel inventory buildup are clearly 
evident in the borrowings of metals and metals-using 
firm; at weekly reporting member banks. Borrowings of 
public utilities and trade firms also nave been large.  
In fact, growth in bank loans to business exceeded 
year-earlier figures in all major industrial categories, 
reflecting the general strength of busiress investment 
as the economy moved toward higher resource utilization.  

Growth in business fixed investment and inventory 
accumulation since the third quarter of 1964 has been 
considerably larger than the expansion in gross retained 
earnings, and has been the principal factor increasing 
business external financing. Capital spending abroad 
also has risen. Additionally, the distribution among 
industries of the growth in retained earnings has not 
matched that of investment. Retained earnings in 

manufacturing, for example, were up sharply in the first 
quarter, but declined in the second quarter and possibly 
also in the third. In contrast, manufacturers' outlays



11/23/65

for fixed investment and inventories have continued to 
rise rapidly.  

The resulting increase in business credit demands, 
which focused heavily on the banking system, encouraged 
banks to bid more aggressively for funds, and rates on 
CD's and Federal funds continued the rise that had begun 
late in 1964. Monetary policy, meanwhile, pursued a 
course that required a larger portion of the increase in 
bank reserves during the first half to come through the 
discount window. Member bank borrowings rose to a peak 
in August: and have declined only slightly since then.  
Movements in free reserves have mirrored the pattern in 
borrowing this year, since excess reserves have changed 
little.  

Reduced reserve availability during the second 
quarter was accompanied by a moderately slower growth 
rate of total bank reserves than had prevailed earlier 
in the year. Then, in the third quarter, total bank 
reserves declined--as Treasury deposits fell sharply-
and reserve growth did not resume until October.  

The third quarter contraction in Treasury deposits 
was not fully offset by more rapid growth of private 
deposits, so that expansion in total bank deposits 
slowed. Growth of the money stock did accelerate in 
the third quarter, however, and by the end of October 
the annual growth rate for the year to date had risen 
to 4.4 per cent, about equal to the 1964 rate. Time 
deposit growth also increased in the third quarter, 
partly as the result of the success of banks in 
marketing savings certificates and bonds.  

The unusual pattern of Treasury financing this year 
has made changes in bank credit difficult to interpret.  
A measure that circumvents some of the difficulties is 
the growth of bank credit exclusive of changes in bank 
holdings of Treasury securities and bank loans to 
brokers and dealers secured by Governments. This can 
be viewed as a measure--though imperfect--of the banking 
system's contribution to the financing of private 
spending.  

Net new funds supplied to private borrowers by 
banks declined in the third quarter, and the decline 
exceeded that in total private borrowing. Funds 
supplied by other savings institutions showed little 
increase, as these institutions continued to feel the 
pressure of competition for savings flows from 
commercial banks. The private nonfinancial sectors,

-29-



11/23/65

as a result, had to supply a larger quantity of funds 
directly to the private credit markets in the third 
quarter than in other recent years. Higher interest 
rates were required to encourage them to enlarge their 
purchases.  

This increase in funds supplied by individuals and 
businesses was accompanied by growing expectations that 
private credit demands might rise further, in line with 
continued vigorous expansion in economic activity. It 
was recognized, also, that the Treasury would soon be 
returning to the market in volume. The swing in market 
expectations reinforced the more basic forces of demand 
and supply, and also exerted upward pressure on interest 
rates. The rise in market rates of interest in evidence 
prior to midyear in the corporate and municipal bond 
markets became more general as rates on Treasury issues 
joined in the advance during August. Rate increases 
since early summer have been both rapid and substantial; 
yields on long-term corporate and Treasury issues are 
close to the peaks of early 1960. Rates on municipals 
and on Treasury bills also have increased since midyear, 
but are still below their earlier peaks.  

The concluding part of the staff presentation was given by 

Mr. Brill, who reviewed more recent developments in financial markets 

and then summarized the analysis and its implications for policy, 

as follows: 

Interest rate pressures developing during the third 
quarter continued in evidence in October and early 
November, as market conditions reflected heavy Federal 
borrowing and uncertainties about military spending, 
the potential strength of private credit demands, and 
the course of monetary policy. Most recently, markets 
for Treasury securities have quieted somewhat and rates 
have shown some signs of leveling. Nonetheless, 
conditions in financial markets remain taut and market 
sentiment uneasy, with peak seasonal pressures just 
ahead.  

Are existing financial conditions appropriate, in 

the light of developments in the real sectors of the 

economy and in the balance of payments? Thus far, price 

changes in commodity markets have continued to be

-30-



11/23/65

selective and, for the most part, moderate. Since June, 
increases in the industrial average have been smaller 
than earlier. The Administration's efforts to contain 
wage rate advances in key industries, and to hold the 
line on prices of basic industrial materials, have no 
doubt contributed to this stability.  

But availability of resources to meet expanding 
demands has been a more fundamental factor in containing 
price pressures. Next year's additions to plant capacity 
are likely to be even larger than this year's, and 
additions to the labor force are also expected to be 
larger. At the same time, resources of efficient plants 
and trained workers are not unlimited, and new price 
pressures could develop if military activities increase 
substantially or investment spending rises much faster 
than is now indicated.  

In our international payments accounts next year, 
moderate further improvement seems likely, in view of 
the probable increase in the current account surplus 
and the additional measures planned by the Department 
of Commerce to hold down direct investments abroad.  
Such progress will depend importantly on maintenance of 
our favorable cost/price record, as well as the continued 
cooperation of the financial community and increased 
cooperation of nonfinancial corporations in restraining 
capital flows.  

If an assessment of economic pressures and of other 
Government policies should lead to the conclusion that 
the present stance of monetary policy is appropriate, 
what would this mean operationally, in terms of reserve 
targets and money market relationships? Any answer must 
be approximate and tentative, given the precarious 
equilibrium in financial markets. As best we can 
estimate, holding net borrowed reserves in the $100-$150 
million range until mid-December would be likely to be 
accompanied by some further upward creep in bill rates, 
but perhaps with only minor implications for long-term 
rates so long as market expectations do not change.  

However, quoted CD rates are generally at their 
ceilings, and further narrowing of the spread between 
market rates and CD ceilings would make it difficult for 
banks to replace the large CD maturities expected around 
mid-December tax and dividend dates. If credit demands 
on banks continue heavy, market pressures could intensify 
in the final weeks of the year. Indeed, to hold close 
to current rate relationships at that time may require

-31-



11/23/65

both increased provisions of nonborrowed reserves and 
some increased flexibility for banks to compete for 
funds.  

If an assessment of the situation suggests the need 
for increasing monetary restraint now, the flow of 
nonborrowed reserves could be limited. The impact on 
market rates of a deeper net borrowed reserve position 
would likely be substantial and relatively prompt. The 
rise in rates could be expected to pervade all maturities.  
Expectations of a discount rate increase would reinforce 
and perhaps make cumulative the upward pressure on market 
rates, and the CD market would require immediate relief 
if contraction in bank deposits were to be avoided.  

My own assessment weighs out in favor of the first 
course of action. Given the knowns and the uncertainties 
in the economic scene, domestic and international, the 
case seems persuasive to me that present taut conditions 
in financial markets are providing all the monetary 
restraint needed at the moment, and the possibilities 
are that these conditions will become even tauter before 
year-end.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Mr. Hayes, 

who spoke first, made the following statement: 

The set of economic conditions on which our policy 
must be based is largely unchanged since three weeks ago.  
Such minor changes as have occurred in the over-all 
economic picture have tended to confirm even greater 
strength in the domestic economy than at the time of our 
last meeting and an even less satisfactory balance of 
payments situation than was apparent at that time.  
Finally, it is becoming ever clearer than artificial 
rigidities in the interest rate structure are handicap
ping the efficient flow of funds in the economy. In my 
judgment the time has come for monetary policy to make 
a significant further contribution to more balanced and 
sustainable growth in the domestic economy and a 
strengthening of the dollar's international standing.  

I recognize that the Treasury is in the process of 
completing its November financing schedule, but I 
believe that we are at last able to reach policy

-32-



11/23/65

decisions without the constraint of even keel considera
tions. The November refunding is pretty much out of the 
way, and while distribution of the tax anticipation 
bills, for which payment is due tomorrow, is not completed, 
this is not enough to be a major deterrent to action on 
our part. I might point out also that with additional 
Treasury financing probably due to be announced sometime 
between mid and late December, the period in which we 
are free to act will not last very long.  

With respect to the domestic economy, the longer
term outlook remains strong, and business optimism seems 
more firmly based than a few weeks ago. The prospective 
buoyancy of plant and equipment spending is especially 
impressive. Incidentally, I can see no ground for fear 
that the recent disparity between rates of output growth 
for capital and consumer goods has meant a tendency toward 
overbuilding of capacity. On the contrary, plant 
utilization rates have risen very appreciably since 1961, 
despite large additions to capacity, and seem to have 
remained about unchanged in 1965. With the likelihood 
that GNP will be growing at a rate of around $11-12 
billion per quarter in 1966, the gap between actual and 
potential levels of activity will probably narrow further; 
and this should mean continued pressure on industrial 
capacity and on the labor market. The over-all 
unemployment rate over the year ahead is, at worst, 
likely to be no higher than the October 1965 figure of 
4.3 per cent and may well decline below 4 per cent. If 
so, increased shortages of skilled and even other workers 
will probably develop, and wage rates may be subject to 
excessive upward pressure. Economic prospects also seem 
conducive to price increases, despite the prospect of 
further productivity gains and the Administration's 
recent strong stand in opposing price increases by means 
of the guideposts and moral suasion. There is always a 
risk too that the course of events in Vietnam might 
intensify the stimulus provided by rising Federal 
outlays.  

Our international problem remains decidedly serious, 
with balance of payments statistics continuing to make 
disappointing reading. The October deficit is estimated 
around $300 million and our November weekly indicators 
still register deficits of varying magnitudes. Prospects 
are that the regular deficit for 1965 will exceed $1.8 
billion and may possibly be as high as $2 billion.

-33-



11/23/65

Changes in the method of reporting the deficit cannot 
conceal the fact that our accounts are still badly out 
of balance, even after allowing for the fact that 
liquification of British security holdings tended to 
amplify the deficit. Moreover, the "official settlements" 
balance for recent quarters is almost meaningless in the 
light of the very large foreign exchange operations of 
the Bank of Italy, carried out with the cooperation of 
the U.S. authorities. The weakness of our payments 
position is especially worrisome at a time when we are 
commencing difficult negotiations on the future of 
international financial arrangements.  

Turning to credit developments, we find that bank 
credit showed renewed and pervasive strength in October 
after a weak September. In the first ten months of 1965 
bank credit was growing at the rate of 9.7 per cent per 
annum, well ahead of the 1964 rate. While there has 
been some slackening in business loan growth since 
mid-year, as corporations were able to tap other sources 
more effectively, there has been renewed strength in 
early November, and most banks look for continuing 
strong general loan demand. Money supply and time 
deposits grew in the first ten months at an annual rate 
of 9.6 per cent, as compared with 7.9 per cent for all 
of 1964. An examination of broader indicators of credit 
growth reveals that while banks accounted for a larger 
share of the total than in 1964, there was also a 
substantial rise in the rate of total credit growth.  
Reduced corporate liquidity, combined with the prospect 
of heavy business spending, points to the likelihood of 
further heavy demand for credit from all available 
sources.  

A final factor of great importance is, as I mentioned 
at the last meeting, the distortions in the interest rate 
structure resulting from a combination of heavy credit 
demands throughout the maturity range and rate rigidities 
introduced by regulatory or statutory ceilings and 
political pressures. For example, now that the leading 
city banks are paying the ceiling rate on 3-month 
certificates of deposit, any further upward movement of 
market interest rates could bring a severe loss of bank 

deposits and a consequent shrinkage of bank assets. The 

prime rate, which has become a favorite subject for 
political attention, is out of line with rising rates in 
the corporate bond market and with the rising cost of

-34-



11/23/65

money to the banks. The 4-1/4 per cent ceiling on the 
coupon rate applicable to new Treasury bond issues is 
now proving to be a major obstacle to the continued flow 
of savings into the Treasury. And fin.lly, the discount 
rate is becoming more and more out of line with market 
rates of interest.  

In my judgment this combination of circumstances 
points to a clear policy conclusion. The time has come 
for an overt move to signal a firmer monetary policy, 
and an increase in the discount rate by 1/2 per cent is 
the appropriate means of effecting such a change. It 
seems to me imperative that the System take this action 
to lend additional support to the voluntary foreign 
credit restraint program. That program may well prove 
increasingly difficult to administer in the absence of 
such additional support, and in any case it is not too 
early to be striving for a more basic improvement in 
our payments position. Not only is the economy amply 
strong to withstand any effects of firmer interest rates, 
but we are probably very close to the point where continued 
sustainable domestic expansion depends on greater effort 
to keep inflationary pressures under control--and of 
course this is of vital importance in connection with 
the maintenance of a large external trade surplus. In 
view of these considerations, it seems no more than 
prudent to try once again to slow the recent excessive 
rate of bank credit expansion. Finally: a discount 
rate increase, with an accompanying increase in Regula
tion Q ceilings, would permit greater reliance on market 
forces an interest rates in channeling the flow of 
funds.  

Most of the directors of the New York Bank have 
felt for some time that an increase in the discount rate 
is overdue. Indeed, on a number of occasions some of 
them have urged that the Bank take the initiative in 
this area. I am now prepared to recommend that they 
vote a 1/2 per cent discount rate increase within the 
next week or so.  

As for open market operations, it seems to me that 
we would be well advised to avoid any significant change 
until we have had time to observe the effects on the 
market of a discount rate rise. An overt change in 
System policy before the end of the year is apt to come 
as something of a shock to the market. While the 
technical position of the market is much better than a

-35-



11/23/65 -36

month or so ago, we have to be prepared for a rather 
strong initial reaction to a discount rate change. No 
doubt market interest rates will move higher, and I 
believe it would be wise, for the time being at least, 
to keep reserve availability about unchanged while 
meeting the seasonal reserve needs expected in the weeks 
ahead. I think the Manager should be allowed fairly 
wide discretion to keep the market adjustment as orderly 
as possible, and we should be prepared to tolerate some 
increase in net reserve availability i. this turns out 
to be necessary. For the moment I should think we 
might instruct the Manager to maintain about the same 
money market conditions as have prevailed in the past 
three weeks. Accordingly, draft directive A, as 
proposed by the staff, seems quite satisfactory, except 
that I would add the words "reflecting strong credit 
demand" after the words "firmer financial conditions."1/ 

Mr. Ellis reported that the Boston Bank's regular business 

outlook conference last week confirmed, as expected, the standard 

forecast of continuing GNP growth at about $10 billion per quarter 

through next June. Among the varied reports, two items drew his 

attention as evidence of the narrowed margin of unemployed resources: 

an aircraft corporation was attempting to expand its Hartford work

force by 1,000 persons per week for 8 weeks; another Connecticut 

employer was offering a $50 "finder's fee" to present employees 

for each new worker hired as a result of their personal recruiting 

efforts. Another conference participant indicated that insurance 

company current commitments were running at 93 per cent of cash 

1/ The two alternative directives suggested by the staff are 
appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



11/23/65

flow--a record high for the industry. In anticipation of further 

needs for funds, a larger number of companies had established lines 

of credit at commercial banks, a number of which had not been used 

as yet.  

In Mr. Ellis' judgment, it would be difficult to fault the 

economy and its progress when appraising it in real terms. Real 

growth was substantial, but not so rapid or distorted as to have 

caused production bottlenecks. Expansion and modernization was 

being concentrated where capacity was tightest. Unemployment had 

been and continued to be reduced. The outlook was universally 

conceded to be for further such growth, with no widespread 

convictions that rapid price inflation was inevitable. Economic 

strength seemed firmly based, not weakly balanced.  

When described in financial terms, however, the current 

picture was less reassuring. It was difficult to feel secure when 

the money supply was expanding at 7.6 per cent (on a three-month 

average) while GNP was expanding 4.7 per cent in real terms. Even 

given the substantial expansion of intermediation by commercial 

banks, it was disturbing to contemplate a 20 per cent year-to-year 

increase in business loans, against a 9 per cent parallel gain in 

industrial production.  

Without being able to measure the degree, Mr. Ellis said, 

it was nevertheless apparent to him that the quality of credit

-37-



11/23/65 -38

extended had declined. Without being able to assess its full 

potential, it was evident that banks had greatly reduced their 

liquidity and their capacity to withstand financial shock. While 

the balance of payments had improved over the past year, it was 

evident that further measures would be requ:.red to restrain 

capital outflows. One such measure, a move toward lesser ease 

would not only buttress the special credit restraint measures 

being employed but would serve as a widely understood monetary 

signal that would strengthen the willingness to hold dollars 

abroad.  

Mr. Ellis said he used the phrase "lesser ease" because in 

retrospect the record suggested that the Federal Reserve had eased 

its reserve availability and allowed an accelerated expansion of 

reserves while limiting rate increases. Member bank borrowings 

averaged in excess of $525 million each month between June and 

September. In October they averaged $490 million, and they 

averaged $438 million for three weeks of November. After declining 

in August and September, nonborrowed reserves expanded at a 5.5 

per cent annual rate in October and at about a 6 per cent rate in 

three weeks of November. Meanwhile, 3-month bill rates, which 

rose 8 basis points in September and 10 basis points in October, 

had been held to a 5-point rise in November. Concern that higher 

bill rates would force a discount rate increase had tended to



11/23/65 -39

translate a "voluntary" prime rate ceiling of 4-1/2 per cent into 

a 3-month bill rate ceiling of 4.10 per cent.  

Looking ahead, however, the Committee must contend with 

the historical fact that in years of strong credit demands bill 

rates normally rose 8 or 10 basis points in response to seasonal 

pressures alone in the next several weeks. In Mr. Ellis' judgment, 

the Committee should not pour out reserves in an effort to enforce 

a rate ceiling against seasonal pressures. While it could quite 

properly seek to insure that rate movements did not become 

disorderly, it should not seek to enforce a ceiling at any level.  

The result would be to destroy the market's ability to set its own 

rates and the Committee's ability to judge true demand and supply 

relationships in the market. Interest rates were too important to 

be left to arbitrary judgments from any source.  

At the meeting yesterday of the Boston Bank's directors, 

Mr. Ellis said, he took the position that this was not the proper 

moment to raise the discount rate. Member bank borrowings were 

running lower than for any month since March. Bill rates had been 

stabilized in recent weeks. Business loan demand was just about 

meeting seasonal expectations.  

Mr. Ellis said that although he agreed with Mr. Hayes' 

analysis, he would reverse the sequence of moves. He would move 

on reserves first and the discount rate later. His choice would



11/23/65

be to restore reserve objectives to primary positions as targets 

of policy. Now that the Treasury financing schedule had been 

completed for the year, it should prove feasible to establish a 

goal of moderate reserve growth associated with net borrowed 

reserves averaging $150 million. If demands for credit exceeded 

seasonal patterns, the Committee should expect borrowing to exceed 

$550 million and some tendency for short bill rates to rise to 

4.20 per cent or higher. The underlying philosophy of such an 

approach was to throw onto the market the responsibility for 

revealing the degree of pressure for credit expansion. If higher 

rates, including higher discount rates, were to eventuate, they 

should result from increased credit demands against a steadily 

growing reserve base.  

Mr. Ellis said he was attracted to alternative B of the 

draft directives. However, what he had suggested in terms of 

policy could probably be carried out equally well under 

alternative A.  

Mr. Irons reported that the latest estimates in regard to 

Eleventh District economic activity continued to reflect expansion 

and growth, particularly in the major areas of activity. There 

had been an increase in manufacturing output, both of durables 

and nondurables. The petroleum situation showed improvement, as 

did the chemical situation. Construction continued strong.

-40-



11/23/65 -41

Employment continued to set new records, with increases in both 

the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors. The unemployment 

rate stood at 3.2 per cent. Automobile sales were exceptionally 

good, and the agricultural situation was very strong this year as 

compared with preceding years.  

Bankers reported that the pressure for loans continued 

unabated, although the loan figures showed relatively little 

change from the high levels that had prevailed. In fact, the 

banks had reduced their loans a bit in the recent period, while 

disposing of some Governments and increasing their holdings of 

other securities. Although they were not borrowing from the 

Reserve Bank heavily, they were active in the Federal funds market, 

with substantial net purchases. The discount window had about 

cleared out the seasonal type of agricultural lending. Those banks 

that were now out of debt to the Reserve Bank might find it easier 

or preferable :o go into the Federal funds market and come to the 

Reserve Bank only when funds were not otherwise available.  

The general attitude in the District was optimistic, 

Mr. Irons said, although there was some degree of concern about 

the inflationary potential. On the national side, he agreed with 

the data in the green book and the supplement to it. His appraisal 

of the material was that it confirmed the strength of the economy, 

with continuing expansion on a broad basis. He anticipated a



11/23/65 -42

substantial rise in final demand through the fourth quarter and on 

into next year. Most economic indexes seemed likely to rise further.  

Demand was beginning to press on capacity, and cost pressures seemed 

likely to increase as labor markets continued to tighten.  

Money and credit markets reflected firmness, with demands 

placing pressure on the supply of available credit. Apparently 

there was some uncertainty in the market as to the probable cost 

and availability of credit, and perhaps as to the position the 

Federal Reserve would take on credit availability. This raised 

the question whether a more positive position would be desirable.  

This was the time of the year when seasonal pressures were present, 

and in addition other influences had entered into the picture with 

regard to rate levels and rate administration.  

Mr. Irons said his thinking was somewhat along the lines 

of that expressed by Mr. Hayes. It seemed to him that there might 

be some advantage in a confirmation of recent rate movements in 

the market through a discount rate change. Such a move would 

dispel some uncertainties. But he was not sure it would be 

necessary to raise the discount rate to 4-1/2 per cent. The 

present market rate structure was roughly compatible with a 4-1/4 

per cent discount rate, so a change in the rate to that level 

would be a confirmation of the market rate structure and an 

indication of the System's policy thinking. Such a move might in



11/23/65 -43

the long run be more effective than either deferring a discount 

rate change or taking a stronger action at this particular time.  

This brought in the whole question of timing, considering the 

atmosphere in which the Committee found itself and the framework 

within which it operated. He was not certain about those factors, 

and he realized there were counterarguments to a course of action 

such as he was suggesting. Nevertheless, it might tend to quiet 

uncertainties, confirm a position the market had taken, and 

perhaps lesser the possibility of further substantial rate 

increases.  

Mr. Irons thought in terms of directive alternative B, but 

he did not have strong feelings one way or the other. Either A or 

B of the draft alternatives would seem compatible with a policy 

approach such as he had outlined.  

Mr. Swan reported that employment ir the Pacific Coast 

States increased somewhat in October in all sectors except 

construction and mining. But with the labor force growing the 

unemployment rate remained unchanged at 5.6 per cent. Employment 

in defense-related manufacturing had improved slightly further.  

Construction contract awards increased in September--the latest 

month for which statistics were available--and for the first time 

the cumulative figure for the year to date was above that of the 

comparable period in 1964. But the increase was only 1-1/2 per



11/23/65 -44

cent, compared with an increase of 4 per cent for the country as 

a whole.  

In the three weeks through November 10, total credit of 

Twelfth District weekly reporting banks declined as the loan 

increase was more than offset by a decrease in securities holdings.  

However, the rise in commercial and industrial loans was consid

erably greater than at weekly reporting banks throughout the 

country, representing a reversal for that period of the earlier 

relationship. Even so, the reserve position of the Twelfth 

District banks in recent weeks had been relatively easy, and their 

borrowings from the Reserve Bank had been extremely low.  

In terms of the national picture, Mr. Swan was inclined to 

agree with the analysis in the green book. The situation was not 

appreciably different than at the time of the last meeting of the 

Committee, but it certainly remained a stron, one.  

In terms of policy, Mr. Swan said, the situation was quite 

difficult, but it seemed to him the Committee ought to maintain its 

current posture. He recognized that the need for overt action 

might be somewhat closer. Like Mr. Ellis, however, he was inclined 

to think that the point had not yet been reached. He noted the 

relationships discussed in the blue book 1/ as between net borrowed 

1/A document entitled Money Market and Reserve Relationships prepared 
by the staff and distributed under date of November 19, 1965. A 
copy has been placed in the files of the Committee.



11/23/65 -45

reserves and interest rates and the prospective basic provision of 

nonborrowed reserves, seasonally adjusted, at about a 2-1/2 per 

cent annual rate for November. If those relationships continued, 

the Committee could live with the situation. However, he agreed 

with Mr. Ellis that emphasis should be placed on the provision of 

reserves to take care of seasonal needs. If credit demands should 

turn out to be considerably stronger than seasonal, so that there 

was some reflection of those pressures in market rates, the 

Committee would be faced with the question of what action to take.  

But the situation should be allowed to develop first. He would 

stay for the moment with net borrowed reserves of $100-$150 

million rather than to raise the sights slightly in those terms.  

Consequently, he would accept alternative A of the draft directives.  

Mr. Galusha said all indications were that economic activity 

in the Ninth District was continuing to expand at a satisfactory 

rate. Orly about the construction industry could there be 

pessimism. With the dollar value of contract awards down sharply 

from a year ago, the industry's immediate future was not exactly 

bright with promise. Otherwise, however, current economic 

intelligence was decidedly encouraging. Although the dollar 

figures showed a significant expansion, the ratio of classified 

loans was more favorable than for the preceding two years. No 

major price shifts had come to his attention except in the area of 

packaging materials.



11 23/65 -46

As for the national economy, a bearish cast could be put 

on some recent economic news. For instance, it could be argued 

that next year's revision of the November 1965 McGraw-Hill plant 

and equipment spending forecast would not be anything like the 

revisions of 1964 and 1965--the reason being that this November's 

accompanying sales forecast seemed so much nore reasonable than 

those made in November 1963 and, even more, in November 1964. And 

it could be argued--on the basis of recent auto sales--that the 

industry would not do quite as well in 1966 as it did in 1965.  

Yet the fact remained that it was difficult to make the outlook 

for 1966 anything but bullish. That apparently was the most prudent 

assumption upcn which to base current decisions about monetary 

policy.  

The issue, therefore, was whether ccming quarters would 

not find business a shade too good. In that connection, the 

information about the behavior of money wages and industrial prices 

contained in the green book was encouraging. So was the staff's 

judgment that a fourth quarter increase in GNP of $10 to $12 

billion would not change the average utilization rate or, presum

ably, bring on an acceleration of the moderate price creep that 

had been experienced.  

Mr. Galusha observed that evidently no one was expecting 

an average quarter-to-quarter increase in GNP for 1966 of more



11/23/65 -47

than $12 billion. The most optimistic forecasts, which by the way 

probably did not take full account of the most recent increases 

in long-term interest rates, implied something rather less than 

this average increase. Thus, however justified the recent 

increases in interest rates were, and however justified the recent 

unwinding of "operation twist" was, further increases in rates 

might be unwarranted unless the stand was taken that an increase 

in prices, even if extremely modest and not at all likely to 

accelerate, should not be permitted.  

Nor, Mr. Galusha continued, could an increase in the 

discount rate be accepted as merely a technical adjustment. There 

was no basis, whether in theory or experience, for thinking that 

such an increase would leave open market rates unaffected. If 

there were circumstances in which that could happen, they were 

not those of today. The thought that an increase in the discount 

rate would not bring on an increase in bank loan rates--the prime 

rate included--was hardly credible. Such an increase might be 

desirable, but if so the bankers ought to be able to bring it off 

without help from a "price leader." 

Finally, Mr. Galusha said, recent developments suggested 

that financial markets now believed current rates to be maintain

able, so an increase in the discount rate no longer appeared 

"necessary," if it ever did.



11/23/65 -48

He would be less than candid, Mr. Galusha commented, if 

the impression was conveyed by his comments that he was not uneasy.  

His hunch was that the Committee was approaching a moment of truth.  

Hunches were an important part of professional decision making, 

but not until experience justified some credibility. Without that 

experience he must rely on such evidence as came to hand, and the 

evidence did not appear to warrant a significant change in policy.  

Of the expressions he had heard thus far, he was inclined toward 

those of Messrs. Ellis and Swan that within the range of the 

present directive the Committee could probably exercise adequate 

restraint, at least for the ensuing period. This would mean that 

any unusual demand, over and above that which could be predicted 

on a seasonal basis, should be dampened.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that the economic atmosphere in the 

Seventh District could be characterized as ebullient. Activity 

was at a high level and was expected to rise further. There were 

frequent reports of bids on new commercial, industrial, and public 

construction projects coming in far higher than anticipated and, 

in some cases, of a reluctance of contractors to negotiate firm 

prices. Structural steel fabricators were said to be overbooked.  

Perhaps the most significant development of recent weeks 

concerned a further tightening of labor markets despite the 

reduction in steel output. In September estimated unemployment



11/23/65 -49

rates in District States ranged from 1.3 per cent in Iowa to 2.6 

per cent in Illinois and Michigan, compared with 3.8 per cent 

(unadjusted) for the United States. Insured unemployment rates in 

the District at the beginning of November ranged from 0.7 per cent 

in Iowa to 1.2 per cent in Illinois, compared with 2.1 per cent 

for the United States. For Indiana, the District's largest 

steel-producing State, the rate was 1.1 per cent, compared to 

about 1.5 per cent a year ago. Employers were making vigorous 

attempts to recruit workers, and reports of labor pirating were 

heard frequently.  

Steel production in the Seventh District had been about 

level since the middle of October. It was believed that the next 

turn would be upward, although the uptrend would not be appreciable 

until after the turn of the year. Some selective steel price 

increases had occurred, principally affecting specialty items and 

smaller quantities sold through warehouses.  

The financial indicators confirmed the buoyant business 

conditions, Mr. Scanlon said. Although the growth of business 

loans at Seventh District banks had slowed somewhat in recent 

weeks, due primarily to repayments by durable goods manufacturers, 

the increase for the year to date remained well above all recent 

experience and slightly greater than the record increase for the 

country as a whole. After adjusting for the temporary intake of



11/23/65 -50

the new tax anticipation bills in October, District banks had 

continued to liquidate Treasury securities and gave evidence of 

becoming less aggressive in purchasing other securities. They 

continued to make less use of the discount window than in past 

periods of similar rate relationships. In the absence of a change 

in Regulation Q, reserve pressures on the banks might be expected 

to increase, culminating on the December corporate tax date when 

a large volume of CD's was scheduled to run. off.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said that, like Mr. Ellis, he 

would not want to resist a modest seasonal rise in rates by 

invoking a rigid rate objective in the coming period. He would 

defer any change in the discount rate, although he believed there 

was considerable merit in Mr. Irons' suggestion. For the immediate 

future, he favored a policy that would imply slower growth in money 

and credit and, assuming continued strengthening of credit demand, 

modestly higher interest rates.  

If market forces pressed in that direction, he would expect 

that in view of seasonal pressures the 3-month bill rate would rise 

somewhat further, perhaps as high as 4.15 or 4.20 per cent. He 

would hope that it might be possible to ride with such a policy 

during the remainder of 1965 and through the early weeks of 1966 

while observing economic developments and getting a better line on 

Federal budget prospects. He continued to feel that any considera

tion of an increase in the discount rate must be accompanied by



11/23/65 -51

consideration of an increase in the rates banks were permitted to 

pay on time deposits. While he could accept alternative B of the 

draft directives, he believed that a policy such as he favored 

could be carried out under alternative A.  

Mr. Clay commented that the national economy continued to 

expand faster than anticipated earlier and its prospective perform

ance also appeared to exceed earlier expectations. There was little 

evidence to suggest any lessening of economic activity in the months 

ahead; rather it appeared to be a question of the degree of 

advancement. Except for residential construction, activity in all 

major sectors of the economy was increasing. The scale of 

prospective Government spending, notably defense outlays, remained 

of unknown proportions, but military developrents strongly suggested 

that that factor would be expansive beyond present indications.  

The remarkable growth in the economy that had taken place 

had been accomplished in essentially an orderly fashion in terms 

of resource utilization and prices, as manpower and other resources 

generally had been available and prices had not experienced a 

marked breakthrough. With the margin of unutilized manpower and 

other resources smaller than earlier, however, prices were more 

sensitive than heretofore. Resource utilization could be expected 

to continue to grow and, despite expanding resources, the margin 

of unutilized resources probably would narrow still further in the 

months ahead.



11/23/65 -52

As the shape of those forces would have to await further 

developments, Mr. Clay felt that monetary policy could justifiably 

continue essentially unchanged for the present in terms of money 

market conditions and reserve availability on a seasonally adjusted 

basis. Looking further ahead, there was ample reason to wonder 

whether money and capital market developments might not make the 

present discount rate and the current degree of reserve availability 

incompatible. In that event the Committee would need to choose 

between higher money market rates with current reserve availability, 

the present level of money market rates with increased reserve 

availability, or some other combination of those alternatives.  

Mr. Clay thought the decision would have to be made on the 

basis of the economic situation then existing, so as to facilitate 

potential economic growth within an orderly framework. It was 

likely that the appropriate course of action would depend on the 

impact of Government defense spending on the economy. Defense 

spending had been a significant force in the economy for several 

months. Should the scale of that program be materially increased, 

the economy's balanced economic growth might be seriously disturbed.  

Alternative A of the draft directives appeared to Mr. Clay 

satisfactory at this time, and he did not think that a change 

should be made in the discount rate.



11/23/65 -53

Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business continued 

to improve and showed evidence of acceleration in some sectors.  

Not a single respondent in the Richmond Bank's latest survey 

expected business to decline in the near future. Manufacturers 

in the survey reported increases in orders and shipments, and about 

one-third reported higher wages and prices. The textile industry 

had experienced a resurgence of new orders following passage of 

the farm bill. Labor markets appeared to be tightening across the 

board. Shortages had become especially acute in the coal industry, 

causing some recent cutbacks in scheduled deliveries to utilities, 

and one coal producer reported that some contracts for spring 

deliveries included price increases of 15 to 25 cents per ton.  

Meanwhile, the national economy continued to show moderate 

gains from high levels of activity. Substantially all of the 

changes in October were favorable, indicating that the effects of 

lower steel production were more than offset by strength in other 

sectors of the economy. Additional reports of labor scarcity and 

the rise of overtime in manufacturing in October indicated that 

the pressure on manpower was rising. The production of business 

equipment continued to follow a spectacular course and to pull 

farther and farther ahead of the production of consumer goods.  

Since December of last year the production of equipment had risen 

nearly five times as fast as the production of consumer goods.



11/23/65 -54

With the prospect of high and rising outlays on equipment next year, 

it would seem that there was a real possibility of a serious 

imbalance between productive capacity and the output of consumer 

goods.  

In the international area, Mr. Wayne continued, the threat 

to sterling now appeared less acute than at any time in recent 

months. Some of the recent improvement had come, however, at a 

cost to the U.S. balance of payments. Estimates of the deficit 

since July were especially discouraging in view of the fact that 

the deficit was experienced despite the voluntary credit restraint 

program and the interest equalization tax.  

There were some indications that the seasonal demand for 

credit for the remainder of the year might not be as great as 

expected earlier. If this was correct, the Committee might be able 

to get by for the rest of the year without further measures of 

restraint. In Mr. Wayne's judgment, that was greatly to be desired 

if it was feasible, since any substantial firming would require 

action on the discount rate and bring additional pressure for an 

increase in Regulation Q ceilings. He did not think that the System 

should resort at this time to an overt action, such as an increase 

of 1/2 per cent in the discount rate, designed to produce a sharp 

impact on expectations.



11/23/65 -55

Mr. Wayne felt the Committee had limited room for maneuver.  

It would not appear that the Committee could seriously consider any 

easing of credit. On the other side, any substantial tightening 

would intensify several very thorny problems. Discounting would 

increase and many banks might face a shortage of Governments to 

use as collateral. The market would anticipate an increase in the 

discount rate and general increases in prevailing rates would make 

it difficult to avoid such a move. The most immediate effect of 

higher market rates would be to endanger the CD position of money 

market banks and probably precipitate a drop in the long-term 

markets. The raising of Regulaticn Q ceilings would not be an 

adequate solution to the problem since such a move in itself would 

promote bearish expectations. In brief, any significant move 

toward firmer credit would carry a strong implication that the 

discount rate would be raised soon, and he was not ready to take 

that step yet. His preference would be to continue present policy, 

and he fo nd draft alternative A acceptable as a directive.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

The last three weeks have provided us with more 

confirming evidence that we should go no further in 

tightening monetary policy at this juncture.  
On the price front, the gradual upcreep in the 

general industrial commodity index has slowed down, and 
certainly the latest aluminum and copper price rollbacks-
whatever their broader social implications--will give a 
little more pause to any other administered price 
increases that might have been in the offing.



11/23/65

In financial markets, conditions also seem a little 
better balanced. Perhaps the most constructive thing 
that has happened is that market expectations of an 
imminent discount rate increase have been quieted some
what. In this calmer atmosphere, funds seem to be 
flowing fairly well through both the money and bond 
markets. I see no evidence of any "knots" that need 
untying by official action.  

In the next few weeks the seasonal pressures in the 
money market will mount to their usual annual peak. If 
feasible, I would like to avoid allowing such technical 
pressures to force us into a basic change of monetary 
policy that might more appropriately wait until the 
impact of next year's Federal budget can be judged.  
Some bankers have been insisting that something must be 
done to resolve interest rate and Regulation Q ceiling 
questions before the December squeeze, but I think the 
availability of the Federal Reserve discount window and 
the Board's capability of revising pertinent Regulation 
Q provisions quickly, if necessary, combine to give any 
well-run bank all the safety valves it ought to need 
for this period. This particular CD squeeze does not 
seem to me to be the kind of development that should be 
dealt with by general monetary policy. That, I maintain, 
should be addressed to the broad performance of the 
economy, which I regard as too strong to warrant any 
easing, but not yet so clearly inflationary as to call 
for further tightening.  

Our directions to the Manager, therefore, should be 
to walk a tightrope between now and year end, keeping 
money market rates as a group from either rising or 
falling significantly, and letting net borrowed reserves 
move where necessary in order to preserve such a money 
market tone. I would vote in favor of alternative A of 
the draft directives submitted by the staff, and would 
hope the Manager would interpret it in the same way as 
he interpreted the similar directive over the three 
weeks just past. My views on the discount rate are 
already known to the Committee from my comments at the 
last meeting, and I have had no reason to change them.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that every available indication 

pointed toward a strengthening economy. Not only were people 

talking about good business the rest of this year and in 1966 but

-56-



11/23/65 -57

some recent statements projected a continuing rise in 1967. He 

thought there was clear evidence of increasing over-expectations, 

and that the rate of money growth and credit expansion was clearly 

beyond sustainable levels. The Committee had spoken for some time 

in its directives about a moderate growth, but it did not seem to 

him that the present rate of expansion could be defined as moderate.  

There was concern about what the Federal budget would be, 

Mr. Shepardson noted. He had no knowledge of what it would be, 

except that programs already inaugurated were inevitably going to 

call for more spending. As far as military expenditures were 

concerned, it seemed inconceivable that with the type of conflict 

the country was going into those expenditures would not pick up 

significantly.  

The reports around the table, Mr. Shepardson pointed out, 

all indicated an increasing shortage of labor, and that was bound 

to bring pressure. Notwithstanding the position being taken by 

the Administration on certain selected prices, the general pressure 

of demand on prices would be inevitable. He found it difficult to 

accept the approach of waiting until the horse was out of the barn 

before locking the door. Once prices went up, they could hardly 

be gotten back down. Higher prices would not improve the balance 

of payments situation, nor would they improve the prospect of 

long-run economic growth.



11/23/65 -58

It seemed to Mr. Shepardson that all indicators showed 

sufficient strength in the economy to withstand some restraint.  

The Committee had been putting off such action until everyone could 

point to clear evidence in the figures as to what had happened.  

Personally, he thought it was time to let up on the gas pedal and 

put on the brakes; in other words, it was time to be moving toward 

a little more restraint. He was aware of the seasonal demands and 

would want to neet them, but he would meet them reluctantly, with 

the result that there might be some increase in negative free 

reserves to between $150-$200 million. If seasonal demands were 

as strong as appeared likely, this probably would result in some 

further pressure on the discount rate, and he would expect a move 

on the discount rate to be called for in the near future. When it 

came to the change in the rate, he did not think an increase of 

1/4 per cent would settle the matter. If the System was going to 

move, it might just as well move the rate up 1/2 per cent and give 

itself leeway to operate for some time into the future.  

Mr. Shepardson favored alternative B of the draft directives.  

He believed that the Committee should try to check the pace of 

monetary expansion a little if it meant what it said about promoting 

sustainable growth. He also felt that the System should be 

prepared for a discount rate increase in the near future.  

Mr. Mitchell said the economy was performing better than 

he had expected it would at this point, and as well as he had hoped.



11/23/65 -59

The possibility of a downturn due to the effects of the steel 

adjustment. seemed to have been removed. His general views about 

the economy were quite well summarized in the chart show.  

At the moment, Mr. Mitchell did not see a threat to 

stability in the present and prospective rates of resource utiliza

tion. Therefore, he saw no basic reason for any further firming 

action on the part of the Committee at this time. Possibly there 

would be some disclosure when the Federal budget was presented 

that would provide a clue for action, but in the meantime he would 

supply reserves adequately and ungrudgingly to cover seasonal 

requirements reasonably related to the present level of GNP. He 

hoped that this course would be adequate to get through the rest of 

the year.  

Mr. Mitchell said the requirement from the standpoint of 

the balance of payments was to contain inflation within the U.S.  

More should not be expected from monetary policy. If it was 

necessary to go beyond that, selective easures should be used; 

he would not want to take measures that would restrict the domestic 

economy generally. It seemed to him the information in the chart 

show suggested quite persuasively that the price rises that had 

taken place were not pervasive. They were not the type that 

resulted from excessive demand. For those who were worried about 

the money supply growth, he would point out that this year there



11/23/65 -60

had been no change in turnover in New York, and little change in 

the other six main money centers. In this situation there was only 

one change that could occur--the money supply had to grow.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed with Mr. Hayes that the rate pattern 

had been distorted for some time. He hoped that before too long 

these distortions could be more or less unraveled. But he would 

not like to see this done in a period when there were seasonal 

pressures on the whole rate structure. The Committee had lived 

with the distortions for a long time, and he hoped in the year 

ahead something could be done, but not right now. For that reason 

he would reject Mr. Irons' proposal, although he found it quite 

attractive in a way. Perhaps something of that kind should be 

done in January, if the Committee did not find it necessary to do 

something else, but he would reject such a course of action at this 

point, largely for the reasons Mr. Galusha had advanced.  

Mr. Mitchell favored alternative A of the draft directives 

but propos d certain language changes. At the beginning of the 

first paragraph, he would say: "The economic and financial devel

opments reviewed at this meeting indicate that over-all domestic 

economic activity is continuing a rate of expansion comparable to 

that of the third quarter despite the contractive effect of a 

reduction in steel inventories. Business sentiment continues 

optimistic and financial resources are in shorter supply," This



11/23/65 -61

would call attention to the fact that the contractive effect of the 

steel inventory adjustment had been absorbed and the economy 

continued to grow at the same rate as before.  

Mr. Daane commented that three weeks ago he was pretty well 

convinced that once the Treasury financing was out of the way the 

time had come for an overt move in System polLcy involving a change 

of 1/2 per cent in the discount rate and in Regulation Q ceilings 

coupled with some cushioning of the move, similar to last November, 

in terms of somewhat greater reserve availability initially.  

His view had been premised on both economic and financial 

grounds. From the standpoint of the economy, the System had for 

several years been following--in his judgment appropriately--a 

relatively easy, or more or less passively accommodative, policy 

in order to provide the needed credit stimulus or support to 

increasing aggregate demand in the interest of achieving full 

employment and a sustainable expansion within the framework of 

relative price stability.  

On the resource utilization side, and specifically the 

employment side--or more accurately the unemployment side-

Mr. Daane now felt that, as had been publicly acknowledged by top 

Labor Department officials, the country was down to the hard core 

unemployment, or a composition of unemployment that might be 

relatively impervious to additions to total aggregate demand.



11/23/65 -62

Further credit-stimulated additions to demand in current circumstances 

of close to capacity operation in terms of utilization of resources 

must inevitably risk accelerating a price upcreep--perhaps even 

upsweep--that he sensed was already in process.  

Continuance of a no-change System policy risked overstimula

ting an investment boom rather than containing it in the interest of 

continuing a sustainable expansion. On that score, in reading the 

green book and in following the chart show this mornirg, he again 

was particularly impressed by three points which seemed to him to 

be central to a diagnosis of the present situation. First, business 

fixed investment plans for 1966, which were already buoyant, at 8 

per cent above 1965, were practically certain to be revised upward 

if the general expansion continued. Second, if business investment 

outlays rose considerably faster than they were now projected to 

rise, there would likely be fairly severe pressures on capacity in 

the machinery industries. And third, if GNP rose much faster than 

it was now projected to rise, the "selectivity" that had been 

characterizing price increases might begin to disappear, if it was 

not already disappearing.  

At some time further ahead--Mr. Daane hoped a long time 

ahead--the risks and dangers of a downturn in business investment 

were bound to be serious. And the severity of the problem at that 

time would depend directly on the degree of disproportion that had



11/23/65 -63

been allowed to develop in the meantime between the rate of growth 

of capital expenditures and the general rate of growth of the 

economy. The degree of ease in monetary and credit policy would 

certainly be a major determining factor.  

Parallel to the need for restraining credit expansion so 

as to help avoid an unsustainable acceleration in business 

investment, restraint was needed to damp down the growth in 

consumer expenditures financed by credit. Here again the need was 

for maintaining reasonable balance in the economy, and reasonable 

sustainability of rates of increase in the various flows of 

expenditure.  

Above all, Mr. Daane said, it was necessary to restrain 

credit expansion so as to retain a reasonable degree of price 

stability. Whatever set of theories of linkages between credit or 

money and prices one might prefer, the present and prospective 

situation was certainly one in which too much ease would be likely 

to contribute, directly or indirectly, to upward pressures on 

prices. And if prices were to begin rising in a less selective 

manner than apparent up to now, the price rise in turn would feed 

the bullishness of the economy, stimulate protective inventory 

investment, and accelerate capital outlays--in short, lead into a 

classical boom completely unlike the steady well-balanced 

expansion that had existed for nearly five years now.



11/23/65 -64

Last, but by no means least, on Mr. Daane's list of economic 

reasons for a System policy change was the deterioration in the U.S.  

balance of payments, which was not entirely papered over by changing 

definitions and strenuous Governmental efforts to achieve postpone

ment of some scheduled outflows into next year's statistics. While 

the effect of a policy change might not produce immediately 

beneficial effects, it would clearly over time be supportive of the 

current efforts. Most importantly, it would contribute to the 

relative price stability essential to the eventual resolution of 

the balance of payments problem.  

In sum, the case on economic grounds for a discount rate 

increase this December appeared to Mr. Daane to rest on the 

following: 

1. Persisting gradual upward price pressures--with 
the wholesale price index rising at an annual rate of 
1 per cent. since June, following a 2 per cent rate of 
rise over the previous 9 months.  

2. Continuing rapid expansion of business fixed 
investment at a pace disproportionate to the rise in 
final products--in the past 10 months, business equip
ment production was up 10 per cent; consumer goods 
production up 2 per cent.  

3. A shrinking margin of unused resources--average 
manufacturing output at 90 per cent of capacity (and 
more in lines other than steel) and unemployment down 
to 2.9 per cent of adult males, with signs of a 
beginning slowdown of productivity and rise in unit 
labor cost.  

4. A persisting balance of payments deficit--at 
roughly a $400 million per quarter rate on a regular 
transactions basis.



11/23/65

On the financial side, Mr. Daane said that three weeks ago 

he found the case for a change even more compelling. Both the 

demand and supply of funds seemed to be distorted by the contin

uance of relatively fixed rates in the banking sector and by the 

Committee's policy of seemingly resisting market forces in the 

interest of Treasury financing considerations. Today, financial 

developments still supplied support for a rate increase, although 

perhaps somewhat less support than a few weeks ago: 

1. Credit demands were large and growing, especially 
business demands for external financing partly to pay 
for disproportionate expenditures on fixed investment.  

2. Despite big business capital market flotations, 
and some bank efforts to push more borrowers into the 

capital markets, a stable 4-1/2 per cent prime loan rate 
kept drawing in business loan demands. To the extent 
that resultant demands taxed bank resources, resultant 
rationing actions pressed most against newer and smaller 
borrowers.  

3. Seasonal pressures would be pushing up bill 
rates between now and mid-December--perhaps to in the 
neighborhood of 4.15 per cent on the 3-month bill. An 
accompanying seasonal tightening of other rates would 
increase pressures on discount administration and might 
trigger new disturbing uncertainties concerning discount 
rate action.  

4. Higher short-term market rates would squeeze 
hard on bank ability to sell CD's to replace big December 
maturities. Such maturities were by now probably as big 
as September, when the post-tax-date squeeze pinched 
banks for several weeks and led to sharp rate run-ups.  

5. Prime-name banks were already being led to 
merchandise promissory notes at shorter maturities and 
higher interest rates than allowable on CD's under 
Regulation Q. Unless Q ceilings were raised, promissory 
note issuance was likely to balloon in December, pushing 
up rates and complicating the Treasury's intended turn
of-year bill financing. If promissory notes were 
redefined as deposits to halt Regulation Q avoidance,

-65-



11/23/65 -66

Q ceilings would have to be raised to give banks relief, 
and this would trigger renewed strong expectations of a 
discount rate increase--expectations that could inhibit 
market flows.  

6. Higher interest rates could increase market 
capacity to handle flows, as had happened in the cor
porate market in the past two weeks. A higher discount 
rate could clear the air and improve the reception for 
unexpectedly large Treasury financing needs in January.  
That would be particularly true if at the same time 
open market operations reduced somewhat the need for 
member banks to borrow.  

While Mr. Daane still felt the case could be made along the 

lines he had indicated, he was today less certain about the timing 

and sequence of System actions. It seemed to him the market was 

now poised precariously, having been buffetec by oral suasion and 

shifting expectations to the point where an overt move in the form 

of a discount rate change might set off a chain of over-reactions 

that could go far beyond the sort of modest tightening he had had 

in mind.  

Thus, where he came out was that the Committee faced a 

choice of two courses. First, it could move back on net borrowed 

reserves to the high side of the $150 million mark and accept, not 

resist, market forces that in all likelihood would produce somewhat 

higher rates in the days and weeks ahead. Under that course he 

would at that point consider a change in the discount rate. To be 

specific, following that particular course at this juncture argued 

that it would be better for the System to follow than to lead the 

market. The alternative course was to go ahead with an overt move



11/23/65 -67

on the discount rate as quickly as possible, with the cushioning 

action on reserves he had already suggested. Those two courses 

might not really be far apart in point of time, but his own 

preference would be, he believed, to follow rather than lead the 

market.  

On the directive, Mr. Daane said that while philosophically 

he would favor alternative B of the draft directives, he could live 

with alternative A, provided somewhat firmer market conditions 

were restored along the lines he had advocated.  

Mr. Maisel said he disagreed strongly with the first and 

last parts of Mr. Daane's analysis. He did, however, agree that 

there was a major problem in the likelihood of market over-reaction.  

He was pleased to see the feeling of both the Account Manager and 

the staff that this was a period of balance both in the economy 

and in the credit markets. The present situation was dangerous 

and worrisome because the economy was balanced at a high level of 

employment and output, but it was a ve-y satisfactory level and 

one that he hoped could be maintained.  

He did feel, Mr. Maisel continued, that a real danger of 

a sudden change in sentiment existed as a result of a misreading 

of the Committee's intent. This would cause the markets to react 

far more than anyone considered desirable.



11/23/65 -68

It was fortunate at this time that a balance existed and 

that the Committee had an opportunity to wait and see. No change 

in policy was required. The main pressures appeared to be off 

with respect to the price-wage situation. The rising rate of 

increases in industrial commodity prices had slackened off. There 

was no indication of any acceleration of growth in the near term 

that would lead to a deterioration in wages or prices.  

Even more important, Mr. Maisel added, was the fact that 

the country was now in the midst of a national emergency or war.  

Major industries had been asked, with no uncertainty in the request, 

to hold the price line. Without far stronger reasons than existed, 

a move on the System's part at this time to help raise the price 

of the major commodity it influenced--money--would be taken as a 

sign that banks wanted to opt out of the national effort and that 

the System approved of such action. This would directly contravene 

the Administration's request to labor, industry, and the banks to 

hold the line.  

It seemed desirable to him to hold to present policy based 

on the actual price-wage situation, the national effort, and the 

need to maintain the present level in expectations and sentiment.  

The Manager should completely meet seasonal needs as they worked 

out in the market.  

Mr. Maisel concluded by saying that he opposed a discount



11/23/65 -69

rate change and that he supported alternative A of the draft 

directives.  

Mr. Hickman said it seemed to him the Committee had little 

room to maneuver, even if it wanted to, insofar as policy action 

today was concerned. With the last Treasury financing of the year 

still in progress, it would be highly disruptive to change policy 

at this time, particularly since the new tax bills would have to 

be redistributed by the banks and dealers. Moreover, financial 

markets contirued to be unstable, with the market for U.S. Govern

ment securities still highly sensitive to rumors and expectations.  

So far as commodity prices were concerned, Mr. Hickman 

felt that the chance of serious price inflation was now greater 

than at any time in the past four years. Bit it could not be 

known that this would happen. For one thing, the standard price 

indexes, while drifting upward, had still not accelerated. For 

another, the increased capacity now coming on stream and the 

increase in the civilian labor force (barring unexpected draft 

calls) should reduce the likelihood of price inflation.  

Insofar as overheating was concerned, Mr. Hickman believed 

the key question was the Federal budget. The normal revenue throw

off from an expanding GNP would permit a noninflationary rise in 

Federal spending for defense and the Great Society on the order of 

$5-$7 billion. On the other hand, a budgeted increase on a GNP



11/23/65 -70

basis much beyond that would clearly be inflationary and should be 

offset by tighter money.  

Even aside from the Treasury's current financing program, 

the situation thus came down to a matter of strategy and timing.  

With the budget now being drafted, the possibility of tighter money, 

and the assumed consequences, might be a major inducement to holding 

the Federal budget to a sustainable noninflationary level. As a 

matter of fact, he suspected that in this period of final budget 

decisions the fear of tighter money was a more effective policy 

instrument than the actuality would be.  

Mr. Hickman therefore recommended no change in policy at 

this time, no change in the discount rate, and no change in Regula

tion Q. There were all sorts of technical problems to be handled 

between now and the next meeting. In dealing with them he hoped 

that the Manager would resolve doubts on the side of ease. He 

hoped also that the Manager would supply reserves through open 

market purchases whenever feasible rather than through repurchase 

agreements. Be favored alternative A of the draft directives, 

amended along the lines suggested by Mr. Mitchell.  

Mr. Bopp recalled having noted three weeks ago that it was 

becoming increasingly difficult for him to determine the appropriate 

stance for policy. Events since then and the outlook for the future 

certainly did not make the determination any easier.



11/23/65 -71

Although the upcreep in prices had slowed and capacity 

limitations still did not appear to block further gains in output, 

many forecasts now emerging suggested a growth rate that could move 

the economy very close to full employment levels as 1966 unfolded.  

Before considering how monetary policy should react, however, it 

was necessary to recognize that the System was operating in a new 

environment of monetary, fiscal, and wage-price constraints. At 

present it was difficult to forecast how business would react to 

the more vigorous action on the guideposts and hence to determine 

precisely how monetary policy would fit into the new over-all mix 

of public policy.  

Moreover, Mr. Bopp continued, the tining of any policy move 

must be weighed carefully. Financial markets were now under consid

erable pressure. In order to gain some insight into developing 

pressures, the Philadelphia Bank had taken a look at corporate 

sources and uses of funds and held discussions with treasurers of 

several large corporations in the Third District. In general, it 

was found that pressures prevailing in the corporate sector stemmed 

primarily from: (a) the normal seasonal increase in bond offerings 

at this time of year, (b) that increase superimposed upon a cyclical 

uptrend in credit demand, and (c) some marginal pressures resulting 

from anticipatory borrowing by firms which hoped thereby to assure 

availability of funds and avoid possible higher interest rates in 

the early months of 1966.



11/23/65 -72

An examination of data on investment spending and cash flow 

in manufacturing suggested that, while investment spending tended 

to peak in the second and fourth quarters of the year, internally 

generated funds tended to be at a low ebb during these quarters, 

creating a seasonal squeeze on cash positions. Moreover, the squeeze 

currently coincided with what appeared to be a cyclical decline in 

the ratio of internally generated funds to total investment spending, 

creating further pressures for outside financing.  

Those pressures were confirmed by many of the treasurers 

with whom he and his associates talked, Mr. Bopp said, individuals 

representing industries ranging from oils, chemicals, and instruments 

to steel, construction, public utilities, and transportation equip

ment. Well over half of the treasurers stated that internally 

generated funds were insufficent to meet current and projected 

spending plans and reported increased reliance on external financing.  

They reported that their needs for current and projected financing 

were primarily to meet firm spending commitments, though some 

suggested they were feeling pressure to acquire external funds now 

in anticipation of higher interest rates next year.  

As Mr. Bopp saw conditions in financial markets, and as he 

appraised the new environment in which monetary policy must operate, 

he felt that this was not the time to tighten further. Also, 

considering tnat the first quarter of 1966 might be less buoyant



11/23/65 -73

than some expected (with continuing steel inventory runoff, the 

social security tax bite, and a leveling in auto sales), he would 

be inclined to wait until seasonal pressures passed and a clearer 

outline of 1966 emerged before deciding whether additional 

monetary restraint was called for. He favored alternative A of 

the draft directives, with Mr. Mitchell's suggested modification.  

Mr. Patterson said the Atlanta Reserve Bank's tabulation 

of announcements of new and expanded manufacturing plants indicated 

that half way through the fourth quarter the announcements of 

investments in that part of the country were already approaching 

the record third-quarter volume. This would fit in with the 

national McGraw-Hill findings, although the two series obviously 

were not comparable.  

Having talked with some of the Sixth District's leading 

bankers, Mr. Patterson was more than ever convinced that liquidity 

had much deteriorated for banks generally, although he would agree 

that a bank-by-bank analysis was nece sary to determine over-all 

liquidity. District banks were relying on Federal funds more than 

ever. But there were limits to that supply, and some banks were 

becoming increasingly worried about what would happen if they had 

to tap that source simultaneously. Some Atlanta banks had started 

to issue small amounts of unsecured notes, primarily to test the 

market. With loan demand showing no signs of letting up and



11/23/65 -74

Governments being used for collateral rather than liquidity 

purposes, Mr. Patterson had the uneasy feeling that banks were 

looking to the discount window as their source of liquidity.  

Resort to the discount window obviously should not be the banks' 

principal line of orotection, and it was restricted in any case 

by the fact that banks held limited amounts of eligible assets.  

As bankers generally woke up to that state of affairs, he would 

expect them to react by restricting any rapid loan expansion.  

Anticipating such self-tightening--which might already be 

taking place if changes in interest rates were any indication-

Mr. Patterson believed that the System should not tighten its 

reins, at least for the time being. He would adopt alternative A 

of the draft directives.  

Mr. Patterson added that, as he had already noted, some of 

the Sixth District's banks--cramped by the ceiling on CD rates-

were beginning to solicit funds in a way that he considered 

subterfue. Would it not be preferable, he asked, to allow banks 

to compete freely for time deposits? Personally, he would favor 

lifting the time deposit rate ceiling. And if that were done, he 

would be prepared to support some compensating open market 

operations and a technical change in the discount rate, because it 

was known from previous experience that a change in Regulation Q 

might lead to an acceleration in deposit expansion, which he would



11/23/65 -75

consider unwarranted in the present economic climate. In terms of 

timing, he would be guided by those closer to the problems of the 

Treasury.  

Mr. Shuford commented that the economy had passed through 

the steel inventory adjustment with business activity in general 

continuing to expand at a rapid pace. Industrial production, 

employment, and retail sales rose from September to October, 

maintaining the rapid rates of expansion that had prevailed since 

a year ago.  

The recent rise in business activity appeared to be broadly 

based. Strength in business equipment and defense industries and 

in some consumer lines contributed to a high level of output and 

employment during the recent period of steel inventory adjustment.  

There had also been substantial increases of employment in trade, 

service, and State and local government. Now that the decline in 

steel output had halted, that sector of the economy should give 

added impetus to the present advance in business activity.  

Fiscal and monetary developments had contributed to the 

current expansion, Mr. Shuford noted. The full employment budget 

surplus fell to about zero in the third quarter, and was expected 

to remain at that level in the fourth quarter. The surplus 

averaged $4.8 billion in 1964 and was running at a $6.7 billion 

annual rate in the first half of 1965. The money supply had



11/23/65 -76

increased at a rapid 6.4 per cent rate since July and had risen 

4.3 per cent over the past year. Both of those rates were high by 

historical standards.  

Mr. Shuford thought the economy might be approaching the 

point where such a rapid expansion in aggregate demand as was 

occurring would result in less increase in real product and more 

price rises. The limiting factor might be labor resources rather 

than industrial plant capacity. The over-all unemployment rate 

now stood at 4.3 per cent and the rate for married men at 2.1 per 

cent; both rates were significantly lower than a year ago.  

Furthermore, expanded draft calls and increased college attendance 

would continue to impinge on the available supply of young workers.  

That group was among the most mobile of labor force participants 

and would normally be utilized in areas of labor shortages.  

In Mr. Shuford's appraisal, prices had risen significantly 

during the past year. In view of the continued rapid increase in 

aggregate demand and a possible limit on the ability of production 

to match such an expansion, price increases might accelerate.  

There was a great deal of official concern with price increases, 

and that concern seemed to him to be well taken. But he was 

puzzled that the treatment most discussed and followed was 

administrative control.



11/23/65

It seemed to him the Committee should bear in mind that 

the economy had achieved advances in output and employment, at the 

expense of some price increases, through increasing total demand 

by means of fiscal and monetary stimulation. Whenever prices were 

rising as a result of market forces, that probably meant that 

total demand had been pushed up too rapidly and that containment 

of prices should depend primarily on some cutting back of demand 

by fiscal and monetary measures.  

Taking into consideration the strength in total demand, 

which was exerting upward pressure on prices, as well as an apparent 

escalation of the U.S. commitment in Vietnam, which might add 

further to total demand, Mr. Shuford thought a tightening in mon

etary policy was desirable. He was not sure how this could best 

be accomlished. The problem of timing was always of concern, but 

he was persuaded that action should be taken promptly to raise the 

discount rate. He had been thinking in terms of a 1/2 per cent 

increase, but the analysis by Mr. Irons had much to support it.  

It seemed to him that a little further discussion on that score 

might be needed, and perhaps additional discussion on the matter 

of timing. But it occurred to him that hardly ever was a 

completely desirable time found for a move of this kind. He was 

not sure it would be any easier to reach a decision in January 

than in December. Since it was his opinion that action was needed,

-77-



11/23/65 -78

he would favor moving without undue delay sometime in the first 

part of December.  

Mr. Balderston commented that he thought the Committee was 

approaching a time of decision, which pleased him because of his 

belief that continued adherence to the status quo--in itself a 

decision of sorts--could lead to real trouble.  

U.S. exports were still insufficient, even when supplemented 

by the return on foreign loans and investments, to cover U.S.  

outlays abroad, Mr. Balderston observed. The Government had failed 

to exert enough restraint upon its foreign spending (partly because 

it was embroiled in war) and U.S. corporations had not curbed 

sufficiently their direct foreign investing for equilibrium to be 

restored.  

Clearly, U.S. export prices would have been even more 

competitive if more of U.S. gains in productivity had been applied 

to price reduction. Failure to restrain bank credit was frequently 

defended on the ground that wholesale prices had not risen very 

much, so efforts to prevent further advances would be premature.  

The point was that with magnificent productivity gains the nation 

had had the choice between wage advances and price reductions. If 

prices had fallen, U.S. export competitiveness would more nearly 

match U.S. political and military needs in foreign places. But 

failure to export enough caused dollar claims to accumulate month



11/23/65 -79

after month in foreign hands, and in sufficient volume to embarrass 

the U.S. Despite selective controls and a plethora of promises, 

the loss of gold continued. It seemed imperative that ebullience 

not be permitted to boost prices and lose the competitive gains 

of the past few years.  

Mr. Balderston's second point had to do with interest rate 

distortions and bank illiquidity. The distorted interest rate 

structure of the moment reflected the fact that the administered 

lending rates of banks were out of tune with the increased rates 

on open market paper. That distortion was pointed up by the acute 

pressure upon rates within the range, rough.y, of 3 months to 

3 years. Because the rate structure was out of balance, there 

were troublesone distortions in flows of funds and uses of finan

cial instruments. Those included increasing bank reliance on 

high-rate promissory notes to raise funds because such notes 

circumvented the Regulation Q ceiling. This accentuated the 

problems of bank supervision because, on those notes, banks 

neither observed reserve requirements nor adhered to the rate 

ceiling.  

Because banks had retained the 4-1/2 per cent prime rate 

as other interest rates rose, it had become a cut rate and had 

attracted business that otherwise would have gone to the capital 

markets. That additional business had come from large corporations



11/23/65 -80

whose loan applications could not easily be turned down by banks 

on whose boards the heads of such corporations sat. Therefore, 

such credit restriction as banks had introduced tended to fall upon 

small and medium-sized concerns. Although banks would not admit 

to doing much credit rationing as yet, commercial finance companies 

reported increased applications from smaller businesses that 

claimed to have been discouraged at their banks.  

The therapeutic action required to straighten out the 

unfortunate rate structure of the moment might well be an increase 

in the discount rate accompanied by a similar increase in Regula

tion Q ceilings. Mr. Balderston's concern about a 4-1/4 per cent 

discount rate, which on technical grounds might be defended, was 

that the market would be waiting for the other shoe to drop. Also, 

friends of the U.S. abroad, who had been hoping for many months 

to see strong, definite action taken by the monetary authorities, 

perhaps would be disappointed.  

Mr. Balderston recalled that at the meeting of the Committee 

on October 12 he sought to state the case for re-examining current 

monetary policy. Among the points he had made at that time were 

the following: Wage pressures, combined with Government spending 

for war and welfare activities, suggested to businessmen that things 

would cost more later on. In addition, business forecasts for the 

coming year were favorable. As a result of those rising



11/23/65 -81

expectations, both actual and projected plant investment volumes 

were strong. Thus business loan activity had been exceptionally 

heavy throughout the year, even though the current annual rate of 

increase in business loans was only one-half of the 20 per cent 

rate of increase for the first nine months, because long-term 

credit demands had been diverted from the open market to the banks.  

The bind in which the bankers now found themselves would 

not have been so tight, Mr. Balderston commented, if the bankers 

had had the courage to utilize the pricing mechanism in guiding 

or forcing customers to secure their funds through channels 

appropriate to the use of the funds. But that did not happen, and 

now the Federal Reserve in its supervisory capacity faced the 

responsibility of remedying the chaotic rate structure. System 

action would have been more effective at on earlier date. But 

there had been a succession of Treasury financings, and it was 

probably better to act late than never. If the System acted--and 

there was not much time left before the next Treasury financing 

operation--the appropriate open market policy probably would be 

represented by alternative A of the draft directives. If the 

System did not act with respect to the discount rate and Regula

tion Q, then he would favor some other polic .  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that the bulk of the criticism 

he had read of System policy over the past 10 years was to the



11/23/65 -82

effect that the System usually moved too late. It was said that 

the System could not arrive quickly enough at a decision. It was 

too late to tighten, when tightening was appropriate, and too late 

to ease when that was appropriate. This, in his opinion, was one 

of the problems with which the System had to deal.  

Chairman Martin commented that over the past two years he 

had been proud to preside over the Federal Reserve System because, 

despite continuing differences of opinion, the debates had been 

on a consistently high level. Having said this, he would also 

say that he considered it unfortunate that the System had been 

divided and cntinued to be divided. He had always felt that when 

the System was united it occupied a strong position within the 

ranks of the Government. When divided, the System was in a less 

strong position.  

As long as a high level of unemployment prevailed and 

resource utilization was clearly below any reasonable level, he 

did not think there was too much trouble in debating the "easy 

money" and the "not-so-easy money" schools of thought, and that 

was fundamentally what the debate had been about over most of the 

past two years. The "easy money" school had thought that some 

moves the Committee made were mistakes, when the Committee made 

them, and he respected that view.



11/23/65 -83

But, Chairman Martin said, he wanted to make his own point 

of view clear this morning. He thought the time for decision had 

arrived, and he wanted the record to reflect his opinion that it 

was not possible to run away continually from making a decision.  

It could be debated at length whether a situation of full 

employment existed and whether the resource utilization level was 

entirely adequate. It could also be debated whether a monetary 

policy move at this juncture would have any impact from the 

balance of payments standpoint. He happened to think that it 

would, and he had thought so for a good while, but this was 

certainly a debatable point. But to revert to the paper he had 

read at the October 12 meeting--and had discussed at high levels-

he thought the financial problem was acute when conditions reached 

a point where, regardless of the decisions made by the Open Market 

Committee, it was necessary to support a Treasury financing 

operation in order to make it successful. While there might be 

some who would disagree with him, he did not think there was any 

doubt that except for official purchases for Treasury accounts 

and except for System support the latest offering of the Treasury 

would not have been successful.  

Talk about market expectations, Chairman Martin noted, 

could work both ways. In the market today the expectations were 

just as much that the President would not allow any interest rate



11/23/65 -84

changes as to the contrary. That created a very real problem. The 

Treasury expected to announce another financing on the 16th of 

December. Therefore, if the System was going to make any move now, 

it must do so before that time. He did think, however, that this 

week would be too early.  

When it came to what to do, the Chairman remarked, there 

was clearly a difference of judgment around the table. Mr. Galusha 

had said that he was a bit uneasy, and he (Chairman Martin) also 

was uneasy. One could not know what construction would be placed 

on any move on the part of the System. In his own mind, there was 

no question about the strength of the economy. But there were all 

sorts of philosophies about how to handle the situation. There 

was the question of selective controls versus general controls.  

When one moved into a period like the present, a tendency developed 

for people to say they agreed on the need for some action, but to 

add that the problem should be handled entirely by selective 

controls. Nevertheless, the System did not have selective controls 

at its disposal, and whether one favored their use or not they were 

not likely to be available fast enough to be of any value. If the 

System waited until mid-January, and if the budget turned out as 

he thought it would, he believed it would be too late for monetary 

policy to have any effect on the course of events. There was quite 

a difference, admittedly, between interest rates and steel,



11/23/65 -85

aluminum, or copper prices. But without arguing the wisdom, or 

lack of wisdom, on the part of the Administration in rolling back 

aluminum or copper prices, he thought that if one were going to 

roll back those prices because of a fear of inflation, one also 

ought, at the same time, to permit an adjustment of interest rates 

to restrain inflation. The two things were compatible--not 

incompatible--as operating techniques.  

Chairman Martin observed that it was necessary to make 

fundamental judgments at this stage. It was easy for him to make 

a judgment because he believed the country was in a period of 

creeping inflation already. And he believed the balance of 

payments situation would be benefited by more restraint in the 

over-all economy. In short, he thought the economy was going too 

fast at the moment. This was where one came up against the basic 

problem--to wiich he did not know the answer--relating to the 

economics of full employment. Here there were different schools 

of thought. Personally he felt that t sone point, if the economy 

went too fast, the possibility of achieving sustainable full 

employment would be destroyed. And he thought the situation was 

about at that point now.  

Accordingly, he did not have any real difficulty with his 

line of approach. When it came to the implementation, though, he



11/23/65 -86

would hesitate to move in the manner that he understood Messrs.  

Ellis and Daane were suggesting, that is, to pursue a firmer policy 

by reducing the level of reserves in the reservoir. He thought 

that the demand forces in the economy were so strong that even with 

a slight increase in the amount of reserves in the reservoir there 

would still be a rise in interest rates. Therefore, the Committee 

was in the relatively fortunate position of not having to tighten 

money per se.  

The difficulty of the moment, the Chairman added, had been 

compounded by the banks' unwillingness to deal with their own 

problem; in his judgment they had let themselves become bound into 

the prime rate in a ridiculous way. But the situation had to be 

unraveled at some point. It could be unraveled by a decline in 

business, although he hoped it would not. The other way--the only 

way that he felt would be effective--would be to move on Regulation 

Q and the discount rate and to continue the level of reserves 

during the period of transition, or perhaps even to increase the 

level slightly during the period of transition so as to make the 

adjustment less difficult in terms of the over-all economy.  

That was where he came out, Chairman Martin said. As to 

the directive, he thought the Committee probably could agree on 

alternative A and probably could not agree on alternative B.  

There seemed to be a clear majority in favor of alternative A.



11/23/65 -87

In this framework, Chairman Martin continued, he would 

personally be prepared to approve a discount rate action, if taken 

by any Reserve Bank, prior to mid-December. To run too close to 

the next Treasury financing would, of course, be a mistake. He 

would expect, also, that if the Board approved a discount rate 

change it would make a change in the Regulation Q ceiling.  

Chairman Martin commented additionally that it must be 

remembered that the Open Market Committee did not set the discount 

rate, just as it did not fix reserve requirements or margin require

ments. The Committee meetings were used as a forum for discussion 

cf System policy generally, but no commitment could be made with 

respect to the discount rate. The Board would have to act on that, 

and he could not anticipate how the Board would act. He had merely 

wanted to make it clear that for his part, as one member of the 

Board--and assuming a continuation of present conditions--if any 

Reserve Bank should come in with an increase in the discount rate 

he would be prepared to approve. He would not vote to approve, 

however, without an increase in the Regulation Q ceiling also.  

He was not suggesting that anyone act on the discount rate; he was 

merely expressing his present position and indicating how he would 

react, as one member of the Board, if such action were taken by a 

Reserve Bank.



11/23/65

Chairman Martin repeated that a majority of the Committee 

appeared to favor alternative A of the draft directives. He would 

be willing to go along with that directive himself. If, however, 

some members favored alternative B there was no reason why they 

should not so record themselves.  

Mr. Daane asked the Manager whether alternative A meant to 

him a restoration of the degree of firmness that had prevailed prior 

to the aberrations of the recent period.  

Mr. Holmes, in reply, referred to the diverse trends in 

various market indicators, even allowing for the aberrations of the 

past 3 weeks. At the moment, for example, he was looking at 

estimated net borrowed reserves of $200 million for the present 

statement week. Federal funds were now reported to be trading at 

3-3/4 per cent, and the bill rate was unchanged. With this sort 

of mix in the figures, it was hard for him to say in advance exactly 

how the specific indicators were likely to develop.  

Mr. Hayes said that he agreed with the Chairman on the 

directive and that he welcomed the Chairman's statement of position, 

with which he found himself in complete agreement. He also 

concurred with the comment of Mr. Shepardson about the tendency on 

the part of the System to be too late in reaching policy decisions, 

and with the Chairman's comment about the futility of trying to run 

away from decisions. As he listened to the comments around the

-88-



11/23/65 -89

table, he had been impressed by the evident reluctance in some 

quarters to make use of one of the System's policy instruments-

the discount rate--even recognizing that there were always some 

uncertainties in the market that might be exaggerated by such a 

move. He was impressed by the arguments of Mr. Daane, which to 

him were about as compelling arguments for a discount rate move 

as he had ever heard. As he understood Mr. Mitchell's comments, 

they implied that the choice was between no change in policy and 

favoring a reversal of the economy. Certainly no one would want 

to advocate a reversal of the economy. All that anyone was talking 

about was prevention of overheating. The fostering of stable 

economic growth did not mean that one favored a contraction of the 

economy. The difficulty he found in the suggestions of Messrs. Ellis 

and Daane was that he did not quite see how policy could be firmed 

in the open market area without immediately creating even more 

serious problems than now existed by virtue of the Regulation Q 

ceiling, which in turn was closely related to the discount rate 

itself. Mr. Daane had said that perhaps there was not much 

difference from the standpoint of timing between his two altern

atives, and it seemed to Mr. Hayes that the System's latitude as 

to timing was distinctly limited. If a move was not made shortly, 

the Treasury financing schedule might preclude any action until 

late in February. Perhaps there would be some room in January,



11/23/65 -90

but it ras necessary to recognize the possibility that if no move 

was made in the next week or two, the System might be blocked out 

for a couple of months.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that obviously there was not a man 

at the table who would admit wanting to turn the economy downward.  

However, there were those who wanted to take steps that in his 

opinion would lead to such an end. He agreed with Chairman Martin 

that many differences within the System's ranks related to questions 

of timing and degree, but there was another much more fundamental 

difference. This was the belief on the part of many that cyclical 

fluctuations were inevitable, that sooner or later what went up 

would have to come down. If one said the System usually did not 

act until too late, it was implicit in the analysis that if the 

economy rose, at some point it had to turn down. Mr. Mitchell 

said he recognized that there were nany problems in keeping the 

economy moving forward at a sustainable rate of expansion. As 

Chairman Martin liked to say, it was a tough job. But he felt it 

was possible to go far beyond previous accomplishments in terms 

of continuing expansion. There had now been a period of expansion 

of almost 60 months, and he did not think one should assume that 

at the end of 60 months there would have to be a downturn. He 

would be more cautious than some in treating the condition of the 

economy and in doing anything that might upset the rate of expan

sion. This was the fundamental difference between his thinking



11/23/65 -91

and that of some others. In most other respects, he thought the 

questions at issue might turn out to involve differences of 

judgment on the matter of timing.  

Mr. Danne remarked that he had not been talking so much 

about a reduction in the reserve reservoir---to use the Chairman's 

figure of speech--as a containment of reserve availability within 

bounds. He was thinking specifically of net borrowed reserves 

somewhat above $150 million--a containment of the reservoir rather 

than a reduction. He thought that with the demands the market was 

likely to experience in the days ahead, this would produce a 

market that would be much more supportive of a rate change than 

today.  

Mr. Maisel referred to the Chairman's comments about the 

situation having reached a stage where it was necessary to deal 

with the economics of full employment. He felt the situation 

required walking a tight rope that was admittedly hard to walk.  

He still hoped, however, that incomes policy, as opposed to monetary 

policy, would continue to be used at this point. In his judgment 

the Administration had properly been using incomes policy. If a 

change were made now to monetary policy, that would amount to 

giving up. It would amount to saying that the System did not 

favor the present way of handling national policy and therefore 

was going to use monetary policy. There were two basic points-

how to walk the tightrope and whether to continue to walk it.



11/23/65 -92

It should be clear that he felt that not changing interest rates 

was very definitely a part of the economics of full employment.  

Chairman Martin commented that he did not think it was 

really a question of "either-or;" it was a question of "both." 

Mr. Ellis said that just because one was concerned about 

the quality and structure of expansion, as well as the rate of 

expansion, this did not necessarily mean that he had a limited 

horizon on the length of the expansion. System action could be 

taken as reflecting concern about the conditions of expansion, 

rather than adoption of a view that a downturn was just ahead.  

Referring to his earlier statement about putting on the 

brakes, Mr. Shepardson said that he perhaps misspoke. He did not 

mean to imply the imminence of or need for a turndown but rather 

a slowing of the rate of expansion to a more sustainable level.  

By way of analogy, he mentioned the situation of the Texas 

homebuilder desiring shade for his home. He might plant the fast

growing Chinaberry which would provide quick shade but which is 

short-lived and extremely brittle in a storm. Or he might plant 

live oaks which are slow-growing but long-lived and hardy and 

would provide shade for his children and grandchildren. His 

preference, Mr. Shepardson said, was for the live oak, and 

likewise, in this instance, for courses of policy that would 

promote longer-term economic growth, even though a somewhat less 

rapid pace of expansion might be involved.



11/23/65

Chairman Martin then alluded to the modification suggested 

earlier by Mr. Mitchell in the language of the first paragraph of 

alternative A of the draft directives, and he inquired as to the 

wishes of the Committee members. Mr. Hayes expressed a preference 

for the original language of the draft directive, particularly 

since he felt that the introduction of the phrase "financial 

resources were in shorter supply" was troublesome. Others who 

spoke on the matter indicated that they would be agreeable to the 

proposed modification except for the phrase to which Mr. Hayes had 

referred.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York was authorized and directed, 
until otherwise directed by the 
Committee, to execute transactions 
in the System Account in accordance 
with the following current economic 
policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity is continuing a rate of expansion comparable to 
that of the third quarter despite the contractive effect 
of a reduction in steel inventories. Business sentiment 
continues optimistic and financial conditions are firmer.  
Meanwhile, our international payments have remained in 
deficit. In this situation, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's current policy to strengthen the 
international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and 
the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall

-93-



11/23/65 -94

be conducted with a view to maintaining about the same 
conditions in the money market that have prevailed 
since the last meeting of the Committee.  

Mr. Shepardson commented, with respect to his vote on the 

directive, that he had not dissented from the adoption of this 

directive because of his view that the policy move he thought was 

needed could appropriately come in the form of a discount rate 

increase. Absent such an expectation, he would have favored 

alternative B of the draft directives.  

Chairman Martin observed, in this connection, that he felt 

the views of the respective Committee members would be reflected 

adequately in their comments that would be included in the minutes 

of this meeting.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, December 14, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 22, 1965 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meetng on November 23, 1965 

Alternative A (no change) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is 
expanding strongly in a continuing climate of optimistic business 
sentiment and firmer financial conditions. Meanwhile, our inter
national payments have remained in deficit. In this situation, it 
remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to 
strengthen the international position of the dollar, and to avoid 
the emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 
supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to maintaining about the same conditions in the money market 
that have prevailed since the last meeting of the Committee.  

Alternative B (firmer) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate strong further domestic economic expansion in a 
climate of optimistic business sentiment, with strong credit 
demand and some continuing upward creep in prices. Meanwhile, our 
international payments have remained in deficit. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to 
strengthen the international position of the dollar, and to resist 
the emergence of inflationary pressures by moderating growth in 
the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to achieving somewhat firmer conditions in the money market 
than have prevailed since the last meeting of the Committee.


