









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 25, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Bryan 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp,1/ Hickman,1/ Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis. and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Holland, and Koch, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Garfield, Partee, and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors

1/ Entered the meeting at point indicated in the minutes.



5/25/65

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Patterson, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Sanford, Eastburn, Mann, 
Ratchford, Jones, Parsons, Tow, and Green, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Richmond, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Fousek and Sternlight, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

May 11 through 19, 1965, and a supplemental report for May 20 through 

24, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of 

the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford said 

the gold stock would drop by another $60 million this week, the second 

such decline this month. The total decline since the beginning of the 

year thus amounted to $1,095 million and the gold stock now stood at 

$14,293 million. At the moment, it looked as though the pace of sales 

in the next couple of months would be below the very high levels of 

the recent past, mainly because the accumulation of dollars by France 

now seemed to have tapered off, at least temporarily. However, as was



5/25/65 -3

evident from past experience, it was hazardous to assume that because 

French reserves, or those of any other country for that matter, ceased 

to grow for a month or so, that could be counted on as a continuing 

trend.  

Turning to the London gold market, Mr. Sanford reported that 

the major development in the last two weeks had been the reappearance 

of Communist China as a substantial buyer. Apparently, their purchases 

were a reflection of the officially expressed distrust of sterling by 

China. Purchases during the latest period amounted to $18 million on 

top of the $5C million or so taken earlier this year. The Bank of 

England permitted the fixing price to rise somewhat, to $35.1168, from 

the relatively low level at the beginning of the period, $35.0916 on 

May 12. But to avoid sharp fluctuations in price, the Pool had to sell 

some gold; it sold $19 million, increasing the overall deficit from 

$174 million to $193 million. Apart from the Chinese demand, the gold 

market had been rather quiet. The price this morning receded further 

to $35.095.  

The exchange markets had shown little movement of significance, 

Mr. Sanford commented. The Bank of England for the most part had been 

on the sidelines with the spot sterling rate drifting slightly lower.  

This morning sterling weakened a bit, to $2.7944, on reported selling 

from Paris, and Bank of England support had been necessary. The dis

count on three-month forward sterling continued to hold at about 1-3/4

per cent.



5/25/65

Mr. Sanford reported that the Canadian dollar fluctuated during 

the period without any lasting trend. However, it was possible that 

the concentration of new Canadian issues scheduled to come to the New 

York market in coming weeks could put pressure on the rate, especially 

since he understood that Chinese grain purchases from Canada were 

expected to reach $100 million. So far as the continental currencies 

were concerned, the dollar had managed to hold the gains it had made a 

couple of months ago. But it had not enlarged those gains except in 

the case of the German mark where a combination of factors--including 

the repatriation of foreign funds, general commercial demand for dol

lars, and possibly some speculation connected with expectations of an 

increase in the German bank rate--had pushed the mark to its lowest 

level since mid-1963 despite continued tight (and perhaps tightening) 

money market conditions. The Belgian franc remained at or close to 

the ceiling, and the Italians continued to take in dollars on a large 

scale, most of which they were swapping out to their commercial banks.  

There had been a number of changes in the System swap network 

during the last two weeks, Mr. Sanford observed. Most notably, it had 

been possible to pay off another $45 million on the Swiss franc draw

ings--$20 million on the Swiss National Bank swap and $25 million on 

the swap with the Bank for International Settlements--bringing the 

amounts still outstanding to $60 million and $75 million, respectively.  

The purchase of Swiss francs to make those paydowns reflected for the 

most part a special one-time adjustment in the reserves of the Swiss 

National Bank rather than market developments. Nevertheless, it was

-4-



5/25/65 -5

encouraging to have been able to liquidate $95 million of the swap 

indebtedness in Swiss francs since March 31. On the other side, the 

System increased its drawing on the Bank of Italy by $50 million to 

$250 million on May 18, to absorb part of that Bank's continuing dollar 

inflow. Also during the period the Bank of England paid down another 

$50 million on the swap drawing on the System with previously acquired 

dollar balances, thus reducing its outstanding drawings to $230 million.  

As was indicated at the last meeting, Mr. Sanford continued, 

the System would make considerable progress in further reducing its 

swap indebtedness through transactions associated with the British 

drawing on the International Monetary Fund. Today $82 million of the 

swap with the Bank of Italy would be paid off with lire bought directly 

from the U.K. In addition, the System had bought an equivalent of 

$45 million of guilders from the Netherlands Bank and $40 million 

equivalent of Belgian francs from the National Bank of Belgium, both 

in connection with the U.K. Fund transaction. In the case of the 

Netherlands, the purchase would enable the System to liquidate com

pletely its drawing under the swap arrangement, while in the case of 

the Belgium $40 million would be reconstituted of the fully-drawn 

portion of the swap, leaving a net indebtedness vis-a-vis the National 

Bank of Belgium of $60 million. Finally, the U.K., also for value 

today, was paying off its entire swap drawing with the System from 

the proceeds of its Fund drawings. As a result of all of those trans

actions, the System's gross and net indebtedness under the swap network 

would be reduced to $363 million.



5/25/65 -6

One final point, Mr. Sanford said, was that he understood that 

the Japanese authorities had lost a fair amount of reserves this month 

in holding the yen just above its floor. If that trend continued, he 

thought the System should be prepared to see Japan make use of its 

facilities under the swap arrangement.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
May 11 through 24, 1965, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Sanford noted that the System's swap arrangement with the 

Netherlands Bank, in the amount of $100 million, would mature on 

June 15, 1965. He recommended renewal for a three-month period, the 

term of the present arrangement.  

Renewal of the $100 million swap 
arrangement with the Netherlands Bank 
for a further period of three months 
was approved unanimously.  

Mr. Sanford then said that the System probably would have to 

renew all or some parts of certain drawings that matured during the 

next several weeks. These included (1) a Swiss franc drawing on the 

BIS maturing on June 8, which presently was in the amount of $75 mil

lion and which might be worked down a bit further but was not likely 

to be completely erased before maturity; (2) a drawing on the Bank of 

Italy of $18 million, which also matured on June 8; and (3) two draw

ings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing on June 22. One of the 

drawings on the Bank of Belgium, in the amount of $50 million, repre

sented the part of the swap arrangement that was always fully drawn,



5/25/65 -7

subject to renewals at six-month intervals. In the recent period that 

drawing had been completely utilized, but $40 million would be recon

stituted today. The other drawing, of $25 million, was under the 

standby part of the arrangement and had a term of three months.  

Chairman Martin asked why it was necessary to act today on 

renewal of drawings on National Bank of Belgium that matured on June 22, 

since the Committee would meet again on June 15. Mr. Sanford replied 

that the Account Management tried to work with a lead-time of at least 

ten days on operations of these types.  

In answer to a question by Mr. Shepardson, Mr. Sanford said 

that renewal of the drawing on the Bank of Italy would be a first 

renewal, but those of the drawing on the BIS and of the $25 million 

drawing on the National Bank of Belgium would be second renewals.  

Mr. Shepardson said he continued to have questions about the 

desirability of second renewals. As he recalled the discussions when 

swap arrangements were first begun, the intent was to use drawings to 

deal with flows that were considered temporary and likely to be 

reversed soon. The Committee was definitely committed to the view 

that drawings were not to be used to deal with nonreversible flows.  

If it proved necessary to renew drawings a second time, the circum

stances requiring them were hardly temporary, and he questioned 

whether such actions were within the Committee's original intent.  

Chairman Martin said that it might be desirable for the Account 

Management to prepare a memorandum for the Committee indicating the



5/25/65 -8

number of times various drawings had been renewed. Mr. Sanford 

indicated that such a memorandum would be distributed by the time of 

the Committee's next meeting.  

In response to Mr. Balderston's request for clarification of 

the nature of the swap arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium, 

Mr. Sanford observed that the agreement with that Bank differed from 

all others in the network, in that $50 million, the amount of the 

original arrangement, had been fully drawn on both sides on a six

month maturity basis since initiation of the arrangement. That was 

in accordance with the wishes of the Belgian authorities for reasons 

connected with their domestic money market. The $50 million drawn 

by the System was kept on deposit in Belgium until such times as it 

was needed, and much of the time it simply had remained on deposit.  

At the moment it was all utilized because cf pressures against the 

dollar, but, as he had noted, $40 million would be reconstituted 

today. The $25 million drawing maturing on June 22, on the other 

hand, was under the part of the arrangement that, like others in the 

network, was on a standby basis except when drawings were found to be 

necessary.  

Mr. Hayes suggested that it might be useful if the memorandum 

the Account Management was to prepare included information on the 

actual utilizations of funds under the fully-drawn part of the Belgian 

swap line, and the Chairman agreed.  

Mr. Shepardson asked whether his understanding was correct 

that because part of the Belgian arrangement was always fully drawn



5/25/65 -9

the System could be considered to have been in debt to the National 

Bank of Belgium for over a year. Mr. Sanford replied that that was 

not necessarily a valid conclusion. When the amount that was fully 

drawn was on deposit in Belgium, the Systen was earning interest on 

the deposit; at the same time, the National Bank of Belgium was earn

ing interest on security holdings in this country. In his judgment 

the System should be considered indebted to the Bank only when it 

utilized the funds that were on deposit. It did so only part of the 

time, although recently it had been much of the time.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that he wanted to be recorded as 

objecting to the planned second renewals. As he understood the mat

ter, they went beyond what the Committee originally had contemplated 

in connection with swap drawings.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he thought the second renewals in 

question were definitely to the advantage cf the United States. He 

did not think the Committee had a rigid policy against more than one 

renewal of swap drawings. Many drawings had been paid off without 

any renewals, and in his opinion the fact that from time to time some 

of them had been renewed one or more times was not contrary to the 

policy of limiting drawings to a short term, which he would define 

as one year or less.  

Mr. Daane suggested that the contemplated memorandum give 

information not only on the number of renewals but also on their 

rationale, from the point of view of their advantages to the United 

States. Mr. Sanford replied that that would be done.



5/25/65 -10

Renewal of the drawing on the Bank 
of Italy, as recommended by Mr. Sanford, 
was noted without objection.  

Renewal of the drawings on the Bank 
for International Settlements and on the 
National Bank of Belgium, as recommended 
by Mr. Sanford, was noted, with Mr.  
Shepardson objecting.  

Mr. Sanford then said he would like to make some observations 

on Mr. Coombs' memorandum of April 30, 1965. entitled "Action on Inter

national Liquidity," on which Messrs. Furth and Young had commented in 

their memorandum dated May 14, 1965. (Copies of these documents, which 

were distributed to the Committee on May 20, have been placed in the 

files of the Committee.) 

It was Mr. Coombs' feeling, Mr. Sanford said, that time might 

be running out on some of the swap arrangements and that the Committee 

perhaps should look more to other means of repaying drawings than the 

ultimate one of gold. That thought was much in line with the view 

Mr. Shepardson had expressed today regarding continuing swap drawings 

for an extended period. It was Mr. Sanford's understanding that 

Mr. Coombs had in mind two exploratory approaches in the field of 

international liquidity. The first had to do with breaking the ice in 

the form of drawings on the IMF by the U.S. to settle swap drawings 

which proved irreversible within their normal span. Previous discussions 

with the Governors of the Bank of Italy and the National Bank of Belgium 

had indicated that they would favor U.S. drawings of their currencies 

from the IMF for this purpose, and that view was supported by conversa

tions with other Governors. Hence, Mr. Coombs recommended that the U.S.



5/25/65 -11

borrow lire and Belgian francs from the IMF to settle swap drawings 

that had not been settled within the usual terms. Such operations 

would obviate the necessity of ultimate settlement in gold; such 

settlement would be undesirable considering the large decline that 

already had occurred in the gold stock this year.  

Secondly, Mr. Sanford continued, Mr. Coombs would like to 

explore with central banks the possibility of reaching advance under

standings, hcwever informal, in place of ad hoc ones on a last-minute 

basis, that in the event of speculative pressure on the currency of 

any member of the swap network, those central banks receiving inflows 

of funds would give sympathetic consideration to joining immediately 

with the Federal Reserve in short-term credit assistance to the cen

tral bank under attack. Thus, the System would have some partners to 

share part of the burden of new rescue operations, such as might be 

necessary later this year, for example, in the case of sterling and 

the Japanese yen. As Mr. Coombs had pointed out in his memorandum, 

there might be a basic reluctance on the part of most European central 

banks to commit themselves, however informally, to sizable credit 

facilities superimposed on the already sizable ones extended to the 

Federal Reserve. Accordingly, Mr. Coombs suggested the possibility 

of considering the Federal Reserve drawing rights of $2,650 million 

as a pool which could be partially and temporarily diverted to other 

central banks at a time of need. That would be a way of converting 

the bilateral swap lines between the Federal Reserve and foreign 

central banks into swap lines which could be made, to some extent,



5/25/65 -12

multilaterally available and thus relieve the U.S. and the Federal 

Reserve of part of the financing burden that fell upon them because 

of the central role of the dollar in international finance.  

He was sure, Mr. Sanford said, that Mr. Coombs would be glad 

to have the Committee's blessing on both of these points as soon as 

possible, so that he might engage in further exploratory conversa

tions.  

Chairman Martin observed that Mr. Coombs' proposals involved 

policy of the Treasury as well as the Federal Reserve. He thought 

the Committee might hold a preliminary discussion of them without 

contemplating any action today.  

Mr. Ellis noted that Mr. Coombs proposed to make some of the 

System's $2,650 million of drawing rights under bilateral swap lines 

available multilaterally. He asked whether it might not be better to 

seek an enlargement of available drawing rights rather than simply to 

spread around the existing total.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that while the System did have $2,650 

million available under its swap lines, only part of that amount 

ordinarily would be usable in a particular case of need, depending 

on which currencies were experiencing drains. More generally, it 

seemed to him that Mr. Coombs' two ideas were simple and straight

forward, and almost transparently likely to be helpful to the United 

States. Drawing by the U.S. on the IMF were, of course, the respon

sibility of the Treasury rather than of the System, but from the 

Committee's point of view Mr. Coombs' suggestion in this connection



5/25/65 -13

seemed to fit exactly with the type of concern Mr. Shepardson had 

expressed. Other countries had drawn on the Fund relatively freely 

from time to time. The United States had used it only for technical 

purposes last year, but there had been much discussion of the possi

bility of its using the gold tranche more actively. Such a course 

obviously would be consistent with the idea of providing international 

liquidity when and where it was needed. It seemed to him that, 

although the matter was not a responsibility of the System's, it was 

logical for the Committee to give its blessing to a proposal that 

could only be helpful to the nation.  

Mr. Coombs' second suggestion, Mr. Hayes continued, was simply 

to explore informally with a few central banks that were likely to 

be so minded the possibility of their agreeing to make short-term 

credit facilities available when needed. It had been possible to put 

together the $3 billion package of assistance to Britain quickly when 

their situation became critical last November, and matters worked out 

all right; but the operation was hectic, and he personally hoped it 

would not have to be repeated. If there were some possibilities cf 

advance preparation for any necessary short-term assistance, it would 

be to everyone's advantage to explore them informally. It would be 

preferable if other countries were willing to make short-term credits 

available to one another without reference to their swap arrangements 

with the System. But it was Mr. Coombs' thought that if those countries 

were reluctant to do so in view of their commitments to the Federal 

Reserve, some of which were quite large, there was the possibility of



5/25/65 -14

the System's temporarily relinquishing part of its drawing rights on 

them.  

Mr. Hayes said he had found the Furth-Young memorandum to be 

interesting, and its points were well taken if one granted the assump

tions made. But the assumptions were too broad; Mr. Coombs did not 

contemplate actions as sweeping as the Furth-Young memorandum implied.  

For example, it was said on page 1 that "It might be a difficult task 

to persuade the foreign banks to extend to all other participants the 

facilities they have thus far been willing to extend to the Federal 

Reserve." Certainly, he would agree with that statement. But there 

was no suggestion to make all of the System's swap lines multilateral; 

it was proposed only to talk further with a few central banks that were 

likely to be willing to do so. The next sentence read: "And to per

suade the governments of the foreign countries involved to agree in 

advance to a quasi-automatic invocation of the General Arrangements to 

Borrow to permit IMF refunding of any intractable swap drawing would be 

even more difficult." But he did not think the System would have to so 

persuade the governments involved in order to get them to agree to make 

some short-term credit facilities available. Perhaps it was not wholly 

true that any short-term swap drawing could bring lasting relief to a 

currency under attack only if there was a refunding by the Fund in 

sight. After all, gold sales were one way of liquidating a drawing, 

and a good deal of relief could be brought to a situation by a short

term drawing by itself, as was seen last November. These were specific 

points that Mr. Hayes thought were of some bearing.



5/25/65 -15

Mr. Hayes said he also agreed with the point in the memorandum 

that the proposed multilateral arrangements would not reduce the risk 

of gold outflows. But the purpose of seeking a few such arrangements 

was not to save gold; it was simply to obtain the psychological advan

tages of having more than one central bank render assistance to a 

country in need. Last November the United States might have supplied 

the full $3 billion of assistance to Britain, but such an action 

certainly would not have had the same advantages as did the multilat

eral assistance that was actually given.  

Mr. Daane commented that he was sympathetic to Mr. Coombs' 

suggestion for U.S. drawings on the Fund, although as Mr. Hayes had 

noted the decision would be made by the Treasury. He felt that it 

would be unwise to invoke the General Arrangements to Borrow in con

nection with a U.S. Fund drawing but he thought it was appropriate to 

think in terms of a drawing for the described purpose without getting 

into the GAB. The United States deliberately had left itself some 

room for maneuver in the recent activation of the GAB in connection 

with the British Fund drawing by keeping down the size of the dollar 

component. Moreover, drawings by the U.S. would indicate that this 

country continued to view the gold tranche as a reserve asset. On the 

whole, he thought the idea was a good one.  

Mr. Daane's feelings were mixed on Mr. Coombs' other proposal, 

for multilateral swap arrangements. As he sensed the climate there 

was not any real amenability to the idea at present, and he thought 

the question of timing had to be thought through carefully. If the



5/25/65 -16

matter was widely pressed now, not only might it be rebuffed but other 

countries might conclude that the U.S. was taking the leadership in 

trying to assure that credit facilities would be constantly available 

to Britain, as well as to the U.S., regardless of the internal policies 

of those countries. Such possibilities did not necessarily argue 

against opening the subject in a private and informal way with one or 

two countries, but he would not like to see an all-out effort made at 

this juncture. In particular, one of the countries that might be most 

amenable to the suggestion at some future time might be turned against 

it if the issue was pressed now.  

Mr. Wayne observed that although there was some reference to 

the Japanese yen in Mr. Coombs' memorandum he thought that what in fact 

was under discussion was the British pound, which might be under con

tinual attack in coming months. On that basis he considered Mr. Daane's 

concerns to be well-founded.  

Mr. Hayes agreed that the outlook for the pound was the foremost 

consideration underlying the suggestions for multilateral swaps, but 

said that he certainly would not exclude the possibility that the 

Japanese might be in difficulty in the near future.  

Mr. Wayne replied that he recognized that possibility. However, 

the yen was not now under attack and the pound was; and the yen was not 

a reserve currency. He also questioned the desirability of the System's 

taking the initiative in this matter. It seemed to him that the Bank of 

England had an active role to play.



5/25/65 -17

Mr. Hayes remarked that there obviously was room for judgment, 

but he was impressed by the fact that if the U.S. should be confronted 

by another sterling crisis it was likely to feel obligated to give aid.  

There was not only the swap arrangement on which the U.K. could draw; 

the British might also have to sell their dollar investments, which 

would involve a dollar drain. He would merely submit that it was not 

too early to think about how such a problem might be solved. He was 

not advocating a wholesale approach to foreign central banks; he agreed 

with Mr. Daane that it was desirable only to explore the attitudes of 

one or two central banks informally and cautiously. He also agreed 

with Mr. Daane with respect to the undesirability of activating the 

GAB in connection with any U.S. Fund drawing. Such drawings should be 

made on an ad hoc basis, involving whatever currencies the U.S. happened 

to need.  

Mr. Wayne commented that he would feel more comfortable about 

the matter if the System had the benefit of the Treasury's views with 

respect to the IMF aspect of the proposals.  

Chairman Martin said he thought it was important that all 

concerned be constantly alert to the international monetary problem, 

which might soon be coming to a head. As he had indicated, he did not 

think the Committee should take any action on Mr. Coombs' proposals 

today. The Treasury had been given a copy of Mr. Coombs' memorandum, 

and perhaps the Committee might have a discussion at its next meeting 

to determine whether it wanted to participate with the Treasury in



5/25/65 -18

exploring the proposals further. There were no objections to the 

Chairman's suggestion.  

In reply to Mr. Shepardson's question, Mr. Young said that. the 

Treasury had not yet been given a copy of the Furth-Young memorandum.  

It was agreed that the memorandum should be transmitted to that Depart

ment.  

Messrs. Bopp and Hickman entered the meeting at this point.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period May 11 through 24, 1965. A 

copy of this report has been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

System open market operations during the past two 
weeks were carried out in an atmosphere of continuing 
demand for Treasury bills and some other short-term 
securities, while a mood of caution pervaded the longer
term markets. On balance, System operations absorbed 
a modest amount of reserves over the period, with fairly 
steady absorption over the first portion of the interval 
being largely offset by reserve injections on the last 
three business days.  

The money market atmosphere remained about unchanged 
during the past two weeks, although Federal funds traded 
a little more often at 4 per cent than at 4-1/8 per cent, 
reversing the pattern of the previous several weeks.  
Borrowing, on the other hand, averaged a shade higher 
in the statement weeks ended May 12 and 19, and net 
borrowed reserves were a little larger. In both of 
those weeks a pattern developed in which Federal funds 
traded largely at 4-1/8 per cent before the week end, 
followed by substantial member bank borrowing over the 
week end, and then a shade more comfortable reserve 
situation after the week end with funds trading at 4 
per cent and borrowing falling off. In the current



5/25/65

week the pattern has not been quite so marked, as 
borrowing rose more moderately over the week end-
although we did return again to an effective funds 
rate of 4 per cent yesterday.  

In carrying out System operations in the past 
two weeks, the Committee's authorization to make 
repurchase agreements against a wider range of col
lateral during Treasury financing periods continued 
to prove useful. In particular, it facilitated the 
meeting of a larger portion of the period's reserve 
needs through repurchase agreements than would have 
been possible otherwise--and thereby reduced the 
need for outright bill purchases. Even so, the 
scale of current and prospective reserve needs is 
such that yesterday it was deemed necessary to buy 
a fair amount of Treasury bills in a go-around of 
the market. Looking ahead, a very large reserve 
need still remains to be met in the balance of May 
and early June. Probably, this will call for a 
combination of techniques to provide reserves, 
including additional outright purchases of bills as 
well as new repurchase agreements and some buying 
of coupon-bearing issues.  

Yesterday's purchases of bills by the System, 
coming on top of continuing demand from a variety 
of other sources, helped push rates slightly lower 
and the average auction rates, at about 3.89 and 
3.94 per cent for the three- and six-month issues, 
respectively, in yesterday's auction were about a 
basis point lower than in most recent weeks. The 
June tax date should produce some let-up in corpo
rate buying in the weeks just ahead but the reserve 
need may, as noted, make the System a large buyer 
in these weeks; on balance there seems little 
immediate prospect of any natural upward pressure 
on bill rates.  

In contrast to the short-term market, the bond 
markets have been suffering from some indigestion 
in the past two weeks. Distribution by dealers of 
the Treasury's recent offering of nine-year 4-1/4 
per cent bonds has been very slow. Apart from some 
takings at gradually lower prices by Treasury trust 
accounts, dealer sales of the 4-1/4s have been 
almost exactly offset by the need to absorb equally 
modest offerings made in the market by investors.  
High-grade corporate offerings have elicited an 
apathetic investor response and tax-exempt issues 
have had mixed success--with some attractively 
priced issues moving out and others proving quite

-19-



5/25/65 -20

sticky. Increased demands on the capital markets 
seem to be largely responsible for this heavy atmos
phere, although market discussion of official 
objectives has also played some part. Prices of 
Treasury issues have held up quite well during this 
period, as dealers have sought to protect the value 
of their large holdings. Price levels may be in 
for some testing in the period ahead, however, as 
further efforts are made to distribute holdings.  

Following his statement Mr. Holmes responded to questions about 

the size of dealer inventories of longer-term Treasury securities and 

the nature of recent purchases of coupon issues by the Account Manage

ment and the Treasury.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactiors in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period May 11 through 24, 1965, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee. These 

questions were as follows: 

1. Business conditions.  

What are the implications for price stability and 
for sustained advances in production and employment of 
(a) the inventory situation, (b) the capital goods 
situation, and (c) prospective fiscal developments? 

2. Balance of payments.  

Assuming voluntary restraint will hold down capital 
outflows this year, will other factors tend to bring a 
lasting improvement in our balance of payments? 

3. Credit.  

How is the pace of credit expansion likely to respond 
to prospective changes in the rate and composition of 
economic activity over the next few months? Are demands



on the banking system likely to become less intense 
than they were earlier in the year? 

4. Money.  

What do recent shifts in public holdings of money 
and time deposits suggest as to prospective changes in 
the demand for these financial assets? 

5. Money market relationships.  

How have relations among money market variables 
changed since last fall? Assuming a continuation of 
current monetary policy, what combination of money mar
ket conditions, interest rates, reserve availability, 
and reserve utilization by the banking system might 
prove mutually consistent during coming weeks? 

Staff comments on these questions were included in the staff 

economic and financial review at the meeting, which was in the form 

of a visual-auditory presentation. Copies of the text of the presen

tation and of the accompanying charts have been placed in the files 

of the Committee.  

The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Noyes, 

was a follows: 

As the United States moves into a fifth year of 
expansion, questions persist as to the danger of infla
tionary developments, and also as to the threat of 
slackening growth or even recession. These two very 
different possibilities have both been in the foreground 
during the two years since the spring of 1963, along 
with our serious balance of payments problem.  

This morning, the staff review is addressed once 
again to the prospects for sustained domestic expansion 
and improvement in our international payments position.  

It is only two weeks since the staff last reviewed 
the economic scene, but even in so brief a period addi
tional evidence has become available to confirm trends 
then just emerging in the first of the April statistics.  
Growth in production has slowed, and the interim steel 
settlement has moderated inventory demands. Bank credit

5/25/65 -21-



5/25/65

and deposit expansion are less vigorous, as the initial 
impact of the Regulation Q change fades and as credit 
demands appear to be shifting from banks to the capital 
markets.  

But some upcreep in prices has continued, with 
further increases in metals and meats. And rising 
defense needs and higher plant expansion targets are 
being translated into rising orders for durable goods, 
particularly machinery. The Congress seems disposed to 
go at least as far as, and perhaps further than, the 
Administration has recommended in excise tax cuts.  

We will begin the staff review with a discussion 
by Mr. Reynolds of the influences at work on our balance 
of payments and the prospects in this area for the 
period ahead.  

There followed sections on the balance of payments, presented 

by Mr. Reynolds; on inventories and business fixed investment, by 

Mr. Williams; on prices, production, and employment, by Mr. Garfield; 

and on financial developments, by Mr. Koch.  

The concluding portion of the review, presented by Mr. Brill, 

was as follows: 

The slight firming of monetary policy that took place 
first around early February and again in late March, has 
not been evenly transmitted to all money market variables.  
As can be seen on the chart, member bank borrowings have 
risen steadily in recent months, and net borrowed reserves 
have deepened by even more as banks have economized on 
excess reserves. The increased pressure on bank reserve 
positions has been reflected mostly in the interest rate 
on Federal funds, which has pierced and generally remained 
above its former discount rate ceiling, while the bill 
rate has remained generally stable to declining at a level 
somewhat below the discount rate.  

The slight decline that has occurred in bill rates 
from their late February- early March peak has been accom
panied by a slight decline and then stability in Government 
bond yields, and a fluctuating but on average higher 
Federal funds rate. The decline in bill rates can be 
explained by a number of factors, including a sharp reduc
tion in bills available to the public, some repatriation 
of funds from abroad, and a large bill demand from 
corporations and State and local funds.

-22-



5/25/65

In the weeks ahead, maintenance of net borrowed 
reserves in the $100 to $150 million range, as indicated 
by the shaded area on the chart, would likely be accom
panied by bill rates remaining in their recent range, 
although there might be temporary upward rate pressure 
just before the mid-June tax and dividend dates. It 
also appears that some upward adjustment in long-term 
rates could occur, as dealers distribute their relatively 
large takings of the reopened 9-year Treasury bonds, and 
with their large inventories of recent corporate and 
municipal underwritings. Corporate yields, not shown on 
the chart, have already risen since mid-March.  

Such a complex of market rates and marginal reserve 
availability would appear consistent with some slowing 
in bank credit and deposit expansion from the first 
quarter pace. In this context, growth in both time 
deposits and the money supply would be expected to 
average close to 1964 rates. This would represent some 
acceleration from the March-April '65 rate for time 
deposits, and some deceleration for the money supply.  

Pushing net borrowed reserves to around an average 
of $200 million--below the shaded area shown--would 
increase the likelihood of an upward adjustment in bill 
rates, although probably not much above 3.95 per cent, 
the top of the range shown. The large margin that has 
developed since March between the funds rate and the 
bill rate suggests that there is likely to be little 
further scope for the Federal funds market to cushion 
bank reserve pressures without reflection in the bill 
market. Such pressures might also redound upon the 
cost and availability of CD money to banks. In view 
of the technically exposed position of the capital 
markets at the moment, a further move in the direction 
of restraint would also be likely to have repercussions, 
at least temporarily, on markets for longer Government 
and other bonds.  

To sum up the staff replies to the questions 
distributed prior to the meeting, recent developments 
in the balance of payments are encouraging, but there 
is no evidence of lasting improvement from factors 
other than the voluntary restraint program. The review 
of domestic developments suggests some moderation occur
ring and in prospect in the pace of economic and 
financial expansion, even taking into account the like
lihood of fiscal stimulation around midyear. This 
moderation should temper pressures on commodity and 
financial markets and on the banking system. In our 
judgment, the present posture of policy is contributing 
to a healthy transition from the excessively rapid pace 
of the first quarter to a more sustainable rate currently.

-23-



5/25/65 -24

Mr. Ellis asked if there was any direct evidence to indicate 

the rate and probable duration of reflows of funds from abroad and 

how long such reflows were likely to affect the U.S. bill rate, if 

they were the principal factor in its recently reduced level.  

Mr. Reynolds replied that confidential Canadian data indi

cated that U.S. corporations had brought back about $400 million 

from Canada in March. The normal reflow in that month was about 

$200 million, so it was obvious that more than seasonal forces were 

at work. There also was some evidence to suggest that the noraml[sic] 

return flow to Canada in April did not occur this year; instead, 

some additional funds were brought back to the U.S. Liquid hold

ings of U.S. corporations in Canada might by now be back to the 

level of December 1963, the goal the Administration had sought.  

In the chart show the staff had hazarded the guess that there would 

not be much further reflow; that seemed unlikely unless the Admin

istration's program was intensified.  

Mr Brill added that the staff had concluded that the 

principal factor holding down bill rates recently was the reduced 

volume of bills available to the public at a time of strong demand 

for them, rather than the reflow of funds from abroad.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement:



3/25/65

For a long time members of this Committee have been 
expressing some unease about the rates of growth of bank 
credit and liquidity in our economy over a period of months 
and even years, and periodic efforts have been made, with 
only very limited success, to check these rapid growth 
rates. International considerations have always provided 
strong backing for these efforts, as they still do. But 
in the absence of clearly visible inflationary pressures 
in the domestic economy, many members have felt reluctance, 
in varying degrees, to press these restraining efforts 
with much vigor or continuity. Recently, however, it has 
become increasingly apparent that the mere threat of infla
tionary pressures has been reinforced by an actual upcreep 
in industrial wholesale prices at an accelerating rate.  
The evidence of a developing inflationary movement is by 
no means conclusive; the upcreep could be slowed down or 
reversed--although in the present setting of great business 
optimism this may be wishful thinking. The stakes are so 
high, and the consequences of a real upward price movement 
could be so disastrous, both at home and more especially 
in our efforts to defend the dollar, that we would be fully 
justified, in my judgment, in taking a definite though 
moderate further step at this time to slow the expansion 
of bank credit and thus to contribute, to the best of our 
ability, to preserving a sustainable domestic expansion 
and a sound currency.  

Business activity. Let me revert, now, to a brief 
summary of recent data that have led me to this conclu
sion. Contrary to the impression given by some of the 
April data--which of course involve a pause in the 
excessively rapid pace of advance of the first quarter-
the outlook for the domestic business situation remains 
very good indeed. It has been streng:hened in the past 
few weeks by the step-up in capital spending plans (backed 
by strong corporate profits) and, more recently, by the 
President's proposal of a second-stage excise tax cut to 
take effect at the beginning of 1966. More important for 
the shorter run is the inclusion of the automobile excise 
tax in the first part of the program, with the cut 
retroactive to May 15. This should make the July tax cuts 
more of an expansionary factor than had been expected 
before. Developments in the steel industry appear less 
likely than they did to be a seriously disruptive factor.  
Apart from a continuing buildup of steel inventories, 
which is likely to lead, incidentally, to only a rather 
modest downward drag on total industrial production later 
in the year, the overall inventory picture and inventory 
policies remain quite conservative.

-25-



5/25/65

On the price front, industrial wholesale prices 
moved up another notch in April, and no reversal is 
evident in May. The edging up in this area has been 
going on since 1963, but it now seems to be accelera
ting. Over the last three months the rise works out 
to an adjusted annual rate of 2 per cent, as against 
roughly 1.5 per cent over the last six months and 0.6 
per cent in the full year 1964. Raw material prices 
also continue to move up, and announcements of price 

changes remain virtually all on the upside. Demand 
pull seems more to blame than cost-push factors-
and this might well have a bearing on our policy 
consideration.  

Balance of payments. The improved balance of 
payments figures for March and April are a reflection 
of the initial success of the President's program of 
voluntary restraint. At the end of March the banking 
system as a whole was under the 105 per cent ceiling 
by $60 million--but 80 banks were under the ceiling by 
$330 million, while about 50 others were over their 
targets by $270 million. Detailed payments figures 
for March indicated especially sharp curtailment of 
long-term bank lending in Europe. Despite these favor
able developments, there is no basis for believing 
that a fundamental payments improvement is under way; 
and yet there is an urgent need for such improvement, 
since the effective life of the voluntary program is 
expected to be relatively short--perhaps not much over 
a year. Meanwhile gold losses continue to be heavy, 
with more in the offing.  

Credit and money. The current bank credit picture 
is far from clear. While the rate of increase in April 
(seasonally adjusted) was back close to the 8 per cent 
figure characteristic of 1963-64, as compared with the 
much more rapid growth of the first quarter- -there is 
reason to doubt whether this really points to much of 
a slowdown, in view of special factors affecting the 
April figures. If we combine March and April, we find 
an annual growth rate of 11.5 per cent, the same as 
that for January and February combined. While some 
fragmentary May data do suggest a slowing of the expan
sion, I am impressed by the continuing great strength of 

loan demand, as indicated by our latest loan projection 
survey in New York. This demand is abetted by the vigor 
of capital spending plans and the relatively low level 
of the prime rate--though there are continuing efforts 
to make the prime rate somewhat more inaccessible to 
longer-term borrowers and to borrowers of less than top 
credit standing.

-26-



5/25/65

Turning to measures of liquidity, we find an 8.3 per 
cent rise in money supply plus time deposits in the first 
four months of 1965, well above last year's gains. And 
total nonbank liquidity has risen appreciably faster in 
the last six months than gross national product. On the 
other hand, the banks' liquidity position has shrunk, 
especially in the matter of short-term Government security 
holdings.  

Monetary policy. I think we should now feel free to 
modify policy, if this seems desirable, without the 
restraints of an "even keel," even though dealer holdings 
of the 4-1/4's are still relatively large. With rather 
sizable corporate security offerings in prospect, we must 
probably accept the likelihood that a tightening of policy 
might find some reflection in slightly firmer long-term 
rates.  

As I said at the outset, I think the time has come 
to make another moderate, but clearly visible, change 
toward greater restraint on the growth of bank credit.  
The abundance of liquidity is pressing supplies of funds 
on lenders and this works counter to the success of the 
voluntary credit restraint program. It may also be 
encouraging a gradual deterioration in the quality of 
credit, on which we hear frequent comments from financial 
observers. While some stiffening of policy is needed as 
a signal at home and abroad of our determination to help 
solve the payments problem, the domestic business and 
price outlook now permits and may even require such a 
change.  

I would like to see net borrowed reserves somewhere 
around the $200 million level. The bill rate should, I 
believe, be a secondary consideration. Because of low 
dealer bill inventories and relatively light bank partici
pation in this market, the suggested increase in net 
borrowed reserves may have only minor impact on bill rates; 
and this in turn may minimize any expectations of a near
term change in the discount rate.  

The directive should be modified to recognize the 
recently quickened pace of price advances, to eliminate 
the reference to Treasury financing, and to call for 
firmer conditions in the money market, if the Committee 
reaches the same conclusion as I have on the need for 
current action. I think the staff's Alternative B is 
entirely satisfactory.1/ 

1/ The two alternative drafts of the directive prepared by the 
staff are appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-27-



5/25/65 -28

Mr. Ellis reported that the general atmosphere of the First 

District's just-completed semiannual business outlook conference seemed 

to substantiate the complaint of one participant that "euphoria seems 

to have broken out all over." While the horizon nine months away still 

seemed to have the traditional grey clouds impeding clear analytical 

vision, the projections for the remainder of 1965 were notable prima

rily for their bland uniformity. The standard forecast of a GNP 

increase of $24 billion by year-end centered in a range of only plus 

or minus 1.7 per cent of present GNP with none of the participants 

predicting a decline.  

New England business trends tended to substantiate the wide

spread euphoria, spiced by some gnawing doubts, Mr. Ellis continued.  

The Boston Reserve Bank had just completed its annual quota of four 

area conferences and from those exposures he would judge that the 

question most on the minds of the District's commercial bankers was 

how they could satisfy the loan demand they faced in view of their 

tightened liquidity positions. They recognized that the liquidity 

characteristics of both assets and liabilities had changed substantially 

as banks had expanded term loan and instalment lending, shifted from 

Governments to municipals, and expanded time deposits and negotiable 

CDs; nevertheless, they continued to have real concern about their 

tightened liquidity positions. Loan-deposit ratios of all weekly 

reporting banks in New England averaged 73 per cent as of May 12, a 

level 3.5 points above the national average and an all-time peak for 

First District banks. Boston banks, of course, were much higher,



5/25/65 -29

with an average ratio of 77.3 per cent. In spite of their concern 

about liquidity positions, each banker reported that he was going to 

"serve his customers" and satisfy loan demand as it showed up. The 

same bankers that reported they were making loans they would not 

touch a few years ago were not going to lose customers by rejecting 

loans now.  

Mr. Ellis said he thought the staff's chart presentation had 

been excellent, and that he would not repeat the discussion of the 

general outlook for business and for prices. To answer the question 

about the balance of payments directly, he would say he judged that 

factors other than the voluntary restraint program would tend to 

worsen the balance during the rest of this year. He noted the care 

with which the staff had phrased the statement that they could not 

foresee an increase in the current account surplus this year. He 

personally expected some worsening on current account. U.S. exports 

of agricultural commodities were likely to be reduced, particularly 

to the protection-minded Common Market countries, and exports also 

would be adversely affected by lowered capital outflows, whether for 

direct or indirect investment. Total imports would be lifted by 

imports of steel in anticipation of a steel strike and in event of 

a shutdown. It was his personal hunch that foreign automobile pro

ducers would again enlarge their share of U.S. unit sales as domestic 

producers again lengthened the new models and increased their horse

power. Tourism already stood ready to worsen the balance by $200-$300 

million, and expanding Government commitments in Viet Nam, Santo



5/25/65 -30

Domingo, and so on might be expected to swell outflows on Government 

account. Against those possibilities stood the hoped-for achievements 

of the temporary voluntary restraint program. Unfortunately, to the 

extent that such restraint was effective it increased the likelihood 

that it would become less voluntary and less temporary.  

To conserve time, Mr. Ellis said, he would blend his comments 

on the last three agenda questions. He expected that a slowed rate 

of business expansion would lessen credit demands from the obviously 

excessive first-quarter levels. Whether bank credit expansion would 

subside to tolerable rates or become merely "less excessive" remained 

moot. In any event, the obvious present strength of credit demands 

and the apparent willingness of banks to satisfy growing demands 

testified that the System's gradual policy moves over the past year 

to lessened credit ease had not stymied economic expansion. He found 

it helpful to describe the Committee's actions as cautious probing 

that had resulted in a gradual transition to modest credit restraint 

in face of steadily expanding demands for credit accomodation. In 

that process the Committee had simultaneously sought whatever balance 

of payments advantage might result from a narrowed rate spread between 

bills and long-term bonds. He was persuaded that such a policy of 

cautious probing had been successful and should be continued.  

The staff report,1 / Mr. Ellis noted, described April as a 

month when "the increase in industrial production was small, retail 

1/ "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared for the 
Committee by the Board's staff.



5/25/65 -31

sales drifted down further, and the labor market barely held its own." 

Yet, the April increase in bank loans and investments exceeded the 

gain of April 1964 by four times, and the April expansion in total 

bank reserves exceeded the three-month average growth rate by 18 per 

cent, ensuring a 10 per cent average rate of growth in bank reserves 

for the past three months. The evidence suggested to him that the 

Committee's modest moves to lessen credit availability had been out

matched by enlarged lending and investment activities by the banks, 

with a resultant acceleration of credit expansion that had carried 

well into the month of April.  

Two factors, both probably temporary, suggested to Mr. Ellis 

that caution should be exercised in further probing. The first was 

the enlarged holdings of bonds by Government security dealers. The 

second was the possibility that repatriation of funds from abroad 

might peter out and substantially alter the balance of forces that 

had maintained such strength in the bill market in face of lessened 

bank reserve availability.  

While recognizing the need for alertness to those two factors, 

Mr. Ellis would continue to probe toward lessened reserve availability.  

In terms of market forces of recent weeks, he would identify policy 

targets of $200 million net borrowed reserves, plus or minus $50 mil

lion; borrowings averaging around $500 million; Federal funds normally 

trading at 4-1/8 per cent; and dealer lending rates at 4-3/8 to 4-1/2 

per cent. Such gentle probing was not likely to stiffen short bill



5/25/65 -32

rates in light of the magnitude of nonbank funds available to the 

market, but, hopefully, eventual redistribution of investment funds 

would allow a 10 or 15 basis point rise in short bill rates.  

Mr. Ellis preferred alternative B of the staff drafts of the 

directive.  

Mr. Irons reported that preliminary figures and estimates for 

the Eleventh District indicated that the rate of expansion in economic 

activity had slackened off a bit during April, but currently there 

were some signs of a resumption of earlier trends. The changes in 

April had been small; in May industrial production continued a slight 

decline and crude oil production was down. On the other hand, con

struction contract awards were inching up in May, employment was 

strong, and unemployment was running somewhat below 4 per cent.  

Retail trade in April was above March, but was showing no change in 

May. Automobile sales continued strong. Bank debits were up appre

ciably.  

Recent weather was among the more favorable developments, 

Mr. Irons said. Heavy rains in all parts of the District, including 

areas that previously suffered from drought, made the agricultural 

outlook much better than it was some months ago. There also had been 

some improvement in agricultural prices, including livestock prices.  

At District banks, Mr. Irons continued, there had been decreases 

in loans, investments, and deposits, but of very small amounts. The 

demand for Federal funds had been large and while sales also had been 

substantial net purchases were sizable. Borrowings from the Reserve



5/25/65 -33

Bank averaged about $33 million in the recent period, compared with 

$23 million during the preceding period. Reports of Directors of the 

Bank's branches in Houston, San Antonio, and El Paso--which, while 

perhaps making up an unscientific sample, were interesting neverthe

less--were more optimistic than one might be on the basis of available 

statistics and indexes. Bankers stressed the strength of loan demand, 

although they recognized that it might be diminishing a little from 

the first quarter of the year. Banks were pressing for deposits, and 

they seemed reconciled to doing business on a higher-cost basis. The 

outlook for the District as a whole was rather optimistic. The under

currents of concern by businessmen seemed to relate mainly to such 

matters as the balance of payments, the recent heavy gold losses, and 

Government fiscal policies.  

On the national situation, Mr. Irons was in general agreement 

with the staff's chart presentation. Among the expansive factors 

were business capital spending, new orders for durable goods, and 

defense outlays. The high levels of consumer spending and construc

tion activity were elements of support if not strongly expansive.  

The level of inventories did not seem to be excessive, particularly 

when viewed in relation to sales. He doubted that there would be 

appreciable accumulation of inventories--in any event, not as long 

as prices did not seem to be rising too much and goods remained 

available from suppliers. Nor did he expect the impact on prices of 

inventory accumulation to be very significant. In sum, he thought 

the national outlook was for sustained advances in production and



5/25/65 -34

employment, although perhaps at a slower rate than had been expected 

earlier. It would be necessary to stay alert to the possibility of 

excesses in such areas as wage increases, consumer debt, inventories, 

and stock market speculation.  

Mr. Irons expected credit demands to continue strong, especially 

in the commercial and industrial and the consumer loan categories.  

Strong loan demands would be facing a lessened margin of liquidity in 

the banking system, and banks would be actively seeking funds to meet 

the demands.  

Mr. Irons reported that the balance of payments voluntary 

restraint program continued to have the support of bankers in the 

Eleventh District and evidently was working satisfactorily. He 

thought the uration of the program would be one factor in its 

effectiveness; the longer it continued the less effective it was 

likely to become. There seemed to be a feeling among bankers that 

the program was a one-year effort, especially if there was a substan

tial reduction in the flow of funds abroad in that period. He did 

not believe that if the voluntary restraint program was successful 

in holding down capital outflows this year other factors in the pay

ments balance would necessarily be improved. In his judgment there 

was a need for other policies and approaches in addition to the 

voluntary restraint program, and among those he thought there was a 

place for a firmer monetary policy. It would be necessary to stay 

continually alert to international price relations, which would affect 

the trade balance. There also were questions of confidence in the



5/25/65 -35

dollar and the effects that gold outflows might have on attitudes.  

The level of U.S. military expenditures abroad also had to be taken 

into consideration.  

Turning to credit policy, Mr. Irons thought there would be a 

strong demand for funds during the period from Memorial Day through 

the Independence Day holiday, and it would be necessary to supply 

additional reserves temporarily. Given the domestic and international 

situations, he would favor undertaking a moderate firming action by 

letting the market tighten against the expected demand. During the 

past week the market had firmed a little, although he could not say 

that it had been particularly firm. He favored a slightly lower level 

of reserve availability, increased use of the discount window, a Fed

eral funds rate at 4-1/8 per cent, and a bill rate reflecting those 

influences. He preferred net borrowed reserves in the $150-$200 

million range and borrowings in the $450-$500 million range. Alter

native B of the staff drafts of the directive was acceptable to him.  

Mr. Swan reported that in the Pacific Coast States employment 

was virtually unchanged in April and the unemployment rate rose a 

little as the labor force increased. However, employment in the 

aerospace industries rose from March to April, the first monthly 

increase since late 1962. Aerospace employment had been rising in 

the past few months in the State of Washington, but not in California 

before April. Present indications were that the rise might well be 

temporary, with declines anticipated in June and July.



5/25/65 -36

Lumber markets were somewhat weake:: in April and early May, 

Mr. Swan said, and prices continued well below the levels of a year 

ago. On the other hand, activity was high in metals, both steel and 

nonferrous metals. The livestock situation was much the same as 

Mr. Irons had reported for the Eleventh District; range conditions 

were very good and livestock people were quite optimistic.  

The gains in business loans at weekly reporting banks in the 

Twelfth District continued to lag behind the country as a whole, 

Mr. Swan noted, and in the first half of May they were less than in 

the same period a year ago. On the other hand, the increase in real 

estate loans at reporting banks in April, on which he had commented 

at the previous meeting, apparently continued in the first half of 

May. Banks continued to be under some reserve pressure. For the 

five weeks ending May 19, borrowings averaged over $60 million and 

were about four times as large as in the previous five weeks.  

Mr. Swan thought the analysis of the national picture given 

in the chart presentation today was highly interesting, and he would 

not take issue with it particularly. He wculd simply say that in 

view of the indications of some moderation in the rate of expansion-

in production, retail sales, and inventories, for example--it seemed 

to him that there was little basis in the domestic situation at this 

point for a further firming of policy. To be sure, the rapid 

increases in bank reserves and bank credit in March and April were 

matters of some concern, but he expected the gain in bank loans to



5/25/65 -37

moderate somewhat in the period ahead in view of the indications for 

the economy. He had been especially interested to note the comments 

in the memcrandum on member bank reserves to the effect that "weekly 

average data for the three weeks ending May 19 show a marked shift 

from the rapid expansion of member bank reserves and deposits that 

occurred earlier in the year;" and that "Total reserves seem likely 

to change little in May on a seasonally adjusted basis." Those 

comments might indicate that the Committee's earlier moves toward 

firming were having some impact at this point. The period in question 

was too short to provide a basis for firm conclusions, but the develop

ments reported seemed to argue against further tightening now.  

Mr. Swan agreed that there was a disappointing lack of 

indications of lasting improvement in the balance of payments apart 

from the effects of the voluntary restraint program. But that was 

hardly surprising; the Committee had been concerned about the payments 

problem for quite a long time. While international considerations 

might call for action by the Committee soon, he would prefer to await 

further developments in light of the general slowdown of the domestic 

economy. In particular, he would like to know more about the shape 

that fiscal policy was likely to take, in view of the proposals now 

under consideration. Consequently, he would suggest that for the 

present the Committee continue the policy it had been following. To 

him that could mean a continuation of the conditions prevailing in 

the last two weeks, with member bank borrowings around $500 million 

and net borrowed reserves around $150 million, even though those



5/25/65 -38

figures perhaps were slightly above the intentions the Committee had 

indicated earlier. However, he would not like to see any significant 

change. He also was concerned about the testing underway at present 

that had been mentioned with respect to longer-term interest rates.  

In sum, Mr. Swan said, he would accept alternative A for the 

directive with the understanding that the money market conditions to 

be sought in the next three weeks would be substantially those pre

vailing in the last two weeks.  

Mr. Galusha said that the Ninth District economy appeared to 

be in good shape and seemed likely to continue to expand, over the 

near-term at least, at a respectable rate. Attitudes toward the 

agricultural outlook depended on the kind of agriculture. Livestock 

people were highly optimistic, but people in the grain producing 

States were not happy; crops were very late this year.  

There would be a great deal of construction spending in the 

Ninth District over coming months, Mr. Galusha commented. Rebuilding 

of structures destroyed or damaged by recent floods and tornadoes, 

particularly in the Twin Cities area, might lead to the District's 

having a boomlet of its own for some time to come. Spending on plant 

and equipment probably would be somewhat above the levels indicated 

for the District by the recent McGraw-Hill survey.  

As far as Ninth District bank loans were concerned, Mr. Galusha 

said he had to distinguish between city and country banks. Among the 

latter, loans grew much more than seasonally over the first half of



5/25/65 -39

May, probably because of heavy livestock feed costs. Among the city 

banks, however, loans did not increase at all on a seasonally adjusted 

basis; indeed, since mid-April loan growth had been about what would 

have been expected from the seasonal pattern alone. It was perhaps 

worth noting that by usual standards District banks were feeling a 

pinch. He had no hard information on loan charges, but loan-deposit 

ratios, both of reporting and nonreporting banks, were at or very near 

post-1960 highs. And there had been much selling, particularly among 

country banks, of Government securities. In fact, total credit at 

all District banks increased a bit less than seasonally over the first 

half of May, and much less than over the first half of May 1964.  

Mr. Galusha went on to say that recent behavior of Ninth 

District banks might be accounted for, in part anyway, by a sharp 

drop in time deposit growth. Time deposit holdings actually declined 

over the first half of May, whereas they usually increased in that 

period. In consequence, total deposits of District banks increased 

considerably less than seasonally between the beginning and middle 

of May.  

As far as the national scene was concerned, Mr. Galusha was 

inclined to agree with Mr. Swan. The numbers, which of course 

lagged events, seemed to indicate there had been some slowing in the 

rate of economic advance. One aspect of the domestic situation that 

concerned him was the apparently large growth of business accounts 

receivable. Someone had to finance business when bank credit was 

tight, and it usually was the suppliers. He was not sure of the



5/25/65 -40

significance of the development but, in effect, the credit that banks 

were extending to their good customers was being made available to 

others indirectly through financing of receivables.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that developments of the past several 

weeks had fortified the belief of Seventh District bankers and business

men that economic expansion would continue throughout 1965. Forecasts 

of activity for the year as a whole typically had become more optimis

tic. He did not find support among businessmen in the District for the 

currently widely publicized view that activity might be topping out.  

Most local labor analysts in centers not heavily dependent 

on steel or autos looked for further increases in employment in the 

second half of 1965, Mr. Scanlon said. The number of reports of 

labor shortages was rising and such reports were no longer confined 

to skilled workers. Jobs requiring only "bodies and hands" were going 

unfilled in some areas, especially areas where auto employment was at 

high levels. That situation was reported most often for service 

industries but occurred also in some manufacturing firms.  

Demand for steel had held up extremely well since the postpone

ment of the strike threat, Mr. Scanlon reported. In the Chicago area 

the rate of ingot output declined 6 per cent from the week ending 

April 17 to the week ending May 15. Despite heavy order backlogs, 

steel producers had begun to shut down facilities in need of repair 

that they had been operating up to the strike deadline.



5/25/65

It appeared, Mr. Scanlon continued, that the average level of 

wholesale prices, led by aluminum and copper products, had moved up 

slightly further in recent weeks. Surprisingly, there was less out

spoken concern over inflationary pressures than several months ago 

when solid evidence of price increases was less evident. Farm incomes 

were rising in areas where cattle and hogs were important and the 

improved price situation for livestock was expected to continue at 

least through 1965. The Reserve Bank's recent survey of country 

bankers indicated that the long-continued rise of farm land prices 

might be accelerating somewhat.  

Business loans at District banks had continued to expand in 

the past few weeks at the slower pace that had been observed in April, 

Mr. Scanlon remarked. Borrowing by manufacturers of metal products 

had continued to rise contraseasonally, and loans to most other busi

nesses remained at relatively high levels. The acquisition of 

municipal securities had slowed markedly, although it had not been 

reversed. Holdings of Governments were up, on balance, although 

Chicago banks had sold some bills over the past month. Those develop

ments, plus the reserve positions shown for the major District banks, 

seemed to reflect a fairly comfortable reserve situation. There had 

been relatively little borrowing at the discount window.  

Mr. Scanlon's views on policy paralleled those of Mr. Irons.  

However, as he listened to the figures mentioned around the table he 

found it difficult to detect any perceptible change in suggested

-41-



3/25/65 -42

objectives with the exception of net borrowed reserves of $200 million.  

And even with respect to that figure, net borrowed reserves had been 

at $171 million in the most recent statement week, and so he would 

regard a figure of $200 million as merely resolving doubts on the 

side of firmness. If it took a change in the directive to accomplish 

that, he would favor alternative B.  

Mr. Clay reported that farm income prospects in the Tenth 

District had improved very materially in recent weeks. In part that 

situation stemmed from more satisfactory weather conditions that had 

brightened the outlook for both grain and grass. Substantial rains 

had alleviated the drought in the Plains area, except for a hard core 

drought area centered in east central Colorado. The record snow pack 

in the mountains also assured abundant supplies of irrigation water.  

The other principal factor improving farm income prospects, 

Mr. Clay said, was the higher level of livestock prices. While meat 

animal prices were not likely to retain their recent spread of 10 to 

20 per cent over year-earlier levels, they were expected to remain 

above year-ago levels throughout the year. Supplementing those fac

tors was the expectation that Government payments to farmers would 

be higher than last year. Accordingly, agriculture should be an 

expansive force on the general level of economic activity in the 

region in the months ahead. Despite the improved prospects for 

agricultural output and income, the structural readjustment in agri

culture continued to take its toll as many farmers were unable to 

continue operations on a profitable basis.



5/25/65 -43

Through the middle of May, Mr. Clay continued, bank credit 

developments at District city banks had continued the more moderate 

pace of April in contrast to the faster rate of the first quarter.  

Business loan activity in the District, which accelerated in January 

and February, did not show unusual strength in March, April, and 

early May. Time deposit volume, which expanded early in the year, 

had shown only modest growth in recent months.  

Turning to the national scene, Mr. Clay said it was apparent 

that the pace of domestic economic activity had moderated. While 

the readjustments in steel and autos were taking place in an environ

ment of expansionary general demand, the forthcoming configuration of 

domestic developments was not entirely clear.  

On the international side, Mr. Clay said, the developments 

under the Administration's program had produced favorable results, 

re-enforced by monetary policy, but the full implications of that 

effort were by no means apparent yet. It seemed appropriate to 

await additional developments in the international area and to observe 

domestic credit developments further as well.  

Accordingly, it appeared logical to Mr. Clay to continue 

monetary policy essentially unchanged at this time. That position was 

not intended to minimize the importance of the international payments 

problem, a problem that the United States had to solve. In addition 

to the basic monetary policy issue, however, was the fact that the



5/25/65 -44

present was a transitional period in domestic economic and credit 

developments, as well as in the Administration's balance of payments 

program.  

Such an approach to policy, Mr. Clay observed, would call for 

a continuation of recent money market conditions and about the same 

degree of credit availability as indicated at the last meeting.  

Alternative A of the draft directives was satisfactory to him. No 

change should be made in the discount rate at this time, he said.  

Mr. Wayne reported that the strong trend in Fifth District 

business activity apparently continued without significant change.  

Cigarette output had been at record levels since February, and most 

other manufacturing industries had maintained or increased already 

high levels of production.  

Nationally, Mr. Wayne continued, the April slowdown in the 

rate of business expansion apparently extended into May, but after 

the very fast pace of the first quarter some easing was to be expected.  

Apparently there had been no decline in the rate of business invest

ment, which should be a substantial element of strength in the economy 

for the near future. The slight easing in the rate of business growth 

had been accompanied by some price developments that might merit 

attention.  

In the international area, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that about 

the only conclusion that could be drawn from recent developments was 

that both the U.S. and the British were holding their own with some



5/25/65 -45

difficulty. While the voluntary restraint program appeared to be 

working quite well, it could not be assumed that any basic improvement 

had been achieved in the U.S. balance of payments. In that connection, 

it was important to keep in mind the possibility that additional defense 

requirements associated with recent international political developments 

might introduce more strain on the U.S. payments position in the near 

future.  

In the policy area, Mr. Wayne noted that the money market 

showed little reaction to the net borrowed reserves of the past three 

months; key money market variables had been almost static for many 

weeks. The banking system also seemed to have developed a kind of 

immunity to borrowed reserves. In part, that was because banks had 

obtained loanable funds in ways that used up fewer reserves or none at 

all, as by the sale of notes, debentures, and CDs. Also, they had 

used existing reserves more intensively th::ough increased trading in 

Federal funds. In those and perhaps other ways banks might have post

poned the restrictive effects of a reduced level of available reserves.  

It might. be that any given degree of restraint now required a lower 

level of available reserves than was true by previous standards. If 

wholesale prices continued their trend of the past six weeks, it 

would be necessary to give serious attention to actions that might 

curb them. For the present, however, Mr. Wayne did not favor a change 

in policy. Alternative A of the staff drafts of the directive was 

acceptable to him.



5/25/65

Mr. Robertson said he would like to compliment the staff on 

the chart presentation, which in his opinion had been excellent. He 

then made the following statement: 

From the facts we have before us, it seems clearer 
now than it was two weeks ago that the economy is in the 

midst of a transition. A slackening of steel inventory 

building, a lower level of automobile sales, and the 

heaviest fiscal drag since the tax cut are all serving 

to slow down the rate of domestic business expansion.  

Some drop from the unsustainably high rates of increase 

of the first quarter is desirable, but during such 

transition phases business is typically extra-sensitive 
to dampening influences, and I would not want monetary 

policy to add to the pressures slowing down activity at 

this time.  

I realize that some observers, looking at the 

fractional increases in price indexes recently, may come 
to the conclusion that a generalized price advance is 

being born that ought to be vigorously opposed by mone

tary tightening. But I am more impressed with the 

relatively small number and small size of the price 

increases that were generated by the peak of demand 

pressures on our resources in the first quarter. That 

we held the line so well under the circumstances I take 

to be an impressive tribute to the basic forces making 

for price stability during the current economic expan

sion. Now, with the pressure of demand on resources 

being relaxed a little, national market forces will be 

working against further price advances. I think we 
should watch carefully to see if such events give us a 

satisfactory overall price performance before jumping 

to the conclusion that they cannot and that monetary 

policy should be tightened further. My own guess is 

that market demands are not sufficient to support a 

generalized price advance of any size at this time, 

except and unless business and labor expectations of 

inflation are so whetted as to start something of an 

administered price-wage spiral. If that unlikely event 

should occur, then a significant and overt tightening 

action by the Federal Reserve would be called for as 

part of a vigorous program of counter-inflationary 

public action. But until it is a fact rather than a 

fear, we had better keep our powder dry.  

I see nothing in either the international or 

financial fields to gainsay this kind of policy pre

scription. The kinds of capital outflows that are 

believed to be interest-sensitive are already well in

-46-



5/25/65

hand with the combination of policy measures now in force.  
At the same time, our basic internaticnal competitiveness 
continues to be strengthened with each passing month by 
our persistently superior price performance and the increas
ing attractiveness of domestic capital investment.  

On the financial side, bank loan and deposit expansion 
seem to have slowed down markedly. As I read the figures, 
there has been a net contraction of the banking system 
and the money supply since late in April. In these changed 
circumstances, I think we should be very careful about 
prejudging what trend of expansion, if any, the banking 
system might settle down to under the conditions of 
reserve availability we are now maintaining. It could turn 
out to be much smaller than the experience earlier this 
year--perhaps even enough to call into question the appro
priateness of current policy. But this is a judgment that 
we will be in a better position to make a few weeks from 
now. In the meantime, I would be content with continuing 
policy unchanged, with money market conditions being kept 
about as they have been in recent weeks, and net borrowed 
reserves ranging around $100-$150 million. (I would not 
want to see them higher than that very often--even by 
inadvertence--with the bond market in its current tech
nically vulnerable position. In other words, I would 
advocate resolving doubts on the side of greater ease.) 
In terms of the directive itself, I would favor alternative 
A as drafted by the staff.  

Mr. Shepardson said that without going into detail he would 

express his complete accord with the views of Messrs. Hayes and Ellis.  

Granting that there had been a little easirg from the domestic economic 

pressures of earlier in the year, all indications--including business 

expectations, the outlook for Governmental fiscal policy, and the 

possibility of increased Federal expenditures associated with political 

problems abroad--seemed to point to further increases rather than 

decreases. In his judgment the present relaxation of the excessive 

pressures of a short time ago was a temporary development.  

For that reason, Mr. Shepardson continued, he would favor 

moving to less ease. He thought a $200 million target for net

-47-



5/25/65 -48

borrowed reserves was appropriate. He favored alternative B for the 

directive, but questioned the desirability of including the word 

"slightly" in the phrase "with a view to attaining slightly firmer 

conditions in the money market." The Committee had used the term 

"slightly firmer" on occasions in the past, and he thought that at 

times more emphasis had been placed on the word "slightly" than on 

the word "firmer." 

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the chart show must have been a 

good one, since those favoring both alternatives for the directive 

had been able to draw on it to support their views. In keeping with 

that procedure he would say that on the basis of the presentation he 

favored alternative A for the directive.  

Mr. Mitchell went on to say that he thought much of present 

business confidence was engendered by the performance of the economy 

in the first quarter. But some of the activity then--particularly 

the high level of automobile output--was borrowed from the past; and 

some--particularly steel production--was borrowed from the future.  

He was confident that the economy would continue to expand, but did 

not think that an advance anything like that of the first quarter 

could be looked for. In the presentation today the staff had said 

that the $14 billion rate of increase in aggregate expenditures of 

the first quarter might be followed by a second-quarter rise at an 

$8 billion rate. In his judgment, however, the rise in the second 

quarter could easily be at less than an $8 billion rate. He also



5/25/65 -49

would note that the buildup of steel inventories was continuing, and 

while its rate was difficult to assess it had been consistently under

estimated in the past.  

On the question of prices, Mr. Mitchell observed, significant 

recent increases had been concentrated mainly in the area of nonferrous 

metals, and were due in part to strikes and political troubles abroad.  

He failed to see any price developments of a type that the Committee 

might appropriately try to snub. In his judgment, the Committee had 

to be prepared to tolerate more significant price movements than those 

that occurred recently, unless it was willing to say that it did not 

favor increased economic growth or a reduction in the unemployment 

rate.  

Some of the comments that had been made on the balance of 

payments also left himrather unhappy, Mr. Mitchell continued. Last 

year the U.S. surplus on goods and services transactions was very 

large--$8.2 billion. This indicated that the country's trading 

position is strong, he said, and any attempt to dramatically increase 

exports and decrease imports to eliminate the overall deficit would 

have serious repercussion on the country's longer run trading relation

ships. It was, in his view, inappropriate therefore to use monetary 

policy at this time to restrict imports or expand exports. Nor was 

it wise to use monetary policy to curb the capital outflow by 

raising the level of U.S. interest rates.  

Any move now toward firmer money market conditions would be 

likely to lead to a rise in long-term interest rates, Mr. Mitchell



5/25/65 -50

said, particularly in view of the large holdings of longer-term issues 

by Government security dealers and the vulnerable position of the tax

exempt market. In his judgment a rise in long-term rates would hurt 

not help the economy. Accordingly, he felt the Committee should keep 

policy about where it was and leave the directive unchanged.  

Mr. Daane remarked that after noting the differences in 

emphasis in the discussion to this point his feelings about appropriate 

policy were mixed. He thought the most important consideration at 

present was that the Committee should maintain a policy posture that 

would be conducive to confidence in the dollar. He agreed with Mr.  

Mitchell that monetary policy alone could not reform the balance of 

payments, which was affected among other ways by the Government's 

foreign aid program. But the Committee did have a concern with general 

attitudes toward the dollar. If he felt that a change in policy was 

necessary today to maintain confidence in the dollar he would favor 

such a change; but in his judgment no overt policy change was required.  

Mr. Daane thouht that members of the Committee, including 

himself, sometimes tended to take too seriously the implications for 

the economy of minor changes in net borrowed or free reserves. Despite 

the staff review he considered the economy to be exceedingly strong 

at present. Perhaps his views reflected the ebullience he had found 

on a visit to Detroit last week; but it was difficult for him to 

believe that a small increase in net borrowed reserves would have 

much impact on economic developments in general and on long-term 

interest rates in particular.



5/25/65 -51

Mr. Daane agreed with Mr. Swan that alternative A was 

preferable for the directive. However, in his thinking he translated 

"no change" into the range of net borrowed reserves suggested by 

Mr. Irons--$150 to $200 million. If effect, the figure had been in 

that range recently; net borrowed reserves had averaged $155 million 

in the last three statement weeks, and a little higher in the last 

two weeks. As he had indicated, his feelings were mixed; from some 

standpoints he would rather see net borrowed reserves at the $200 

million level. On balance, however, he would hold to alternative A.  

However, he would suggest two minor amendments to the staff draft.  

In the first sentence he would say "The economic and financial develop

ments reviewed at this meeting indicate a generally strong further 

expansion of the domestic economy, although at a somewhat slower 

pace. . ." rather than that these developments indicated "maintenance 

of a high level of economic activity. . ." as suggested by the staff.  

To him the staff's proposed language implied that activity was on a 

plateau, whereas GNP was expected to rise at an annual rate of $8 

billion in the current quarter. Secondly, in the last paragraph he 

would call for maintaining about the same money market conditions as 

had prevailed "since the last meeting of the Committee," rather than 

"in recent weeks." 

Mr. Hayes remarked that in view of the comments by Mr. Daane 

and others regarding recent levels of net borrowed reserves, it 

might be useful for the Manager to indicate what range of figures he had 

had in mind in operations since the previous meeting.



5/25/65 -52

Mr. Holmes replied that, as he had understood it, the Committee's 

intent was that net borrowed reserves should average somewhat over $100 

million. However, he also had understood that the Committee wanted 

operations to be related to other conditions in the money market; and 

in some respects the money market had had a somewhat easier tone 

recently despite the higher level of net borrowed reserves. He could 

not say that he had had a target range ot $150-$200 million net bor

rowed reserves in mind.  

Mr. Daane commented that net borrowed reserves nevertheless had 

come out in the $150-$200 million area, and he thought the Committee 

could contemplate a continuation of that range without adopting 

alternative B for the directive.  

Mr. Hayes observed that in his opinion the most recent figure 

of $171 million was regarded as a slight aberration on the high side, 

at least by some Committee members.  

Mr. Maisel said he felt the tone of the staff report was 

excellent. From it he drew the following conclusions. The past six 

months had been characterized by a sharp increase in savings by 

businesses and governments. It was fortunate that increased auto 

sales, as well as the run-up of steel inventories, were available to 

offset that higher level of savings. He noted that industrial prices 

had not had any statistically significant rise in nearly six years 

and that the main recent price rises had been primarily in inter

national goods and raw materials. It now appeared that the two



5/25/65 -53

major spending factors which sparked the first quarter expansion would 

be missing in the next half year. Since even with that extra spending 

the economy fell short of a completely desirable level of production 

and employment, it was extremely important that plant and equipmen: 

investments rise to make up the gap. As a consequence, he thought no 

action should be taken that would endanger that growth. He felt that 

such growth was probable. On the other hand, he did not believe that 

a period of slackening growth with a declining workweek was a period 

for putting further pressure on financial markets.  

As a general rule, Mr. Maisel said, he would prefer that the 

Committee not vote a change in policy which would have very little 

actual effect. It was too likely to be misunderstood. He believed 

that alternative A was the proper directive. He would, however, go 

along with Mr. Daane's first proposed change but not his second one.  

Perhaps, however, a change also should be made at the end of the first 

paragraph to call attention to the fact that as a result of movements 

in the past month the money supply was no greater than it was six 

months ago. While moderate growth might be proper, it had not occurred.  

Mr. Hickman observed that for the first time the figures were 

beginning to show the hesitation in the economy that had been expected 

to occur from declines in autos and steel. That was the case in indus

trial production, where the increase in April was smaller than in 

recent months, as well as in such series as overtime pay and the wage 

and salary component of personal income. A similar pattern would 

presumably be reflected in the second-quarter increment of GNP.



5/25/65 -54

Prices had moved up on a selective basis, but, with the exception of 

agricultural products, most increases appeared to have been adjustments 

to shortages and bottlenecks that might already have passed.  

In addition to declines in autos and steel, Mr. Hickman 

continued, cutbacks were beginning to appear in associated industries.  

For example, the workweek at rubber plants had been reduced from six 

to five days to correct for extremely large inventories of tires.  

Reflecting those developments, some analysts had lowered their sights 

from the very optimistic levels prevalent earlier.  

Mr. Hickman reported that the Cleveland Reserve Bank's staff 

estimated that the combined changes in steel, autos, and related 

industries would have a net drag on the industrial production index 

from the second quarter to the second half of the year averaging 

about two index points. That was expected to be only partly offset 

by further gains in machinery and defense. It thus appeared that 

further net gains in the production index this year would be small 

at best.  

Despite strength in capital spending and the expected fiscal 

stimulus, the "standard forecast" for GNP indicated rates of quarterly 

gain below those achieved in 1964, Mr. Hickman remarked. His staff 

was inclined to project somewhat lower rates than the standard fore

cast, but by almost any reckoning momentum seemed to be diminishing.  

Thus, the U.S. would be losing ground in the national effort to close 

the gap between actual and potential GNP. That implied a rising rate 

of unemployment.



5/25/65 -55

Against that background, Mr. Hickman said, fiscal measures 

proposed by the Administration appeared to be inadequate. For example, 

the full employment surplus for the second half of 1965 had been revised 

upward to reflect an unexpectedly large rise in Federal income tax 

receipts. Looking further ahead, he was also disturbed by the alarm

ingly large fiscal drag estimated for the first half of 1966, even 

taking into account further reductions in excise taxes. Thus, it 

appeared that U.S. fiscal policy, as now planned, would be inadequately 

countercyclical this year, and would become procyclical next year.  

Whether the Committee liked it or not, monetary policy might be called 

upon to make a still further contribution to economic expansion, 

despite the country's balance of payments difficulties.  

Viewed retrospectively, Mr. Hickman observed, the level of net 

borrowed reserves, which averaged $161 million over the past two weeks, 

and member bank borrowings, which averaged $500 million, might prove to 

have been too restrictive. With the uncertainties in the business out

look, he would prefer to see borrowings around $400 million and net 

borrowed reserves in a range of $50 to $100 million. That, he thought, 

could be acconplished within the scope of alternative A of the staff's 

draft directives. He would accept Mr. Daane's recommendation with 

respect to the first paragraph, but not his suggestion for the second 

paragraph.  

In concluding, Mr. Hickman noted that covered yield 

differentials were still not favorable to the U.S. and there were 

reports of attempts to attract funds to Canada from the Fourth 

District on a rate basis. He thus would like to see the Treasury



5/25/65 -56

either offer a strip of bills or increase the weekly bill offering, 

despite the Treasury's temporarily large cash balances.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that now that the interim steel settlement 

had been reached, the economy appeared to be experiencing the slight 

hesitation so widely anticipated earlier in the year. A recent meet

ing of Philadelphia area business economists held at the Reserve Bank, 

while noting the slowdown, reached the conclusion that the economy 

was in for no general downturn. Those economists felt that steel 

inventories would hold at about present levels until the latter part 

of the third quarter, whereupon some accumulation would occur. They 

felt also that if a final settlement was reached in early September, 

steel production would decline 20 to 25 per cent. It was felt that 

upward momentum would still be maintained, however, paced by high 

rates of capital expenditure and a moderately expansive fiscal 

policy. The median forecast for gross national product in December 

1965 was almost $670 billion (annual rate), up 5.5 per cent from the 

fourth quarter 1964. A tapering off of the rate of increase was fore

cast during the latter part of the year, with wholesale prices 

remaining relatively stable and unemployment creeping up to around 

the 5 per cent level.  

As for the strength of business loan demand in coming months, 

discussions with District reserve city bankers provided mixed 

appraisals, Mr. Bopp commented. Two of the larger banks expected 

some noticeable increase in business loans in the latter half of the



5/25/65 -57

year; the remaining banks saw only a slight rise. None of the banks 

could pinpoint any category of business loans as likely to show 

particular strength. Instead, they viewed prospective loan demand as 

coming "across the board." Over all, no significant strengthening in 

loan demand was anticipated.  

Turning to policy, it appeared to Mr. Bopp that the present 

monetary posture was appropriate to the near-term outlook. The 

rapid increase in business loans experienced in the past few weeks 

would be disturbing if continued over a protracted period. But the 

rate of increase seemed to be moderating, and with the pace of business 

activity likely to be slower in coming months, demand for credit should 

be more moderate. Though prices had shown some increase, pressures 

were confined primarily to metals and food. He continued to be 

impressed by the facts that productive capacity was expanding and unit 

labor costs remained stable. Unemployment would probably rise over 

the summer months and, while much of present and prospective unemploy

ment might be structural in nature, it was still necessary to maintain 

a high level of aggregate demand if new entrants into the labor force 

were to find employment and if measures to alleviate the structural 

problem were to achieve ultimate success. Given those factors and 

considering also the apparent success of the President's voluntary 

balance of payments program, Mr. Bopp would make no change at present 

in the general posture of monetary policy. Hence, he favored alterna

tive A of the staff drafts of the directive.  

Mr. Bryan remarked that relatively few new statistics for 

the Sixth District had become available in the two weeks since the



5/25/65 -58

Committee had last met. However, the new statistics that were 

available for the District seemed to confirm the indications of the 

national figures of a slowdown in the upward trend of the economy.  

As he saw it, the question was whether that represented merely a 

reduction in upward momentum that might make for more stable growth 

in the long run--in his judgment the economy had been growing at an 

unsustainable pace earlier--or whether it reflected a genuine down

turn. Obviously, he was not enough of an economic forecaster to say 

with certainty at this point which was the case. As a result, he 

favored no change in policy. He would vote for alternative A for 

the directive, with Mr. Daane's suggested change in the first 

paragraph.  

Mr. Bryan's only other comment was on the balance of payments.  

He was gratified by the contribution that the so-called voluntary 

restraint program was making, but doubted that the program would 

result in a lasting amendment of the situation. Unless some new 

approach was fashioned--such as in the area of Government foreign 

loans and grants--he thought achieving improvement was going to be 

slow and hard work.  

Mr. Shuford said that economic and financial developments 

continued to demonstrate strength, even though there perhaps had 

been some slowing of the economic advance in recent weeks. Employ

ment had increased rapidly in the past few months, and production had 

risen faster than the upward trend in capacity. While retail sales 

were off a bit recently they were at a high level and, after allowance



5/25/65 -59

for special fluctuations, had been rising at an average 5 per cent 

annual rate.  

Wholesale prices had been working up since late last summer, 

Mr. Shuford continued. They rose early last fall; in the fourth quar

ter they were nearly stable; and since December they had risen at a 

3 per cent annual rate. On the average, since last June they had 

moved up at a 2 per cent annual rate. Both the extent of the rise 

compared with the virtual stability over the previous six years, and 

the acceleration of price increases in recent months compared with 

declines for corresponding periods of the three previous years, were 

reasons for some concern.  

Business activity in the Eighth District had approximated 

that nationally, Mr. Shuford said. Production and spending had been 

expanding at slightly faster rates than na:ionally since last August.  

Employment, while strong, had been increasing a little less rapidly 

than in the nation.  

Mr. Shuford noted that national financial markets continued 

to reflect the strength of the economy. As interest rates had 

remained about unchanged, bank credit--chiefly loans--had expanded 

at a marked rate. Time deposits had increased at a rapid rate, and 

a major share of the reserves supplied to the banking system had been 

used to support them and also to support an unusual jump in Government 

deposits. The growth in the money supply had probably slowed since 

November, but he was inclined to think not so much as current data 

indicated after adjustment by the new seasonal factors and for the 

unusual temporary transfer of funds from private to Government accounts.



5/25/65 -60

As to policy, Mr. Shuford felt tha: some firming was in order.  

Without repeating the reasons that had been outlined today by Messrs.  

Hayes, Irons, Ellis, and others, he would simply say that he too would 

think in terms of net borrowed reserves fluctuating around $200 mil

lion, and the Federal funds rate above the discount rate most of the 

time. In addition, while he did not advocate attempting to raise 

short-term rates, he nevertheless would be pleased if higher bill 

rates resulted from the slightly firmer position he favored.  

Mr. Shuford said that he would not change the discount rate 

at this time. As to the directive, alternative B seemed acceptable.  

Mr. Balderston noted that much of the discussion at today's 

meeting had centered on the domestic economy; he thought the minutes 

would reveal that much more stress had been placed on domestic than 

on international considerations. He did not know whether a real slow

down was occurring in the rate of economic expansion that the country 

had been enjoying for four years or whether there was merely a little 

deflation in the bubble that might have grown on top of the boom.  

The money supply had been affected by the large increase in Treasury 

deposits. The relapse in the stock market was what one would expect 

and perhaps even hope for after the kind of ebullience that had been 

witnessed for a while.  

In short, Mr. Balderston said, he was not willing to make a 

judgment right now as to whether the domestic advance had really 

slackened. He suspected, however, that unless the Committee took 

some further steps with respect to policy, it might find that the



5/25/65 -61

psychology of businessmen had led them to decisions they would regret.  

He thought he had observed some unhealthy ebullience in the thinking 

of businessmen. In any case, whatever the domestic concerns, the inter

national problem was very much with the Committee.  

Mr. Balderston said he was reminded of the challenging 

statement that Mr. Mitchell had made at the Committee's April meeting.  

He (Mr. Balderston) had found many of Mr. Mitchell's individual obser

vations intriguing, but disagreed completely with his conclusions.  

Mr. Mitchell had observed that overall restraint of credit growth was 

not a desirable or feasible way of dealing with the problem of capital 

outflows. He also had argued that any effort to reduce the flow in 

credit markets by more restrictive monetary policies was offset, in 

part, by a diversion of the flow of current income away from consump

tion and durable goods expenditures into credit markets. He had 

concluded that the restrictive impact of a tight money policy would 

slow up the rate of domestic expansion and not curtail substantially 

the flow of funds seeking investment outlets abroad. Mr. Mitchell 

also had observed, and Mr. Balderston agreed, that interest rate 

differentials were bound to persist for some time between the U.S. and 

other countries which were not as intensively capitalized. Mr. Mitchell 

had concluded further that in the longer run the U.S. must establish 

controls over capital outflows that did not have to be backed up or 

reinforced by tighter money. It was at that point, Mr. Balderston 

said, that his own thinking departed from Mr. Mitchell's. While the



5/25/65 -62

latter would stress domestic goals, Mr. Balderston would give equal 

weight to international considerations.  

In Mr. Balserston's opinion the Government had to act quickly 

to curtail its foreign spending, or all efforts to improve the payments 

balance would be fruitless; the private sectors of the economy could 

not be asked to carry all of the burden. But also, what progress was 

being made in the private sectors would be undermined, in his judgment, 

unless it was supported by some reduction in credit availability.  

That was the responsibility of the Committee.  

It might be argued, Mr. Balderston continued, that the recent 

increase in bank credit had been more rapid than in other forms of 

credit, and therefore was not as serious as it might appear. However, 

banking institutions had the know-how and the incentive to push funds 

abroad. Accordingly, he thought that the rate of growth of bank credit 

was particularly in need of control.  

Mr. Balderston concluded that the Committee should not concen

trate on domestic goals to the exclusion of international objectives.  

Further restraint on credit availability was required, in his judgment, 

to achieve the nation's balance of payments goals. He favored alterna

tive B of the draft directives for the reasons stated by Messrs. Hayes 

and Ellis.  

Chairman Martin noted that some members of the Committee 

favored one alternative for the directive today and some favored the 

other. He could argue the case either way. There seemed to be only 

slight differences in the objectives sought by the two groups, and he



5/25/65 -63

wondered if the distinction being made was not too fine to serve as a 

basis for a policy change. His own thinking probably tended in the 

direction of the group favoring firming, although no one could be sure 

about the appropriate timing. He was becoming increasingly worried 

about both the balance of payments and the possibility of domestic 

inflation. his views were not firm on either point but he certainly 

was not worried, for example, that a deflation would occur.  

The Chairman said he was not sure that monetary policy would 

have any influence on price developments; sometimes he felt discour

aged on that score. But he could not go along with Mr. Robertson's 

suggestion that the Committee should wait until there was clear evi

dence of a price bulge before acting, because then it would be too 

late. With respect to the balance of payments problem, it there was 

a clear hemorrhage in U.S. internaticnal payments it might be necessary 

to follcw Britain in raising the discount rate to a high level. That 

might happen.  

Those were matters that the Committee had to weigh in arriving 

at its policy decision, the Chairman remarked. On the directive, he 

thought the Ccmmittee was in a difficult situation when the two alterna

tives could be interpreted in the same way by different people.  

Speaking not from his own point of view but in light of the discussion 

today, a directive along the lines of alternative A might be adopted, 

with the understanding that the conditions to be kept unchanged were 

roughly those that were currently prevailing, whether they had been 

attained inadvertently or not. Net borrowed reserves currently were



5/25/65 -64

in the neighborhood of $150 million, he noted. The Chairman said that 

he could not support alternative A if it was taken as an instruction 

to the Desk to get net borrowed reserves back to around $100 million; 

in advocating no change in policy he meant no change in either direc

tion. On the whole, he thought present policy, which he would describe 

as "mildly restrictive," was appropriate.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that the second paragraph of alternative 

A called for maintaining about the same conditions in the money market 

and not for maintaining net borrowed reserves at any particular level.  

On that basis the figures for net borrowed reserves could be expected 

to fluctuate He was unclear from the discussion whether it was now 

proposed to shift to a net borrowed reserve target or to continue the 

earlier practice.  

Chairman Martin commented that he personally did not favor 

introducing numbers for net borrowed reserves into the directive.  

But in its discussions around the table the Committee had tended 

toward the use of such numbers in measuring the results achieved by 

the Desk.  

The Chairman then noted that Mr. Daane had suggested changes 

in both paragraphs of alternative A, the first but not the second of 

which seemed acceptable to those commenting on them. He proposed 

that the Committee vote on alternative A with Mr. Daane's first pro

posed amendment. There followed some further discussion of the 

wording of the directive.



5/25/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York was authorized and directed 
until otherwise directed by the Commit
tee, to execute transactions in the 
System Account in accordance with the 
following current economic policy direc
tive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate a generally strong further expansion 
of the domestic economy, although at a somewhat slower 
pace, and some improvement in our international balance of 
payments, but with gold outflows continuing. In this 
situation, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's 
current policy to reinforce the voluntary restraint pro
gram to strengthen the international position of the 
dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pres
sures, while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve 
base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
over the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
maintaining about the same conditions in the money market 
as have prevailed in recent weeks.  

Votes for this action: Messrs.  
Martin, Bryan, Daane, Galusha, Maisel, 
Mitchell, Robertson, and Scanlon. Votes 
against this action: Messrs. Hayes, 
Balderston, Ellis, and Shepardson.  

Mr. Hayes said he dissented from this action because he 

considered it desirable to move toward firmer money market conditions 

at present, even if the change was a slight one. Messrs. Balderston, 

Ellis, and Shepardson also dissented because they favored a move 

toward firmer money market conditions, for the reasons indicated by

their statements earlier in the meeting.

-65-



5/25/65 -66

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, June 15, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  Secretary



Attachment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 24, 1965 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive 
for Consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee 

at its Meeting on May 25, .1965 

Alternative A (no change in policy) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate maintenance of a high level of economic 
activity and some improvement in our international balance of 
payments, but with gold outflows continuing. In this situation, 
it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy 
to reinforce the voluntary restraint program to strengthen the 
international position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence 
of inflationary pressures, while accommodating moderate growth 
in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
over the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
maintaining about the same conditions in the money market as 
have prevailed in recent weeks.  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate maintenance of a high level of economic 
activity with some upward pressures on prices, a large expan
sion of bank credit and reserves in recent months, and 
continuing gold outflows despite some improvement in our 
international balance of payments. In this situation, it is 
the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to rein
force the voluntary restraint program to strengthen the 
international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, by moderating growth in 
the reserve base and bank credit.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
over the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
attaining slightly firmer conditions in the money market.


