









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 13, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairnan 
Balderston 
Bryan 
Daane 
Ellis 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Clay, Alternate for President of Minneapolis Bank 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, and Irons, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistart Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Biill, Garvy, Holland, Koch, 

and Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistart to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Mr. Partee, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors



4/13/65 -2

Messrs. Patterson and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, 
Parsons, Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphis, 
Cleveland, Richmond, St. Louis, Minneapolis, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Sternlight, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on March 23, 1965, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

March 23 through April 7, 1965, and a supplemental report for April 8 

through 12, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed in the 

files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

stated that the U.S. gold stock would probably be reduced by $150 

million this week in order to replenish the Stabilization Fund. This 

would bring the total decline to $975 million for the year. During 

the month of April, he expected that total gold sales would come to 

about $240 million, offset by purchases totaling about $94 million, 

including $50 million from the United Kingdom. He anticipated that 

the Stabilization Fund would end the month with a balance of roughly



4/13/65 -3

$70 million. For May, gold sales of somewhat more than $40 million 

were already in sight. The total could go to $150 million or more, 

which would mean a further sizable reduction in the gold stock.  

On the London gold market, Mr. Coombs continued, there had 

been continued private buying in some volume, although less than 

before. The Chinese Communists still were coming in occasionally; 

their purchases were now in excess of $50 million this year. On the 

other hand, there had been a fairly good inflow from new production, 

and losses of the Gold Pool during March were no more than $26 million.  

This brought accumulated Gold Pool losses to $206 million against 

resources of $270 million. But the agreement reached at the time 

of the March meeting of the Bank for International Settlements to 

continue Gold Pool selling if necessary, even if the Pool's resources 

should become exhausted, was reaffirmed at the time of the meeting 

held this past week end.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs noted that sterling had 

experienced a number of ups and downs. Prior to the announcement of 

the British budget, there had been devaluation rumors resulting in 

speculative pressures. The Bank of England suffered sizable reserve 

losses in dealing with those pressures in the spot and forward markets.  

Drawings on the swap with the Federal Reserve were increased to $370 

million, and borrowings from other central banks and the Bank for 

International Settlements to more than $800 million. Since the



4/13/65 -4

announcement of the budget, which was fairly well received in the 

markets, sterling had recovered, both spot and forward, and the Bank 

had taken in moderate amounts of dollars. But the March trade figures 

showed no significant increase in exports and a rise in imports.  

The sterling rate was immediately affected, and the situation remained 

highly uncertain.  

It had not been possible, Mr. Coombs said, to make ary net 

reduction in the Federal Reserve swap drawings on various central banks, 

and the total drawings had increased from $515 to $585 million. He 

suspected that the continuing inflow of dollars to continental central 

banks was mainly attributable to U.S. direct corporate investments, 

aggravated by continuing tight money conditions in continental markets.  

At the recent Bank for International Settlements meeting, 

Mr. Coombs said, there were three rather important developments. First, 

there was a great deal of discussion of the British situation, with 

more or less general agreement that the British should go to the 

Monetary Fund for the entire $1.4 billion left in their quota and a 

general feeling among most of the central bankers that any appearance 

of dissension should be avoided. There was a feeling on the part of a 

few of the bankers that the budget was not sufficiently strong, and a 

rather general view that it was a pity the budget had not been accompanied 

by further measures on the monetary side. But the budget was a fact, 

and it was thought essential to make the best of it.



4/13/65 -5

Secondly, there were indications of some softening in the 

French line, Mr. Coombs continued. Aside from the reduction in the 

discount rate, there were other evidences of some shifting, which 

meant that the French might be pressing less harshly than before.  

Third, there were a number of indications that the European central 

banks were beginning to respond to the need to ease up somewhat in 

their monetary policies in order to compensate for the pulling back 

of U.S. corporate short-term investments and the curtailment in U.S.  

bank foreign lending. The Bank of Italy had put into the Euro-dollar 

market a total of $750 million in the last month or so. This was the 

reason the Euro-dollar rate had been coming down and a disruptive 

situation averted. He thought that the Bundesbank would shortly 

institute similar swaps with German banks, and that a number of others, 

including the French and Dutch, might take actions that would result 

in a movement of funds into the international credit markets.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System 
open market transactions in foreign 
currencies during the period March 23 
through April 12, 1965, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the $100 million swap arrangement with 

the Bank of France would mature on May 10, and he recommended its 

renewal for another three months.  

Renewal of the swap arrangement with 
the Bank of France for another three months 
was approved unanimously.



4/13/65

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period March 23 through April 7, 1965, 

and a supplemental report for April 8 through 12, 1965. Copies have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

The noney market tone was a bit firmer during the past 
three weeks. Net borrowed reserves were perceptibly larger, 
member banks were obliged to borrow in greater volume in 
order to meet a level of required reserves that ran con
sistently in excess of our expectations, and Federal funds 
traded quite frequently above the discount rate. Indeed, 
the effective rate was 4-1/8 per cent on eight of the past 
fifteen business days. Nevertheless, bill rates have 
barely moved from the lower levels reached a few weeks 
ago. In yesterday's auction the average issuing rates on 
three- and six-month bills were about 3.94 and 3.99 per 
cent, respectively. Three weeks earlier the comparable 
rates were 3.92 and 3.98 per cent.  

In conducting System operations during this interval, 
an effort was made to supply reserves with minimum reliance 
on Treasury bill purchases in the market. A net of $446 
million reserves was supplied, in good part through re
purchase agreements; outright holdings of Treasury issues 
increased by $222 million, including $170 million of bills, 
the latter largely reflecting purchases from foreign 
accounts.  

In reviewing developments at the last Committee 
meeting, Mr. Stone suggested that the tendency for bill 
rates to decline while other short-term rates were steady 
or rising might be explainable in good part as a result 
of repatriation of corporate short-term funds from abroad; 
there seemed to be a tendency for such funds to go 
initially into the bill market even when this offered 
a relatively less attractive return than other short-term



4/13/65

instruments. Repatriation flows probably have remained 
a factor, although it is very difficult to pinpoint the 
extent or form of such inflows with any precision. An 
additional factor in recent weeks has been the sub
stantial demand for bills by various public funds, partly 
with the proceeds of tax receipts, which run heavy at 
this time of the year. At the same time, commercial 
bank liquidation of bills, which might have been expected 
to have been substantial under the sustained condition 
of firmness in the money market and vigorous loan demand, 
has occurred to some extent but has apparently been 
inhibited somewhat by banks' needs to hold Treasury 
securities for collateral purposes.  

In the meantime, other short-term rates have shown 
little change on balance. Three dealers raised their 
acceptance rates by 1/8 per cent shortly after the last 
meeting, as inventories approached record levels, but 
then rescinded the increase a few days ago as inventories 
had worked down. Similarly, some commercial paper rates 
briefly mcved higher during the period and then returned 
to the late March level. New York City bank new CD 
rates have also changed little--if anything, edging 
slightly lower as tax date pressures receded. On the 
whole, therefore, the further slight firming of bank 
reserve availability seems to have had little noticeable 
impact beyond the very shortest term area of day-to-day 
reserve availability.  

The bond markets also showed little net change through 
the interval--exhibiting some hesitancy in the early portion 
while awaiting the British budget and appraising weekly 
banking statistics that pointed to strong loan demand and 
lower reserve availability, and then regaining some confi
dence in the wake of the British budget proposals and the 
French bank rate reduction. The publication of a second 
week's net borrowed reserve level greater than $100 
million did generate some caution; most observers now 
feel that a further modest shift in policy has occurred, 
but this produced no significant selling pressure and 
prices were off only 1/32 or 2/32 since Thursday's close.  

The corporate and municipal markets have continued 
rather uneventful. New high-grade corporate issues reached 
the market in light volume, were priced in the same area 
as in other recent weeks (roughly 4-1/2 per cent for Aa
rated utility issues), and tended to move out slowly to 

investors. The supply of new tax-exempt issues continued 
fairly sizable and these, too, moved out slowly for the 

most part.



4/13/65

As was mentioned at the last meeting, the next item 
on the Treasury financing calendar is the refunding of 
May 15 maturities, of which some $4.1 billion are held 
by the public. The Treasury will meet with its advisory 
groups on April 27 and 28, and probably announce the 
terms of their refinancing on the latter day. A number 
of market observers expect that the Treasury might offer 
preemptive rights to holders of the maturing issues, and 
perhaps sell an intermediate issue as well as a short 
"anchor" issue in an exchange operation.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period March 23 through 
April 12, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then referred to the memorandum dated March 18, 

1965, from Mr. Stone, former Manager of the System Open Market Account, 

which was prepared as the result of a question raised by Mr. Mitchell 

at the March 2 Committee meeting and held over at the March 23 meeting 

at Mr. Robertson's request. The memorandum presented a breakdown of 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's holdings, as of end of 

December 1963 and 1964, and of February 19 and March 12, 1965, either 

for own account or for foreign accounts, of third-country bankers' 

acceptances (acceptances created to finance third-country trade, that 

is, goods stored in or shipped between foreign countries).  

The Chairman called for comments, and Mr. Robertson made the

following statement:



4/13/65

The question raised by Governor Mitchell as to whether 
the System should purchase third-country acceptances in view 
of the low priority assigned them in our voluntary restraint 
program is a marginal one--and I do not mean that in any 
depreciatory sense. It is my judgment that System activity 
in bankers' acceptances is quite marginal to the health of 
the acceptance market, but this is not the time to argue that 
on such grounds the System shoul desist from operations in 
acceptances. A broad range of questions--dealing with cri
teria for market performance and desirable characteristics 
of a free market--would have to be discussed if such were the 
fundamental issue before us.  

We do not really have to deal with so fundamental a 
problem, though, because System operations in third-country 
acceptances are also marginal to the success of the voluntary 
restraint program. Still, I would be reluctant to give up 
whatever marginal value to the program might be gained from 
the psychological impact on banks of some limitation on 
System activity in third-country acceptances. And I do 
recognize, of course, that the bulk of third-country ac
ceptances involve Japan, a country where application of 
the program is involved in high diplomacy.  

I am not speaking of any written limitation from this 
Committee, and definitely not of any limitation announced 
in the market. Rather, I would simply like to see the 
System make an effort in its transactions to avoid third
country acceptances--which were reported to be about two
fifths of the portfolio on March 12--and emphasize others.  

I am not advocating at this time that we necessarily 
cut down our already limited total activity in acceptances.  
I would expect that the System would continue to be able to 
make repurchase agreements or buy outright in volumes not 
much different from recent experience, but with relatively 
more emphasis on U.S. import and export paper and relatively 
less on third-country paper.  

The idea, in other words, would be to reduce that two
fifths gradually, and certainly not build it up. In the 
process, acceptance dealers will find that the System is 
less willing than formerly to buy third-country paper, 
even under repurchase agreements. The System would, for 
instance, tell a dealer that he should make a reasonable 
effort, in packaging acceptances to be purchased or 
financed, to hold down the amount of third-country paper 
involving Japan, Canada, or the underdeveloped countries,



4/13/65 -10

and to exclude paper financing transactions between 
other developed countries. Such news should have some 
psychological benefit in terms of our whole voluntary 
restraint program--not merely the third-country acceptance 
part of it. And I do not think that so moderate an 
action will, as such, hurt the acceptance market. If 
that market is going to be hurt, it is going to be hurt 
by the very existence of the voluntary restraint program, 
given the fact that almost half of outstanding acceptances 
are third-country acceptances.  

Mr. Treiber commented that if he understood Mr. Robertson's 

proposal correctly it would involve the New York Bank's indicating to 

the dealers that it had some question about third-country acceptances 

and therefore they should cut down on such acceptances presented to 

the Bank. This would quickly permeate the market, and there would be 

a lesser degree of marketability of that type of acceptance than others.  

The market would get a clear signal that the System was concerned in 

this respect. The New York Bank's approach under the voluntary 

restraint program had been that acceptances, for whatever purpose, were 

included in the 105 per cent ceiling when created by a bank, and that 

once the acceptance had been created it stilt fell within the 105 per 

cent figure whether the accepting bank held the security in its 

portfolio or sold it in the market. The Reserve Bank felt that the 

accepting bank must be the judge under the voluntary restraint program 

as to whether an acceptance was in accord with the program; and once 

that judgment was made the acceptance should be able to circulate freely.  

If that was not true, there would be a cloud on the marketability of



4/13/65 -11

third-country acceptances of even the most scrupulous bank operating 

within the voluntary program guidelines, and the voluntary nature 

of the balance of payments program would be vitiated if the Federal 

Reserve declined to purchase those acceptances. The commercial banks 

should be relied upon to comply with the guidelines in the creation 

of acceptances. After this had taken place, there should be no 

restriction on their free marketability.  

Mr. Holmes commented that he did not see how Mr. Robertson's 

suggestion could be carried out without some announcement to the 

market, even though informal. Neither did he see how a fine degree 

of discrimination could be accomplished in the market very easily.  

Mr. Robertson said that even if the word got out to the market-

and he thought it would rather quickly--he did not think it was going 

to occasion any cloud on the acceptance market. He thought the impact 

would be almost entirely psychological. The Federal Reserve would 

continue to acquire acceptances in the ordinary course; it would just 

give a little push to the desirability of holding down third-country 

acceptances, without eliminating the Japanese paper.  

Mr. Wayne observed that while he was quite sympathetic to the 

views Mr. Robertson had expressed, he hoped the Committee would be 

slow in implementing Mr. Robertson's suggestion. Not only would it 

permeate the market rather quickly but also, as he was sure all members 

of the Committee were aware, some of the spokesmen and writers for



4/13/65 -12

the New York City banks, particularly those most outspoken in 

pressing for a greater reliance on restrictive monetary policy, had 

alleged in recent weeks that the Federal Reserve was likely to act 

through the discount window to support the voluntary restraint program.  

In other words, the idea was spreading through the banking community 

that the voluntary program was likely to become something less than 

voluntary through denial of access to the discount window to banks 

that failed to cooperate. He hoped the Committee would not make a 

move that would appear to validate any such idea. Implementation of 

Mr. Robertson's suggestion no doubt would be interpreted by those 

who had been pressing strongly and continuously for more reliance on 

a restrictive monetary policy as the first move. He was sympathetic 

to Mr. Robertson's views; he would not like the System to appear as 

saying restraint was good for others but not for itself. For the 

time being, however, he saw merit in Mr. Treiber's position. He would 

hope for restraint at the point of creation of acceptances and wait 

a little longer before making any move. even "quietly." 

Mr. Mitchell said he had examined Mr. Stone's report and noted 

that less than a third of the third-country acceptances in the New York 

Bank's portfolio were held for its own account, two-thirds being held 

for foreign accounts. He would be reasonably well satisfied if con

tinuing analysis indicated that such acceptances were not being un

loaded on the System; that the System was not getting the type of



4/13/65 -13

acceptances it was trying to discourage commercial banks from making.  

If the New York Bank was not, in these operations, adding to its 

portfolio and also getting a different mix, namely, a larger proportion 

of third-country paper, he would be satisfied. If the Bank, however, 

appeared to be getting an unusually large proportion of third-country 

paper or a larger portfolio, he would take this to be evidence that 

the Federal Reserve was doing the sort of thing it was requesting the 

commercial banks not to do.  

Mr. Daane commented that the System had had an active interest 

in the growth of the acceptance market over a period of time. He 

would not want to see the System interrupt its posture of general concern 

for that market unless this was really essential. The comment had 

been made that restraint should be exercised under the voluntary 

program at the point of inception, and with this he agreed. He concurred 

generally with Mr. Mitchell's position; he would not like to see a 

growth of third-country paper in the portfolio. He suggested keeping 

a close look at the figures in the light of the whole voluntary restraint 

effort.  

Chairman Martin commented that he, too, thought the point of 

inception was the place to work on this. He had one real conviction 

on this matter, which was the System should not say anything "quietly" 

to anybody. This type of thing was certain to go right through the



4/13/65 -14

market, to be nisconstrued, and to be self-defeating. If the 

Committee was going to change its pattern of activities in the 

acceptance market, it should do so openly.  

Mr. Robertson said he would not object to a formal statemert 

if that was the best way to go about it. He then inquired whether 

the best way to approach the matter might not be to ask the Desk to 

analyze the situation over the next few weeks and report back to the 

Committee.  

Mr. Wayne commented that it might be appropriate also to try 

to determine what effect the voluntary program was having on acceptances 

at the point of inception.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that the matter be carried over 

until another meeting, on the basis indicated, and no disagreement 

with this suggestion was expressed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in 

the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

Business activity thus far this year has been 
exceptionally good, better than expected by most of us.  
Not only have the data on March developments been very 
strong but many estimates of activity in January and 
February have been revised upward substantially. More
over, the expansion has been broadly based, although the



4/13/65

high rates of activity in autos and steel are no doubt 
having secondary expansionary effects on other industries.  
The index of industrial production for March, to be 
released Thursday, stands at 140.1, as against 138.9 for 
February. The March figure represents about an 8 per 
cent increase from a year ago.  

We have also made some progress with our sticky 
unemployment problem. The increase in employment, par
ticularly in manufacturing and among production workers 
as well as nonproduction workers, has been striking in 
recent months. The first quarter's average unemployment 
rate of 4.8 per cent reflects real improvement rather 
than a temporary fluctuation around the 5 per cent level 
that prevailed in the second half of last year. Further 
progress in reducing the unemployment rate after the next 
month or two will be more difficult, however, as the high 
current rate of overall expansion inevitably slows down 
somewhat and as an expected more rapid growth of the labor 
force occurs.  

There remains the need to assess the relevance of 
the great first quarter strength in overall economic 
activity to the two basic questions that have been 
plaguing us for some time: first, the possible over
heating of the economy in the near-term future and, second, 
its possible slowdown after the steel strike threat has 
passed.  

The likelihood of the economy overheating in the near
term future can, I think, be discounted a bit more now that 
we have gotten through several months of unsustainably 
rapid rate of economic expansion with few additional out
ward signs of inflation. We are, of course, using our 
resources more intensively now than earlier, but the 
expansion of plant capacity in many lines is likely to 
equal or even to exceed that of output over the next few 
quarters, and the potential supply of bcth employed and 
unemployed labor susceptible of training to meet shortages 
of higher skills remains large.  

In the price area, at first glance it seems difficult 
to reconcile the list of specific increases that have been 
announced recently with the exceptional stability of the 
overall indices, particularly the important industrial 
wholesale price index. This development, however, illus

trates again the limited and selective nature of the 

increases and the lack of publicity given to offsetting 

price declines. The recent renewed strength in nonferrous

-15-



4/13/65

metals prices, at a time when supplies are being augmented 
by withdrawals from the stockpiles, is a cause for concern, 
although it may be due in large part to special temporary 
factors.  

In the area of business costs, the big question, namely, 
the wage settlement in steel, remains unanswered. The 
steel industry costs the initial demands of the union at a 
7.5 per cent annual rate of increase for the 3-year period 
of the proposed contract, but this was an asking price that 
is reportedly already being reduced by the union. An 
eventual settlement not far from the 3-1/2 per cent in
crease recently achieved in the can industry is still a 
real possibility. A wage increase of this magnitude might 
involve some steel price increases, but they would probably 
be selective and not well publicized. The can companies 
have announced small price increases following their wage 
settlement.  

With regard to the relevance of the recent pickup in 
the rate of overall economic expansion to its likely sus
tainability, the dependence of the expansion on very high 
auto sales and heavy inventory accumulation does raise 
doubts as to its likely duration. Consumer spending on 
new autos declined 8 per cent to a seasonally adjusted rate 
of about 9-1/4 million units (including imports) in March, 
but this rate is still no doubt unsustainable for a long 
period of time.  

In the area of business inventory accumulation, 
available data on production and shipments certainly 
suggest that accumulation of steel since last spring has 
been substantially greater than the direct dollar inventory 
figures suggest. If this is so, settlement of the steel 
wage dispute will no doubt mean a sharp reduction in steel 
output, and probably also a significant decline, at least 
temporarily, in the rate of growtn of total industrial 
production and the GNP.  

Total business inventory accumulation has also no doubt 
been proceeding at an unsustainably high rate in recent 
months. The seasonally adjusted annual rate approximated 
$10 billion or more in the 3 months ending with January.  
After falling off in February according to preliminary figures, 
which may very well be revised upward later as have been 
those of earlier months, accumulation no doubt rose sharply 
again in March if available production and sales figures are 

correct.

-16-



4/13/65 -17

In conclusion, although the recent sharper rate of overall 
economic expansion is welcome as a step toward a more satis
factory level of employment, it warrants careful watch. This 
is because the current long-lived expansion is beginning to 
show signs of imbalances which have in the past often been 
preludes of slowdowns or recessions.  

A further burst of activity is possible, particularly 
if extension of the period of steel wage negotiations engenders 
even more inventory build-up. But this would only accentuate 
the imbalances that threaten maintenance of satisfactory 
growth later this year and in 1966. Meanwhile, the current 
less easy monetary posture adopted at the Committee's last 
meeting might well be maintained for the next few weeks 
pending a clearer view of prospects in the steel industry.  

There followed comments by Mr. Koch, in response to a question 

by Mr. Mitchell, concerning the degree of significance that it would 

seem appropriate to attach to the decline to 4.7 per cent in the un

employment rate in March. The purport of Mr. Koch's comments was to the 

effect that he would not be inclined to over-emphasize the March figure 

taken by itself. Instead, he would base a judgment more on the March 

figure's relationship to developments in the employment and unemployment 

statistics over a period of months, which indicated steady improvement 

in employment and a break away from the unemployment rate plateau that 

had persisted earlier. He added a note of caution concerning anticipated 

labor force developments later this year that would militate against 

further reduction or even maintenance of the current unemployment rate.  

Mr. Noyes made the following statement concerning financial 

developments:



4/13/65

We are accustomed to some difference between the 
rate of growth in total deposits, on the one hand, and 
total loans and investments on the other, because of 
problems of seasonal adjustment and because we generally 
use daily average figures to measure deposit changes 
and end-of-month figures when we look at bank credit.  
But we expect to see them move in the same direction and 
by roughly the same order of magnitude.  

In February, for example, total deposits increased at 
a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $2.6 billion, and bank 
credit at $2.4 billion--a reasonable and understandable sort 
of difference. But in March the rate cf deposit expansion 
dropped to $1.3 billion, and the rate of credit growth 
soared to $3.5 billion.  

If we look at the first quarter as a whole, I think 
we get a better picture of what has been going on. For 
the quarter the annual rate of increase in the money supply 
was 1 per cent; time deposits rose at an 18.7 per cent 
rate; and money supply plus time deposits was up 8.8 per 
cent. This latter figure is almost the same as the rate 
in the fourth quarter of 1964, and only moderately above 
the 7.7 per cent for all of last year.  

For the first quarter the rise in total bank credit 
was at a 12.8 per cent annual rate--up considerably from 
either the 6.6 per cent in the fourth quarter or the 7.9 
per cent for the year 1964.  

But it was in loans--and especially business loans-
that the rise has been most spectacular. In March, loans 
rose by a record $3.9 billion. This brought the quarterly 
annual rate to almost 20 per cent, and the rate for business 
loans for the quarter was a whopping 28 per cent.  

Some of this credit growth at banks was undoubtedly 
at the expense of competing institutions. It will be quite 
a while before we have any reliable estimates of total credit 
flows for the first quarter, but it is interesting that the 
annual rate of expansion in total liquid assets for the 
first two months was only 6.5 per cent, as compared to 
6.9 per cent for last year. Hence, we may find that the 
rise in total funds raised in the first quarter was not 
nearly so spectacular as the bank credit figures.  

It is also important to keep in mind that the rise in 
real output was unusually large in the quarter. The increase 
in real GNP that is now generally anticipated translates 
into an annual rate of over 8 per cent, as compared to a 
4.1 per cent increase over the year 1964. Thus, the rise in 
bank credit in relation to GNP was not as large in comparison 
to earlier periods as the credit figures alone might suggest.

-18-



4/13/65

It is hard to account for the strength of credit 
demand solely in terms of transitory factors. Certainly, 
some of the demand can be related to steel inventory 
accumulation and some to the belated build-up in dealers' 
auto stocks. But both the expansion of the economy and 
the size and structure of bank credit extensions suggest 
a broader basis for the surge in demand for bank loans.  
There is no prima facie reason why it should subside 
quickly even if the steel inventory build-up slows or 
reverses.  

As one would expect in a period of strong credit 
demand, the rate of increase in total reserves has been 
high during the quarter (over 8 per cent), despite 
progressively tauter money market conditions. In the 
first quarter free/net borrowed reserves averaged $240 
million less than the preceding quarter, and the increase 
in nonborrowed reserves was down to only a 3.5 per cent 
annual rate.  

In the last few weeks most money market interest 
rates have remained close to their recent highs and the 
bill rate has edged up a little from its "out of line" 
position. Long-term yields have moved back and forth 
in response to day-to-day developments and are generally 
a few basis points above the levels prevailing at the 
time of the last meeting.  

In summary, we see a fairly clear picture of strong 
credit demand pulling out a near record volume of bank 
credit in the face of more reluctant reserve provision at 
the System's initiative and, of course, a corresponding 
rise in member bank borrowing.  

As the Manager has indicated, the Treasury will be 
engaged in a major refunding in about two weeks. Therefore, 
an "even keel" is almost inescapable. Especially in light 
of the fact that the change in policy at the last meeting 
may not yet be fully reflected in market yields, the 
precise meaning of this term in the circumstances would 
seem to be the major question at issue today.  

Mr. Swan referred to the strength of business loan demand and 

earlier discussions about a firming of credit terms and lessening signif

icance of the prime rate. This did not seem to square with the March 

quarterly interest rate survey, which showed a reduction in the average

-19-



4/13/65 -20

rate on short-term business loans and an ircreased dollar volume of 

loans made at the prime rate.  

In discussion of this point it was noted that there was no 

doubt some volume of borrowing around the tax date on the part of 

prime borrowers that may not have been otherwise active in the market.  

If there was increased loan demand by larger corporations that were 

eligible for the prime rate, with perhaps some drop-off in less de

sirable credits for which the rates were necessarily higher, this 

would have the effect of lowering the overall rate.  

Mr. Daane recalled that at the recent Princeton meeting 

sponsored by the American Bankers Association there had been some 

comments by ba.kers about giving the prime rate to parties who never 

before would have gotten it. The reason was not entirely clear, given 

the existing credit demand, but it appeared to reflect strong compe

tition for loans.  

Mr. Balderston remarked that with a Treasury financing in the 

near offing the Committee might conclude that an even keel posture was 

indicated for that reason. He suggested that perhaps the central 

issue this morning had to do with what was meant by an even keel in 

the present circumstances.  

Mr. Noyes replied that it was not entirely clear whether the 

current rate structure reflected full market understanding of the pre

sent posture of monetary policy. The question, then, was whether an



4/13/65

even keel posture was one that would allow market adjustments to 

continue to take place or one in which an attempt would be made to 

hold at bay ary further adjustments. While it was only a guess, he 

rather felt that there would be a tendency for yields to adjust upward 

somewhat further in light of the present reserve position of the 

banks and the present levels of borrowing and net borrowed reserves.  

The question was whether such a further adjustment should be allowed 

to take place during a period of Treasury financing.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement: 

The large U.S. payments surplus recorded in March seems 
to have persisted into early April, in contrast with last 
year when there was a sharp March-April reversal. Thus 
the new balance of payments program apparently continues 
to bite into capital outflows. Also, exports are no doubt 
still rebounding in the wake of the port strikes.  

Little new information on our payments position has 
become available since the "Green Book" was written. 1/ 
Therefore I shall direct my remarks this morning to what 
seems to me the most important international financial 
news of the past few weeks--the British budget. Mr. Coombs 
has already commented on its early, mildly favorable, 
effects on foreign exchange markets. I should like to 
consider it in the context of economic developments in 
the United Kingdom, and of other U.K. policies.  

An American analyzing British developments must 
always guard against two opposite dangers. First, there 
is a temptation to assume more similarity between the two 
countries than actually exists. We are both reserve
currency countries, we both have payments problems, and 
we both use the same language, including much of the same 
economic language. Yet our circumstances and institutions 
are in many ways very different. In particular, a budget 
deficit can mean different things in one country than 
in the other.  

1/ The report "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
by the Board's staff for the Committee.

-21-



4/13/65

Secondly, however, it would be wrong to treat Britain 
as a wholly unique case, beset by structual problems un
known elsewhere, and uniquely bedevilled by the gnomes of 
Zurich (or of London). There has been some tendency in 
the press to do this, and to forget that mundane things 
like inventory cycles and plant and equipment outlays are 
as important in Britain as they are here.  

The U.K. economic context in which the budget was 
announced last week was one of rapid economic expansion 
and of strong inflationary pressures. Real GNP in 
Britian rose 5 per cent from late 1963 to late 1964, 
despite very slow growth in the labor force. The ad
vance both in plant and equipment spending and in 
residential construction, again after allowance for 
price increases, was 12 per cent. Expansion continued 
into the first quarter of 1965, and plant and equipment 
spending plans surveyed as of December--after the 
emergency policy actions connected with the sterling 
crisis--indicated a further 10 per cent increase this 
year.  

Inflationary pressures have been evident on every 
hand. Wholesale and retail price indexes have been rising 
at a rate of 4-1/2 per cent a year. The unemployment 
rate has fallen to less than 1-1/2 per cent, with labor 
shortages widespread, particularly in the heavy engineering 
industries and in construction. The pressure of demand 
against supply in the engineering sector has been 
particularly important for the balance of payments. Ex
port order backlogs in this sector, which accounts for 
about one-third of British exports, have risen 20 per 
cent oer the past year, but export deliveries have 
risen only 7 per cent. Britain's ability to sell has 
been hampered by inability to deliver.  

Thus, in framing the budget the Government did not 
face any conflict between internal and external economic 
objectives, even though it took courage for a Labor 
Government to recognize and act upon this fact. There 
was a clear need, on both counts, for a policy of re
straint. The need was widely recognized by British 
economic analysts; it was not peculiarly the recommendation 
of "international financiers." 

It seems to me that the budget does provide some 
considerable new measure of restraint. It had earlier been 
announced, last November, that an increase in the standard 
rate of income tax, and in social security contributions,

-22-



4/13/65

would firance an equal increase in welfare pensions. Also 
in November, taxes on motor fuel were significantly in
creased. Last week's budget imposed an additional 200 
million pounds of new taxation on consumption--on tobacco, 
alcholic beverages, auto registration fees, and postal 
rates. In U.S. terms, the equivalent for our economy 
would have been $3 billion to $4 billion of new taxes 
and fees The intent is to dampen consumer demand 
without unduly dampening the rate of investment, since 
investment is thought needed to insure continued growth 
and improved competitiveness.  

Some analysts, including several of my colleagues 
here at the Board, are rather skeptical about the budget 
because they notice that the overall budget deficit is 
expected to be as large this year as last, even apart 
from that portion of this year's expenditure which re
presents a mere shifting of local authority financing 
from the market to the central government. Other 
analysts, notably the London Economist, focus on the 
above-the-line surplus, which is to be the largest for 
15 years, and regard this budget as very severe indeed.  

It seems to me that the truth lies somewhere in 
between. The character of the below-the-line expenditure 
matters a good deal here. A large increase is provided 
for investment outlays by the nationalized industries, 
particularly electricity. In the United States, such 
expenditure would not be in the governnent sector at 
all, but would instead represent private plant and 
equipment spending. Allowing for this, and striking 
the balance on the sort of items that would be included 
in a U.S. Federal cash budget, there is to be a significant 
reduction in the U.K. budget deficit--by roughly 200 
million pounds.  

It is always difficult to say exactly how much re
straint is needed to cure an inflation, particularly one 
in which psychological uncertainties have played as large 
a role as they have in Britain. The amount of new taxation 
announced in the budget is about what had been recommended 
by commentators of as diverse leanings as Professor Paish 
of London and Professor Kahn of Cambridge, and was perhaps 
a little more than had been generally expected by the 
British press. It may be some time before we know whether 
the budget has done the full job required. The Chancellor 
recognized this in two ways: first, by asking renewal of 
his authority to use "regulator" taxes, i.e., to increase

-23-



4/13/65

purchase taxes if more fiscal restraint should prove 
needed; and second, by stating that monetary policy would 
be used to the extent required. This last implies, to 
me, that no early relaxation of credit policy should be 
looked for, certainly not before the trade and payments 
figures show a decisive turn for the better.  

There are several indications that the credit squeeze 
in Britain is having a useful restraining effect. There 
was no significant net expansion of bank loans during the 
first quarter, whereas earlier expansion had been very 
rapid--20 per cent a year. Inventory accumulation slowed 
some in the fourth quarter. Mortgage money is reportedly 
in much tighter supply than before, which is important 
since the residential construction boom has been an im
portant element in the inflation in Britain.  

My summary impression of Britain's present financial 
policies is that they represent significantly more re
straint than the policies of six months ago. While the 
question remains open whether the British have done 
enough, they have moved a long way in the right direction.  
And what they have done may well prove to be enough, 
particularly if they have any success at all with their 
longer-run policies of moderating wage demands and in
creasing the flexibility of the economy.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(1) Business activity--What do recent developments with 
respect to production, sales, and inventories in steel, 
steel-using, and other key industrie. suggest for the 
sustainability of overall economic activity? 

The economy continues to be characterized by vigorous 
and broadly based expansion, with extraordinarily high 
rates of production in the auto and steel industries.  
Whether expansion can be maintained at close to the average 
pace of recent quarters depends not only on the timing 
and extent of the inevitable readjustments in these 
industries but also on such factors as the developing 
strength in business capital spending and prospective 
changes in Federal fiscal stimulation.

-24-



4/13/65

Short-run prospects in the automobile industry appear 
to be somewhat clearer than those for steel. Auto pro
duction in March rose to a new high, even though sales 
failed to show the usual large seasonal increase. (A 
downward readjustment in consumer auto purchases from 
the exceptionally high January-February level was suggested 
by the Buying Intentions Survey conducted by the Census 
Bureau earlier in the year.) While dealers' inventories 
consequently increased further, their stocks are still 
low relative to sales, and production is scheduled to 
remain at record levels throughout the second quarter.  
Automobile producers are reportedly sufficiently well 
stocked with steel to maintain output at advanced levels 
until about midyear even if a steel strike occurs May 1.  

If consumer purchases continue to lag behind output, 
however, it is likely that production of this year's 
models will be cut back sharply early in the summer (unless 
an excise tax reduction rekindles consumer demands). It 
seems likely, though, that automobile production will 
continue to contribute to high levels of economic 
activity over the next few months.  

The steel situation hinges on the wage negotiations 
now under way, the outcome of which cannot be predicted.  
Building of steel stocks continues, with data on physical 
volume of production and shipments suggesting much more 
accumulation than is indicated in the dollar value figures.  
Current steel consumption rates are high, for in addition 
to the record volume of auto production, output of business 
equipment has been rising. Also, production of household 
metal goods has been maintained at the advanced rates 
reached in late 1964, even though retail sales of these 
goods have leveled off this year.  

An early settlement of the steel wage negotiations, 
while steel-using industries are operating at such high 
levels, would permit relatively orderly liquidation of 
inventories. But it would likely be accompanied by a 
sharp reduction in steel output, as in 1962 and 1963, 
when settlements were reached without strikes. Such a 
cutback in steel would obviously slow the rate of economic 
growth, but expansionary forces in the rest of the economy 
appear sufficiently strong at this time to maintain a 
general upward trend in overall activity.  

Extension of the contract beyond the May 1 termination 
date would permit further inventory accumulation. While 
it would tend to maintain the recent pace of business for

-25-



4/13/65

some time, it raises the disturbing prospect of 
concomitant and substantial cutbacks in production of 
steel, autos, and household durable goods later in the 
spring or summer.  

(2) Prices and costs--To what extent has the step-up in 
industrial output and the strengthenirg in the labor market 
in recent months been reflected in unit labor costs and 
prices? 

Since the October-November auto strikes, industrial 
output has increased sharply and has maintained a margin 
of 8 per cent over year-earlier levels. The recent rise 
has been accompanied by a substantial increase in employment, 
a considerable lengthening of the average factory workweek 
through increased overtime, and a decrease in the unemploy
ment rate. Nevertheless, total labor costs per unit of 
output in manufacturing have remained essentially stable; 
the first quarter level was down nearly 1 per cent from a 
year earlier and more than 2 per cent from two years 
earlier. The industrial commodity price level, after having 
risen three quarters of 1 per cent in late 1964, leveled 
off in the first quarter.  

Most recently, increases have been reported for some 
sensitive commodities. Upward price pressures still are 
confined mainly to markets for nonferrous metals and 
products, however. Within most other commodity categories, 
price increases have been selective and of moderate size 
or have been balanced by decreases. Over the past two 
years of rapid expansion in output, discounts from list 
prices nc doubt have been reduced or eliminated, but 
increases in list prices have been neither large nor 
widespread.  

On the cost side, an important feature of the response 
to expanding demand and output is the continued rise in 
productivity. Although less rapid than earlier, the rise 
in manufacturing productivity in recent, months has continued 
to be great enough to offset the gradual increase in hourly 
rates of pay, including the wage costs of overtime and 
also the costs of fringe benefits.  

Whether output and employment now have reached a 

range where further expansion is likely to be accompanied 
by significantly greater upward pressures on prices and 
labor costs depends for the most part on the rate of growth 
in the labor force and its adaptability, on the rate of

-26-



4/13/65

expansion in plant facilities, and on expectations for 
market conditions. For some occupational groups, unemploy
ment rates have reached what might be considered frictional 
levels. Therefore, further expansion in demands could 
result in some labor bottlenecks and selective upward wage 
pressures. With the overall unemployment rate still as 
high as 4.7 per cent, however, and with the labor force 
now increasing 1.2 million persons a year, further signifi
cant gains in employment could be achieved without widespread 
labor cost pressures, assuming a reasonable settlement of 
the current steel negotiations.  

Continued growth in industrial capacity and prospects 
of further large increases also have tended to restrain 
upward piice and cost pressures. One feature that dis
tinguishes this from earlier postwar business expansions 
is that capital outlays reached advanced levels long before 
the development of pressures on existing resources, and 
then outlays continued to increase. The increase in actual 
and potential supplies has helped maintain expectations of 
competition within markets and between products. At the 
same time, the new facilities are holding down costs by 
continuing the advance in productivity.  

(3) Balance of payments--What significance is to be 
attached to preliminary payments data for the first 
quarter of 1965? 

Preliminary payments data for the first quarter appear 
encouraging. The restraint program has cut back bank 
lending from the high rates reached late last year and in 
the first six weeks of 1965. But too little is known about 
other elements of payments and receipts to permit a judgment 
as to how much and how lasting an improvement in the balance 
is being achieved in comparison with the 1964 average.  

The deficit on "regular" transactions appears to have 
been roughly $2-1/2 billion, at a seasonally adjusted 
annual rate, somewhat below the average rate for 1964 and 
well below the fourth quarter rate. However, foreign 
commercial banks made much smaller net additions to their 
balances here than they usually do in the first quarter.  
Consequently, on the "official settlements" basis the 
first quarter deficit was very large--perhaps $3 billion, 
annual rate, against last year's average of $1-1/2 billion.  

There have been additional indications that net 

outflows of U.S. private capital diminished sharply after

-27-



4/13/65

the new balance of payments program was announced.  
February statistics on long-term bank loans show a net 
outflow of about $200 million, but the sharp drop in 
new bank loan commitments after February 10 suggests 
that most if not all of this net outflow occurred in the 
first part of the month. Also, we have learned of the 
cancellation or postponement of several nonbank loans and 
inves:ments earlier planned. A number of large corporations 
are reported to be letting their money market investments 
abroad run off at maturity and to have told their European 
subsidiaries that the latter must seek funds locally and 
rely less upon United States financing. But no compre
hensive data beyond February are yet available on foreign 
lending by banks, and none beyond January on liquid 
asset holdings abroad of U.S. corporations. Data on 
direct investment transactions during the first quarter 
will not begin to become available for another month or 
two. New foreign security issues sold here during the 
quarter were at about the average rate for 1964.  

The effects of the longshoremen's strike on 
merchandise trade greatly complicate analysis of the 
first quarter payments results. Exports slumped much 
more sharply than imports in January-February, and the 
trade surplus in those months was zero. Even though 
exports are likely to have jumped up in March, the trade 
surplus for the quarter must have been much below the 
$7 billion annual rate of the fourth quarter, on the 
trade statistics basis. On an actual payments basis, 
too, the trade surplus was probably reduced, but it is 
impossible to say by how much.  

(4) Bank credit and money.  
A. What do recent developments in the major 

categories of bank loans suggest for the 
future course of lending activity? 

The rapid bank loan expansion of recent months is 
attributable not only to temporary factors--some of which 

are still operative--but also to strong and continuing 
underlying demands. While demands could slacken somewhat-
as a result of inventory liquidation following a steel 
strike or settlement, for example--bank loan activity 
over the next few months might still be expected to rise 
at or above the late 1964 rates.  

The dominant factor in recent bank loan developments 

has been the sharp increase in business loans. Earlier

-28-



4/13/65

this year, the accelerated growth was due in large part 
to temporary influences, particularly the dock strike, 
the surge of foreign lending, and anticipation of a steel 
strike. The first two of these factors receded in late 
February and early March, and this was reflected in some 
slackenirg in the business loan expansion.  

Since then, loan growth has accelerated again.  
Several of the industry groups recently showing the 
strongest demand for bank loans also are markedly in
creasing their plant and equipment expenditures (e.g., 
food processors, chemicals companies, and certain metals
using industries). Since such expenditure programs will 
be in process for many months, continued bank borrowing 
by these industries may be in prospect. Also contributing 
to near-term strength of loan demand is the need for 
corporations to make partial payment on estimated 1965 
tax liabilities in mid-April. On the other hand, borrowing 
for steel inventory accumulation, which may have accounted 
for close to one-fourth of the $1.1 billion rise in 
business loans in March, could terminate after a few more 
weeks. Borrowing by trade concerns, which also have been 
making large additions to inventories, could also slacken 
later in the spring.  

Bank lending to consumers has been at a relatively 
advanced rate in recent months, mainly reflecting high 
rates of car sales. As the surge in auto sales abates 
and after borrowing by individuals for income tax payments 
is completed, some slackening frcm recent very high rates 
of consumer credit growth at banks and elsewhere is 
indicated.  

City bank holdings of real estate mortgages have 
increased at a considerably reduced pace so far this 
year compared with 1964. Less bank interest in mortgages 
and a leveling off in such financing demands appear to 
be factors in this decline. A continuation of the recent 
slower rate of acquisitions of mortgages appears to be a 
reasonable assumption for the period ahead, particularly 
in view of the strength of competing business credit demands.  

B. What factors have been mainly responsible for 
the changing relationships among the rates of 
expansion of total commercial bank credit, 
time and savings deposits, and the money supply 
in February and March?

-29-



4/13/65

In recent weeks, time and savings deposit growth 
has slackened substantially from the high rate of increase 
earlier in the year, while the money supply, though 
fluctuating, apparently has begun to rise again. Bank 
credit has continued to increase at an advanced rate.  

Following the initial sharp inflow of time and 
savings deposits in response to the introduction of 
higher rates and new savings instruments around the 
beginning of the year, the recent slackening was not 
unexpected, as one-time transfers to time deposits from 
other assets were completed. The slowing occurred some
what earlier this year than in 1957 and 1962--two previous 
periods of substantial rate advances--probably because 
banks adjusted their rates more promptly this time. In 
addition, the advance in market rates of interest in 
January and February may have created difficulties for 
some banks in attracting CD funds even under the new 
ceilings. Adverse publicity regarding CD losses in 
recent bank failures also may have been a factor in 
limiting net CD sales by smaller banks.  

Accompanying the sharp rise in time and savings 
deposits, the money supply declined from early January 
through late February, but since then has moved higher 
on balance. Temporary downward pressure on the money 
supply, which was evident also early ir 1957 and 1962, 
would normally be expected to accompany transfers of 
funds from other assets, including demand deposits, into 
time deposits. But rapid growth in transactions needs 

associated with the accelerated pace of economic activity 
has helped stimulate a resumption of monetary expansion.  

The first quarter increase in the private money 
supply and time deposits combined, at an 8.8 per cent 
annual rate, was about the same as in the fourth quarter 
of last year. On the other side of the ledger, bank 
credit expansion accelerated in the first quarter. The 
difference in behavior is explainable in large part by 
the sharp buildup in U.S. Government deposits in this 
period.  

The bank credit figures have reflected unusually 
strong loan demands. Banks have been under moderately 
increased reserve pressure, and have reduced their hold

ings of Governments and cut back on their acquisitions 
of municipals and agency issues to help meet strong loan 
demand. Nevertheless, a substantial increment of reserves 
has been needed to accommodate growth in demands for bank

-30-



4/13/65

credit and deposits. About half of the reserve rise has 
been provided through increased member bank borrowing, 
and the remainder through a continued expansion in 
nonborrowed reserves.  

(5) Money market and reserve conditions--Assuming a 
continuation of the monetary policy adopted at the last 
meeting, what range of money market conditions, interest 
rates, reserve availability, and reserve utilization by 
the banking system might prove mutually consistent during 
coming weeks? 

Over the last week of March and the first week of 
April, member bank borrowings at the Federal Reserve 
rose to an average of more than $500 million and net 
borrowed reserves averaged $130 million, as required 
reserves showed more than usual strength. The Federal 
funds market continued taut, and there was a slight 
firming of bill rates in the early part of the period.  
But a resurgence of bill demand in recent days has kept 
the three-month bill rate in the 3.92-3.94 range. This 
demand has been highlighted by seasonal buying on the 
part of public funds, and also may have been enhanced by 
corporate demand.  

With net borrowed reserves above $100 million for 
two successive statement weeks, the market is now beginning 
to focus on the question of whether the Federal Reserve 
has firmed policy somewhat further. This question is 
being raised following some strengthening of the bond 
market in reaction to the British budget and the reduction 
in the French discount rate. The U.S. Government bond 
market is in a fairly good technical position, however, 
so that upward rate adjustments from a modest change in 
expectations are likely to be minor. In the municipal 
market the level of unsold inventories continues large, 
but the calendar of new offerings is relatively light.  

In coming weeks, continuation of net borrowed 
reserves in the $100 to $150 million range would appear 
consistent with Federal funds trading frequently at 
4-1/8 per cent and with the emergence of some upward 
pressure on bill rates. Such upward pressure depends 
importantly on continued strong bank loan expansion and 
abatement of some of the recent special demands for bills, 
since bill rates tend to be seasonally low at this time 
of year. Firmness in money market conditions of this 
order is unlikely to produce any appreciable upward rate 
adjustments in the capital markets.

-31-



4/13/65

In March, private demand deposits rose at a 6.7 per 
cent annual rate, but these deposits seem likely to grow 
more slowly in April. Slowing appears especially likely 
if tax collections from individuals (and to a minor ex
tent from corporations) are significantly larger than in 
earlier years, although continued strong loan demand 
could be an offsetting influence. While month-to-month 
variability will undoubtedly continue to characterize 
demand deposit growth, the money market conditions 
postulated above would appear consistent with a rate of 
increase over the next few months averaging around the 
3.7 per cent rate of 1964.  

Chairman Martin called next for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement: 

Business activity. The current business situation 
is very strong. The first quarter of 1965 will probably 
show one of the largest gains in overall output on record.  
Even after allowing for some cutback in auto and steel 
activity from the very high current levels, the outlook 
is for h.gh and rising economic activity.  

Reports from the steel industry suggest that lead 
times for filling orders are now extended into June and 
July, and that barring a quick wage settlement, the 
present high levels of production should be sustained 
at least through April and possibly May. While there 
inevitably will be some downward adjustment in production 
levels--but not necessarily in employment--in the 

steel and auto industries, the latest indications suggest 
a somewhat longer sustained period of strength than had 
been thought possible a month or so ago. Any weakening 
that might develop seems more likely to occur in the third 
quarter rather than in the second quarter. There is good 
reason to believe that the economy may turn in even a 
better performance over the year than has generally been 
projected.  

Prices and costs. The step-up in industrial output 
has helped to bring unemployment to the lowest level 
since October 1957. There are more reports of shortages

-32-



4/13/65

of skilled workers in various occupations. Demands of 
labor unions in current bargaining sessions are high, 
but terms of settlement are customarily less than demands.  
There has not yet been an increase in overall unit labor 
costs in manufacturing. Profits have been well maintained.  

Industrial wholesale prices continue their modest 
upward creep. Producers are testing markets on a selective 
basis. In the area of administered prices there continue 
to be more increases than decreases.  

The prospect of price increases is more imminent, 
and the problem of keeping down unit costs is more 
precarious, than they have been for several years.  

Balance of payments. There has been a dramatic 
improvement in the recent balance of payments figures, 
which can be traced clearly to the voluntary restraint 
program. The March figures will probably show a large 
surplus; yet that surplus is a good deal less than the 
heavy outflows of February and January. In addition, 
seasonal factors are customarily favorable in the first 
quarter of a year; after allowing for them there is a 
large deficit for the first quarter.  

Much of the good showing in recent weeks is due to 
large declines in the balances held by Canadian banks 
with their New York agencies. Surpluses attributable 
to a decline in short-term investments here by Canadian 
banks in response to a loss of corporate time deposits 
of U.S. concerns are not as important to the international 
position of the dollar as surpluses resulting from trans
actions with Continental Europe.  

So far this year the United States has lost more 
than $900 million in gold; and we expect to lose more.  

It is too early to evaluate fully the effect of the 
new United Kingdom budget on sterling. Generally the 
market response to the budget has been favorable; this is 
all to the good. But, even if the budget proposals are 
considered adequate, the longer-term position of the pound 
depends heavily on further efforts to restrain cost and 
price increases and to improve the competitive position 
of the British economy. Hence sterling may remain quite 
vulnerable in the short run and may be subject to repeated 
periods of pressure.  

Bank credit and money. In recent months, banks have 
accounted for a larger share of total credit expansion

-33-



4/13/65

than previously. Liquid assets held by the public have 
continue to advance more rapidly than economic activity.  

Bank credit continues its rapid advance. The pace 
of advance in March exceeded that in January and February.  
As in previous months, a broad-based business loan expan

sion has been the major contributor to the current strength 
of bank credit. Figures for the first quarter of 1965 
will probably show the largest advance in bank credit, in 
both absolute and percentage terms, since early 1958. The 
annual growth rate for the quarter just ended was 13 per 
cent compared with the 8 per cent rate that had been 
characteristic of most of the current expansion. Loan
deposit ratios have risen further, reaching post-1931 
highs.  

Loan officers of the New York City banks are impressed 
with the strength of the loan demand. Two factors are 
cited: first, after several years of financing investment 
essentially from internal sources, more corporate treasurers 
are now concerned with the need for cash for capital 
spending plans; and second, bank loans are readily avail
able and relatively cheap. The present seems to be a good 
time to borrow from banks, even as a protection against 
future needs; there may be some expectation of lesser 
availability and higher rates.  

Recent surveys by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York indicate a fairly widespread tightening of loan 
terms, ircluding firmer rates, while at the same time 
there has been a decline in the average interest rate on 
both short-term loans and long-term loans. Apparently 
prime-rate borrowers have been obtaining a larger 
proportion of total loans.  

The banks appear to be capturing an especially large 
share of the total credit and deposit narket. The banks 
have been able to improve their competitive position, 
aided by rapid reserve growth. Total member bank reserves 
grew at an annual rate of 8 per cent in the first quarter 
of 1965 compared with 4.3 per cent in the first quarter 
of 1964 and 4.2 per cent during all of 1964. The rapid 
reserve growth has been accomplished in part by increased 
borrowing from the Reserve Banks.  

Money market and reserve conditions. Money market 
conditions have been firm. The growth in bank credit and 

deposits has been especially rapid in the light of these

-34-



4/13/65

money market conditions. The rapid growth has necessitated 
frequent upward revisions in our estimates of required 
reserves. Despite the heavy demands for funds by the 
public and despite a general firmness in other money market 
rates, the demand for U.S. Treasury bills has been strong 
and rates on the three-month bill have remained several 
basis points below the discount rate. We do not have a 
complete explanation for the strength of the bill market.  
But it does seem to be due in some measure to the invest
ment demand by business concerns that have withdrawn 
deposits from abroad and by public bodies seeking the 
temporary investment of tax monies.  

On or about Wednesday, April 28, the U.S. Treasury 
will probably be announcing the terms of its proposed 
financial operations to refund the Treasury issues that 
mature May 15, about $4 billion of which are held by the 
public.  

Credit policy. The current financial situation-
both international and domestic--counsels some reduction 
in the rate of growth of bank credit and some upward pres
sure on the Treasury bill rate. To meet these objectives 
might require net borrowed reserves in a range of $50-$200 
million.  

While in recent weeks net bcrrowed reserves were 
higher than expected, they were not inappropriate in the 
light of the large expansion in bank credit. I would 
suggest that our objective in the next four weeks, until 
the next meeting of the Committee, be to maintain about 
the same degree of firmness in the money market as has 
existed in recent weeks.  

I like the draft of directive prepared by the Staff.1/ 

Mr. Ellis remarked that perhaps the most notable aspect of 

economic strength in New England was its generality. Manufacturing 

employment in almost all industries was strong, as were output and 

capital spending plans. Service employment, while slackening in 

1/ The draft directive is appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-35-



4/13/65 -36

February, had been a steady source of expansion; and construction 

activity, paced by accelerated housing construction, especially of 

apartments, had continued to provide strength. With hours of work 

rising, construction contracts rising, and new orders exceeding output, 

the evidence was persuasive that the region was participating widely 

in the national prosperity.  

The same might reasonably be said of the First District banks 

also. Business loan demand remained strong, with District banks re

porting greater strength currently than the national pattern. Perhaps 

the evaluation by those banks of prospective loan demand reflected 

their tighter position. In spite of deposit growth that paralleled 

the nation, the average loan-deposit ratio for weekly reporting First 

District banks stood at 72.9 per cent compared with 68.4 per cent for 

the nation. Except for two weeks in January, New England reporting 

banks had been net borrowers in the Federal funds market since early 

December, and borrowings from the Reserve Bank had averaged slightly 

higher in recent weeks, in the national pattern. The two banks using 

unsecured notes had gradually expanded their outstandings to a total 

of $68 million.  

Turning to monetary policy and the questions proposed by the 

staff for discussion, Mr. Ellis noted the first question posed was 

what recent developments suggested in terms of future developments.  

Given the major impacts of the auto strike last fall, the dock strike



4/13/65 -37

in January, and the expectation of a steel strike, his reaction was 

that the underlying strength of the economy must have been and 

continued to be substantial to withstand the effects without spinning 

off into inflation or tipping into recession. That underlying 

strength was reflected in the breadth of industries expanding output 

and capital outlays and in the breadth of business loan demand. This 

basic attitude led him to expect continuation of strong business 

conditions throughout 1965, with an expected dip traceable to the 

steel settlement whether or not there was a strike.  

The second question, Mr. Ellis observed, related to prices 

and costs. He agreed with the staff response, to which he would add 

that there did not seem to be much evidence that rising labor costs 

were having sufficient upward pressure to force upward price adjust

ments. However, the strength of demand kept producers looking to see 

if they could make price increases stick were they to announce them.  

In short, the situation was very competitive, as it should be.  

As to the question on bank credit and money, particularly the 

changing relationships between bank credit expansion rates and deposit 

trends, Mr. Ellis thought the staff memorandum fell short on explaining 

why a pickup in credit expansion could be associated with no change in 

the rate of growth of total deposits. He suspected that an explanation 

on a short-term basis was bound to be frustrating because what was 

known about such relationships suggested multiple causations of variable



4/13/65 -38

consistency and strength. He was inclined to look at a single month's 

figures as be:ng merely confirmatory of previous trends or as a first 

indication that a previous trend was changing. From this viewpoint, 

March data substantially confirmed the pre-existing trend of sharp 

expansion in bank credit. The numbers seemed to say that the first 

quarter bank credit expansion averaged 13 per cent, annual rate, com

pared with 7 per cent for the fourth quarter of 1964 and perhaps 

9 per cent for the year. March data also confirmed that loan demand 

was strong enough for such expansion to take place in spite of a 

lessened availability of reserves. The over-riding question was 

whether the Committee was prepared to continue feeding in reserves to 

support such a trend.  

The last question, Mr. Ellis continued, asked the Ccmmittee to 

postulate what range of money market conditions, interest rates, reserve 

availability, and reserve utilization might prove mutually consistent if 

the Committee were to continue the monetary policy adopted at the last 

meeting. Without knowing the exact strength and duration of the factors 

that were causing the divergence between bill rates and what might 

ordinarily have been expected in their trend in relation to other money 

market measures, it would seem appropriate to move slowly though probing 

actions to test out the effect of the Committee's moves toward attaining 

higher bill rates. Unless the bill rate were to move to perhaps 

4.05-4.10 per cent, an upward move would not be likely to produce



4/13/65 -39

disturbing changes in the long-term market, nor should it lead to 

expectations of a change in the discount rate. If reflow-of-funds 

pressure continued, net borrowed reserves near $150 million or more 

might be required. This would increase the frequency with which 

Federal funds traded at 4-1/8 per cent, along with continuation of 

the relatively high dealer loan rates and member bank borrowings at 

about $450 million or above. At the same time, probing toward $150 

million net borrowed reserves would help slow the expansion of bank 

credit.  

With this objective in mind, Mr. Ellis favored continuation of 

the monetary policy adopted at the last meeting of the Committee. He 

would renew the existing directive, with its instruction to conduct 

operations "with a view to attaining slightly firmer conditions in 

the money market," and he would probe toward net borrowed reserves of 

around $150 million. If the short-term bill rate tended to push above 

4.05 per cent, he would be prepared to reverse direction as necessary 

to forestall an abrupt cumulative effect of lowered reserve availability 

if the supply of repatriated funds were to dry up suddenly.  

Mr. Irons said that Eleventh District economic conditions 

continued very strong and followed generally the pattern in effect over 

the nation. There had been little change from the conditions of three 

weeks ago except that the expansion had continued and the figures were 

at higher levels. It seemed to him that prospects were favorable for



4/13/65 -40

further exparsion and for a high level of business activity throughout 

the year. With perhaps a little dip, the steel and auto situation 

might well iron itself out.  

In view of the high level of activity experienced and the 

indications of further increase, it seemed strange that the imbalances 

were so minor. Prices, according to the indices, seemed to have 

shown a rather high degree of stability. There had been substantial 

inventory accumulation, but probably not as substantial or damaging 

as might have been anticipated in view of the dragging out of the 

steel wage negotiations. The steel and auto problems were still ahead, 

but he was inclined to feel that the steel settlement might not be as 

upsetting as had been thought. He was not sure about the sustainable 

level of auto consumption; it seemed to move up from level to level.  

People liked automobiles and had the money to buy them, and a much 

higher level might prove sustainable than many would have believed a 

year ago. Certainly the production of all goods and services was 

running very high, and consumption was also high.  

Mr. Irons observed that the demand for credit was exceptionally 

strong. Banks were reaching for funds and deposits in any way they 

could. Some banks seemed to be operating on a "planned deficit basis," 

presumably with the idea of coming to the discount window temporarily 

if they got caught. Many member banks in the Eleventh District were 

less liquid than they were not too long ago.



4/13/65

Mr. Irons got the impression in talking with bankers that 

there had been a change in the quality of credit. He was told that 

while they had not changed their rates per se, they were negotiating 

rates upward with individual customers wherever possible. In their 

judgment the quality of credit, all things considered, was not as 

high as a year ago. He understood that thi, question was considered 

informally at the recent meeting of the Reserve City Bankers 

Association, with general agreement that there had been some degree 

of deterioration in credit quality.  

As far as the international payments situation was concerned, 

Mr. Irons noted that apparently there had been some improvement.  

However, the available figures were scattered and hard to interpret 

in the light of various developments, so he did not think one could be 

sure just what was happening that might lead toward a basic improvement 

in the balance of payments. It might be two or three months before 

a solid appraisal could be made.  

During the past three weeks, Mr. Irons pointed out, there had 

been a moderate firming in money market conditions, and he would be 

inclined to continue the conditions that had prevailed. It would seem 

well to watch closely what went on over the next four weeks and maintain 

policy as it was. With considerable leeway for a margin of error, he 

would be inclined to think that if net borrowed reserves fluctuated 

around $100 million, this would probably be in order, with Federal

-41-



4/13/65 -42

funds more often at 4-1/8 per cent. A Treasury bill rate under 

4 per cent would not worry him. As long as the bill rate caused 

no more trouble than it had caused over the past month, he did not 

know why there should be a particular objective of getting it up.  

A range from around 3.95 to 4.05 would seem satisfactory. He would 

expect borrowings to average around the $450 million figure, and at 

certain times rise higher. He would want to avoid any change in 

conditions that would put pressure on the discount rate, which he 

would not like to see increased at this time.  

On the directive, Mr. Irons did not favor the staff draft.  

He preferred that the Committee not change policy but maintain the 

degree of firmness of the past few weeks. Therefore, he would use 

the first paragraph of the current policy directive, which he found 

more understandable than the staff draft, while changing the second 

paragraph of the draft directive so as to call for open market operations 

over the next four weeks to be conducted with a view to "maintaining 

the slightly firmer conditions in the money market that have prevailed 

in recent weeks." 

Mr. Swan reported the general tone in the Twelfth District 

seemed to be one of underlying strength, apart from the continuing 

question of the course of defense and space-related employment, lack 

of strength in residential building, and concern about some aspects 

of agriculture. In the lumber industry, which was affected by the



4/13/65 -43

residential building picture and the weather in other parts of the 

country, orders were up in the last half of March but were still 

somewhat slow, and prices remained soft. On the other hand, heavy 

construction was strong indeed in the District.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he had been going to comment on the 

dividend rate changes announced by some Southern California savings 

and loan associations, but that had been covered in the green book.  

Strength in loan demand was evident at Twelfth District banks, although 

the major banks still were not under marked pressure. They continued 

to be net suppliers of funds to banks and securities dealers.  

Although borrowings from the Reserve Bank were up a little in the 

week of April 7, they still were not large. On the other hand, one 

of the larger banks had indicated that inquiries from smaller and 

newer banks regarding the purchase of loans had risen considerably.  

To some extent this might be a result of depositors' reaction to the 

special situation in the Twelfth District; to some extent it might 

reflect real tightness apart from losses of deposits.  

Mr. Swan said he was in general agreement with the staff comments 

on the economic and financial questions. In terms of policy, he doubted 

whether he could do better than to say that he agreed with the remarks 

made by Mr. Irons. In view of the strength of the current situation he 

would continue present policy, but in view of the uncertainties he would 

not like to see any further tightening or any probing in that direction



4/13/65 -44

for the next four weeks. In terms of a definition of continuation of 

the same policy, he agreed with the figures Mr. Irons had given. He 

favored putting no pressure on the discount rate, and he would be 

happy if the bill rate did not go above 4 per cent at all. He still 

thought it possible that there would be a little increase in the bill 

rate; in fact, he was surprised that there had not been more upward 

pressure in the past three weeks given the lesser degree of reserve 

availability.  

Mr. Swan said he had the same comments on the directive as 

Mr. Irons. When he read the first paragraph of the draft directive, 

he thought it was going to lead into a move toward a tighter position 

in the second paragraph. He did not think the two paragraphs matched 

up well, and therefore he would go back to the first paragraph of the 

existing directive.  

Mr. Strothman, on commenting on developments in the Ninth 

District, said it was necessary to distinguish between the agricultural 

and the nonagricultural sectors. The agricultural economy seemed to be 

doing rather poorly and prospects were not encouraging. Farm prices 

were still low, and in addition a particularly severe winter had hit 

some parts of the agricultural economy very hard, raising costs and 

reducing the prospective calf crop. Nor could it be expected that 

agricultural business would prosper this spring. The most recent 

Reserve Bank survey indicated that businessmen in rural areas were 

expecting a less-than-normal spring expansion.



4/13/65 -45

However, expectations as to the District's nonagricultural 

economy were for a better-than-average sprng. This was what survey 

respondents reported, and what preliminary labor market and output 

statistics strongly confirmed. Strong increases in construction 

activity and retail sales, held back by a decidedly wet and cold 

March, would help appreciably.  

If there was any real bleakness in the Ninth District outlook, 

it was for the longer term, Mr. Strothman continued. There was the 

possibility that the rate of economic expansion currently being enjoyed 

would not be continued in the second half of 1965. Present inventory 

positions, for the most part of finished gods, were suggestive of this.  

And a high enough level of spending for business plants was becoming 

somewhat less certain.  

Loan expansion at District member banks continued to be impressive.  

Among weekly reporting banks the January-March 1965 increase in loans 

was far greater than seasonal, and so was the March increase taken by 

itself. Moreover, increases in commercial and industrial loans had 

continued to lead the way.  

Of course, Mr. Strothman said, the March increase in total 

credit of weekly reporting banks, still stronger than seasonal, was 

not as impressive as the increase in loans outstanding, for those banks 

reduced their investments rather sharply, as did the nonweekly reporters.  

The latter also appeared to have been faced in recent months with



4/13/65 -46

heavy loan demands. Their loans outstanding increased through March 

and over the first quarter of 1965 much more than seasonally. It 

appeared, however, that country bank loan demand had differed some, 

at least in motive, from city bank loan demand. Continuing high-level 

country bank loan demand had to be explained, in some considerable 

measure, by an unfavorable agricultural situation.  

In closing, Mr. Strothman noted that the largest banks in the 

Twin Cities area reported a firming in the loan market. Whether for 

good or bad, the cost of business loans had evidently increased slightly 

in recent months.  

Mr. Scanlon said he concurred with the staff judgment that an 

upward trend in overall activity was likely to be maintained even though 

important sectors might experience substantial setbacks.  

Steel producers in the Chicago and Detroit areas had been unable 

to increase output appreciably since the start of the year, Mr. Scanlon 

commented. Mill inventories of finished steel were now declining; at 

the manufacturing level, however, steel inventories were rising rapidly.  

His observations regarding the steel and auto industries were similar 

to those that had already been made. Overall, it did not appear that 

declines in output of steel and autos would do more than slow the advance 

of aggregate economic activity in the months ahead.  

Measures of employment and unemployment had continued to show 

improvement in recent weeks in the Seventh District. Unemployment



4/13/65 -47

rates in all District states continued well below the national average.  

The volume of help-wanted ads for the Chicago area, seasonally adjusted, 

had risen sharply in recent months and had now passed the level for 

January 1957, which was the previous high on record. Overtime had 

increased in many industries since last year, and employment increases 

had been fairly general. Those developments were indicative of 

greater pressure on the labor market and doubtless tended to increase 

unit labor costs. As the staff had noted, what lay ahead might be 

determined largely by the adaptability of the labor force.  

Doubtless there had been some moderate strengthening of upward 

price pressures in recent weeks, Mr. Scanlon said. Increases had 

occurred for a number of commodities, although a number of declines 

had been posted also.  

On the balance of payments, Mr. Scanlon agreed with the comment 

that too little was known to attach great significance to data for the 

first quarter. Even a complete set of figures on the performance of 

the first quarter could not be taken as significant and fully indica

tive of U.S progress. More time must be allowed for a reversal of 

what had been a long-run trend in some of the accounts, and for a 

sorting out and evaluation of the several unusual and nonrecurring 

factors.  

The Chicago Reserve Bank's analysis of probable loan trends 

came out essentially at the same place as the staff analysis,



4/13/65 -48

Mr. Scanlon commented. On balance, he felt that loan demand might 

ease substantially after mid-April.  

While he had little to add to the staff's explanation of 

the changing relationships among bank credit, money, and time deposits 

in recent months, Mr. Scanlon found it disconcerting to note the very 

strong role attributed to changes in Regulation Q. He thought the 

changes had been effective, but not to the extent some apparently 

believed.  

On morey market and reserve conditions, Mr. Scanlon observed 

that present policy was directed toward achieving slightly firmer 

money market conditions than had existed before the last Open Market 

Committee meeting. While free reserves had declined and borrowings 

rose, most money market rates changed only slightly in this period 

of continued strong credit demand. This seemed to him to leave open 

the question whether the somewhat firmer money market conditions 

specified in the directive had been achieved. While he did not mean 

to imply that the Desk had not done everything it should, he found 

it difficult to reconcile the absence of more rate changes.  

Chicago banks, Mr. Scanlon noted, remained in a relatively 

comfortable reserve position for this time of year. While New York 

banks had continued to build up their outstanding certificates of 

deposit rapidly, after adjusting for tax runoffs, those of Chicago 

banks were still below their pretax date level. Accommodation of



4/13/65 -49

the heavy credit demand at near-stable interest rates in March 

resulted in continued rapid increases in total reserves, bank credit, 

and total deposits.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon favored striving to maintain the 

slightly firmer conditions that had recently prevailed. He would not 

back away from the position the Committee had attained. The positive 

statement in the draft directive about an improvement in the balance 

of payments seemed to him a bit premature. He would be satisfied 

with the present directive as revised by Mr. Irons, also making refer

ence in the second paragraph to the impending Treasury financing.  

Mr. Clay commented that the most noteworthy aspect of the 

domestic economy was its impressive performance in absorbing the 

strong surge of demand resulting from the automobile and steel contract 

disputes and the rather broadly based general demand for goods and 

services. When consideration was given to the advanced stage of the 

business upswing, the predominantly orderly developments in prices, 

manpower. and industrial capacity were worthy of more than passing 

notice.  

The economy continued to be faced with important uncertainties, 

Mr. Clay added, concerning some sectors of the economy, notably steel 

and autos, and their impact on the aggregate level of economic activity, 

as the staff statement analyzed effectively. There was no way of 

foreseeing the shape of those developments, but it was apparent the



4/13/65 -50

economy would need to absorb reductions of uncertain magnitude in 

those sectors. The economy did have substantial underlying strength 

and its advance was broadly based, however. While the trend of 

productivity .n the manufacturing sector was favorable, the labor 

contract settlements and commodity pricing resulting therefrom remained 

the most serious threat on the price level front.  

Obviously, it could not be known with any high degree of 

accuracy what was happening to the international balance of payments 

in view of several factors distorting the data and the incompleteness 

of the more recent data. The limited evidence available was on the 

encouraging side, however. So far as the payments balance was con

cerned, it was only reasonable to give time for the effects of the 

present program to unfold within the existing framework of monetary 

assistance.  

Reserve availability had shifted considerably in recent weeks, 

Mr. Clay noted. While bank credit growth was still rapid, the role 

of borrowed reserves had increased substantially. The level of 

interest rates had not changed much recently, but interest rates 

already were high by historical comparison.  

While judgments might differ as to the appropriateness of 

moving toward a tightening of monetary policy, judgments presumably 

did not differ as to the desirability of avoiding abrupt tightening 

action. System experience certainly demonstrated the importance



4/13/65 -51

of that position. In view of the fact that interest rates were, as 

already indicated, high by historical standards, it became particularly 

important to be mindful of the degree and pace of reduction in credit 

availability. This was especially true inasmuch as the domestic 

economy continued to grow in productive potential, which would permit 

further orderly expansion in real output, assuming a satisfactory 

settlement of the crucial steel labor contract negotiations. In view 

of the recent actions taken in the balance of payments area, it would 

seem logical to await further observations of their effects, while 

maintaining a monetary policy conducive to domestic economic growth.  

For the period ahead, Mr. Clay felt that money market 

conditions generally should continue essentially unchanged. While 

the Treasury bill rate should be permitted to rise toward the discount 

rate if market forces brought that about, reserve availability should 

not be further reduced in an effort to produce that result. He 

favored no change in the discount rate.  

Mr. Clay agreed with those who felt it desirable to retain 

a directive similar in the first paragraph to the outstanding directive, 

with changes such as suggested by Mr. Irons in the second paragraph.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business developments in the Fifth 

District had approximately paralleled those in the nation. In banking, 

commercial and industrial loans in the District since the first of 

the year had followed the recent seasonal pattern closely, whereas



4/13/65 -52

in the country as a whole they had been much above that pattern. This 

was probably accounted for by the lesser importance of steel and 

automobile production and foreign lending in the District.  

Turning to the staff questions, Mr. Wayne said he would 

incorporate comments without referring directly to each question.  

Business activity in the nation seemed to be following the same trends 

that were evident three weeks ago. Inventory accumulation, especially 

in steel and related industries, seemed to be restrained by limits 

of productive capacity and unusually high consumption. This meant 

that if there was no steel strike the period of adjustment might be 

shortened because the amount of inventories to be liquidated would 

be smaller except to the extent that the present high level of con

sumption was due to the anticipation of a strike. If there was a 

strike, the fact that inventories were less than had been planned 

would mean that steel-using industries would have to curtail activity 

sooner as their supplies of steel were exhausted. Such a slowdown 

would cause a more rapid spread of the effects of the strike and might 

well strengthen demands for political action to bring the strike to 

an end.  

Mr. Wayne noted that as the level of industrial production had 

moved up in recent months, unit labor costs had declined somewhat 

despite a rise in overtime with its higher labor costs. Whether the 

decline would continue in the face of a growing scarcity of skilled



4/13/65 -53

labor remained to be seen. On the other hand, the prices of 

industrial raw materials, which had drifted downward or held steady 

between the end of October and the middle of February, had again been 

moving up. In the past two months the raw materials component of 

the daily index had risen about 5 per cent. Thus, the effects of 

those two items seemed to have partially offset each other, the extent 

depending on the cost structure of a given industry.  

It seemed to Mr. Wayne that it was much too early to assess 

the significance of balance of payments data for the first quarter 

of 1965, which at this stage were quite fragmentary. Even if complete 

and detailed data were available, a careful and extended analysis 

would be necessary to determine their significance in view of the 

dock strike, the heavy outflow of funds before February 10, and the 

voluntary restraint program since then. In the meantime, there might 

be some small basis for optimism in the continuing good progress of 

the voluntary restraint program, the absence of covered flows of 

funds to or from Europe, and some easing of credit conditions in 

France and Italy.  

Several factors suggested to Mr. Wayne that the unusually 

rapid rise in bank loans might come to an end before long. The effects 

of the dock strike were receding, foreign lending had been greatly 

reduced, the accumulation of steel inventories would reach a peak 

soon, and the growth of automobile inventories would likely slow



4/13/65 -54

down. The combined effect of all those factors should soon be 

apparent in a slower rate of growth, or even, a temporary decline in 

bank loans.  

Higher rates on time and savings deposits, Mr. Wayne observed, 

especially on certificates of deposit, had been a major factor in 

changing the relationship between bank credit and the money supply 

in recent months. Those higher rates had apparently enabled commercial 

banks to divert substantial amounts of new savings away from savings 

and loan associations and the funds so obtained had been used to 

make loans.  

In the policy area, Mr. Wayne said, the indicators told that 

money market conditions showed only minor changes from three weeks 

ago despite progressively larger net borrowed reserves. The growth 

rates of total and nonborrowed reserves declined a little in March 

but in both cases the absolute amount continued to rise. The bill rate 

had risen a little in the past three weeks, probably due in part to 

an increased supply, but was still well below the discount rate. If 

it were not for impending Treasury refundings, the nature of loan 

demand, and a good probability of its easing within the next month, 

a further distinct move toward less ease might seem advisable. As it 

was, however, he believed that the Committee should retain its 

present posture and keep the market steadily firm at about its present 

level. No change in the discount rate seemed appropriate now. The



4/13/65

draft directive, including the first paragraph, appeared satisfactory 

to him.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

Business activity is continuing at a very high rate, 
with gratifying large recent increases in employment and 
as yet no inflationary break-out of price increases, but 
also with some clearly unsustainable rates of output in 
a couple of major industries.  

I remain optimistic that we can move through this 
period without need for any major change in monetary 
policy. But a key factor shaping the future course of 
business will be the outcome of the steel wage ne
gotiations. A reasonable settlement ought to add to 
the longevity of this already record period of non
inflationary peacetime expansion. On the other hand, 
there is no gainsaying the possibility that an outsize 
steel wage contract and accompanying price increase 
might give rise to ramifying wage and price advances 
in numercus other sectors of the economy where activity 
is already high. The formal contract termination date 
is now only 2-1/2 weeks away. Either a strike or a 
settlement by that date would halt or reverse the 
pressure of steel inventory accumulation. A temporary 
contract extension would delay and perhaps even 
aggravate the adjustment, but I see no substitute for 
simply waiting to see how the issue is resolved.  

Fortunately, a "wait and see" attitude also seems 
quite appropriate to the international financial 
situation. That there has been an improvement in 
our situation since mid-February is undeniable; the 
real imponderable is how long-lasting that improvement 
will be. Here, too, only time will tell.  

It does seem to me that the domestic credit expansion 
accompanying these developments has been rather large.  
Although a variety of factors help to explain this 
credit rise, I do not want to be overly critical of the 
size of the net borrowed reserve figures that developed 
these past few weeks as banks kept putting more reserves 
to work than we were expecting. Having moved to a more 

restrictive policy at our last meeting--and believing 
it unwise to shift back and forth too frequently--I

-55-



4/13/65

would not object to a directive holding to the degree 
of tightness achieved since the last meeting, so long 
as the pressure of bank loan expansicn continues very 
strong. Such a posture should also suffice as an 
"even keel" during the Treasury financing period that 
will occupy about half the time between this meeting 
and next.  

I would caution, however, against giving any special 
attention to the three-month bill rate as a policy 
target at this time. I cited my reasons for this feeling 
at the last meeting, and I will not take time to re
iterate them here, but I feel them every bit as strongly 
today as I did three weeks ago.  

With these views, I would vote to approve the current 
directive to the Manager as drafted by the staff if 
the last sentence of the first paragraph were altered 
to substitute "support" for "reinforce," and the last 
two lines were left as they were. The changes suggested 
by the staff seem to contemplate a further move toward 
"reinforcing" or "moderating" that is not in accord with 
a policy of "no change" as set forth in the proposed 
last paragraph.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that the reports and comments so far 

all seemed to agree that there was a high level of economic activity, 

rather broadly based, recognizing the disturbances that might come 

from the steel situation at some point in the near future. The expansion 

of credit seemed to go on at a higher rate than could be justified 

over a long period of time. The international situation, as several 

had commented, seemed to be improving, but because of many conflicting 

factors there was no definite answer as yet.  

With all these things in mind, it seemed to Mr. Shepardson 

that the policy the Committee adopted at the last meeting continued 

to be appropriate. In his judgment the Committee should press for

-56-



4/13/65 -57

slightly firmer money market conditions. The actions of the past 

three weeks hd been constructive, but he did not think the Committee 

had probed as far as it might. He was not in favor of any drastic 

change, but he would favor probing toward a somewhat firmer position, 

He agreed with the comments made about the draft directive as written, 

for it seemed to him that the first and second paragraphs were not 

consistent. The first paragraph seemed to lead up to a continuation 

of the attempt to achieve slightly firmer conditions, which he would 

support. If the impending Treasury financing would be impaired, 

however, by not assuming an even-keel posture, then the maintaining 

of present conditions might be required. His personal preference 

would be for the staff directive as written, with one minor change in 

the first paragraph, unless that was inconsistent with the Committee's 

usual policy of even keel during periods of Treasury financing. If 

it was inconsistent, he would be willing to go along with a directive 

that called for maintaining the firmer money market conditions that 

had prevailed in recent weeks.  

Mr. Mitchell made the following statement: 

At the last meeting I raised the question whether we 
should, in light of the voluntary foreign credit restraint 
program, regard a widening of the differential between 
foreign and domestic interest rates brought on by rising 
interest rates abroad as a reason for monetary tightening 
by this Committee.  

Fundamentally, I seriously doubt that, in the 

environment of the mid-20th century, one is justified



4/13/65

in assuming that capital flows between reserve currency 
countries and their major trading partners and the 
attendant balance of payments surpluses and deficits 
which they generate can be adequately regulated by 
adjustments in the monetary policies of the countries 
involved.  

The "stop-go" experience of the U.K. and the 
recent reaction of exchange markets and their par
ticipants to the "crisis" bank rate in the U.K. and 
the bank credit squeeze there add to the accumulating 
bulk of evidence that the creation of artificial monetary 
stringency is neither a sound nor practical way to 
curtail capital outflow.  

There is some logic in the presumption that a 
country that is enjoying a surplus on current account 
might benefit domestically from a somewhat easier 
monetary policy, and that a country that is suffering 
from a deficit on current account might be encountering 
internal developments which would call for a tighter 
monetary policy. Unless there are chronic maladjustments 
of exchange rates, it is reasonable to assume that the 
deficit country is erring on the side of ease and/or 
the surplus country is erring on the side of tightness, 
and that an appropriate adjustment by one or the other, 
or both, would redound to everyone's benefit. There are 
important exceptions to this logical sequence, even when 
it is related only to the current account. When it is 
extended, as it too often is, to the overall balance 
including capital account transactions, it loses all 
realistic logic.  

It simply is not true that the capital exporter, 
when his current account is in surplus or balance, would 
necessarily benefit from the tighter monetary policy which 
would be needed to bring his overall account into balance-
and there is no prima facie reason to believe that the 
capital importer, when his current account is in deficit, 
would be better off with an easier monetary policy. This 
would only be a valid logical conclusion if capital 
were employed with the same intensity in all countries 
in the first instance, and if the rates of saving were 
approximately equal thereafter. That this is not the 
case in the world today, even among the so-called 
developed or industrialized countries, is obvious.

-58-



4/13/65

The conclusion is also inescapable. Overall re
striction of credit growth is not a desirable or even 
a feasible way to deal with our capital outflow problem.  
It is not, as is often said, a fundamental or basic 
approach.  

The determination of the precise response of saving 
in the U.S. to changes in interest rates is not presently 
within our analytical capacity. But we do know one 
thing. In recent years the flow of financial saving 
here appears to have been significantly responsive to 
the rate paid to savers. Hence, any effort to reduce 
the flow in credit markets by more restrictive monetary 
policies is offset, in part, by a diversion of the flow 
of current income away from consumption and durable goods 
expenditures into credit markets. Hence, we have every 
reason to expect that the restrictive impact of a "tight 
money" policy would be to reduce the relative profit
ability of investment in the U.S., slow up the rate of 
domestic expansion, and not curtail substantially the 
flow of funds seeking investment outlets abroad. Only 
by bringing domestic activity to a virtual standstill 
for a good many years could we hope to produce changes 
in the basic rate of return on investment which would 
"naturally" stem the outflow of capital. These are 
the hard, basic facts that people are reluctant to face.  
Tight money is not the "traditional" solution to a 
capital outflow occasioned by intensive capital application 
in one area, as compared to another. It is no solution 
at all.  

Then what can we do? In the longer run, we must 
establish controls over capital outflows that do not 
have to be "backed up" or "reinforced" by tight or 
tighter money. Interest rate differentials are bound 
to persist for some time between the U.S. and other areas 
which are not as intensively capitalized, and which 
have much lower savings rates than we do. We simply 
must control this capital outflow so that we can "feed 
out" capital to the rest of the world at a reasonable, 
sustainable rate, compatible with our current account 
surplus and foreigners' willingness to hold dollars.  
This mechanism of control must be such as not to inter
fere with the availability of credit for continued 
expansion in the United States.  

The program we are now following for reducing the 
U.S. balance of payments deficit relies on restricting

-59-



4/13/65

the supply of dollars flowing abroad in various capital 
transactions. The Federal Reserve's task is to cut 
the outflow of bank loans. The Commerce Department 
aims at corporate investment--both liquid and fixed; 
that program may well be involving not only a slowdown 
in the rate of outflow of U.S. funds but actual 
repatriation of liquid balances by American corporations.  

The entire program is a conscious attempt to reduce 
the supply of dollars to the rest of the world by means 
other than raising interest rates in the United States.  
It rests on the soundly based fact that the advance in 
interest rates necessary to eliminate that balance of 
payments deficit would have had to have been so large 
as to seriously injure domestic prosperity. A second 
good reason for avoiding an increase in U.S. interest rates 
as the instrument for reducing capital outflow is that 
such action was much more likely to lead to an escalation 
of interest rates throughout the industrialized world.  

Whatever the technique we use to reduce capital 
outflow, the result will be a tendency for interest rates 
abroad to rise. This is a natural reaction to a reduction 
in the supply of funds going from the United States to the 
rest of the world. In fact, if rates abroad did not tend 
to rise, we would have reason to doubt that our program 
was being effective.  

Now, if we had adopted the technique of raising 
rates here--and assuming this action were successful in 
cutting the outflow of capital--the consequent advance 
in rates abroad would tend to undo the effect of our 
initial increase in rates. Thus we would feel an 
incentive to raise rates here again in order to maintain 
the inducement for reducing capital outflows. In light 
of our experience thus far in trying to cope with the 
balance of payments deficit, it is easy to imagine an 
upward ratcheting of interest rates back and forth 
between the United States and Europe, to levels far 
above those appropriate for a healthy domestic economy.  

The great virtue of our present program is that 
the natural reaction abroad--a tendency for rates to 
rise--does not weaken the force of our own measures, 
as would happen if we had used the interest rate weapon 
in the first place.  

The increase in rates abroad has appeared mainly 
in the Euro-dollar market. This impact should be

-60-



4/13/65

recognized as a favorable indication that our program 
is biting. In view of the nature of our program, this 
rise in Euro-dollar rates in no way requires a rise 
in interest rates in the United States.  

What we should look for are the further reactions 
in Europe to this advance in Euro-dollar rates. In 
the Euro-dollar market, our program is leading to a 
reduced supply of U.S. funds and an increased demand 
by foreigners who might otherwise have borrowed in the 
United States. How will this help our balance of 
payments and, in particular, how will it reduce official 
dollar holdings in Europe? 

There are various ways in which the higher Euro
dollar rates can act to reduce official dollar balances.  
One way would be direct placement of dollars in that 
market by European central banks. A second way would 
be a diversion by European commercial banks of dollar 
accretions into the Euro-dollar market instead of to 
their own central banks. A third way would be that 
European borrowers who had been tapping the Euro
dollar market will now borrow at home. If they need 
dollars, they will acquire them in their own markets, 
reducing the flow of dollars to their central banks; 
if their need is for their own currency, their switching 
from the Euro-dollar market to domestic sources of funds 
will shut off a flow of dollars that previously went to 
their central banks. (This is what is happening in the 
U.K. to the extent that local authorities are repaying 
Euro-dollar loans and refinancing in sterling.) 

By these and other channels, our program will 
tend to reduce the dollar buildup in foreign official 
holdings. And, it should be noted, none of these 
channels requires an increase in interest rates in the 
United States. Each type of reaction results from the 
cut in the supply of U.S. funds. As long as our program 
is effective in reducing this supply, there is no case, 
from the balance of payments side, for also raising 
rates here.  

Turning to the domestic situation, Mr. Mitchell said he was 

disturbed about the effect on the economy generally of the beginning 

of steel inventory liquidation. He thought there was a tendency to

-61-



4/13/65 -62

underestimate the shock effect of this operation and that the economy 

was a little more exposed to a cessation of growth, if not a small 

downturn, than might be assumed. The economy had only just now achieved 

a reduction in the unemployment rate to 4.7 per cent, and he thought 

the U.S. ought to be able to achieve a higher utilization of resources 

while absorbing a balance of payments constraint. He agreed with 

what Mr. Irons and others had said about not giving too much attention 

to the bill rate and felt that the Committee ought to be giving more 

attention to the level of total reserves. The longer-term market 

may not have assimilated the change in policy at the Committee's 

last meeting, he added, and in this sensitive area the adjustment 

might have still some way to go.  

Mr. Mitchell preferred the first paragraph of the existing 

directive and a second paragraph along the lines suggested by 

Mr. Irons.  

Mr. Daane said he felt that the Committee's present policy 

posture was clearly appropriate on both domestic and international 

grounds and in terms of prospective developments, even if one made 

the assumption that the economy possibly had passed the overheating 

point. In short, he was pleased that the Committee stood where it 

did in its firming of money market conditions and its general policy 

stance. His general predilection against quantification and being 

too precise as to targets had been reinforced in recent weeks by



4/13/65 -63

consideration of the problems encountered and dealt with successfully 

by the Account Manager, so he would not want to set a precise reserve 

target for the next month. Nor would he wait to make a special effort 

to bring the bill rate up to any higher level, although he would 

be happy if it were to rise a few basis points. The imminence of 

Treasury financing reinforced the idea of a steady course in policy 

and open market operations. The Committee could not be oblivious to 

the fact that there would be a Treasury financing of substantial 

magnitude during the period prior to the next meeting. In summary.  

he would try to stay steady in terms of the tone and feel of the 

market, recognizing that this might be difficult in light of the 

growing market feeling that the Committee was in process of effecting 

a change in policy.  

On the directive, Mr. Daane said he shared the dissatisfaction 

of those who did not like the suggested new first paragraph. He 

would prefer to retain the first paragraph of the present directive, 

and he would accept Mr. Irons' suggestion for the second paragraph, 

which would call for maintaining the slightly firmer money market 

conditions that had prevailed in recent weeks.  

Mr. Hickman said that in considering his answers to the 

questions suggested by the staff he had drawn heavily on views ex

pressed at a Fourth District Economists Round Table held at the 

Cleveland Bank on March 26, in which 23 economists participated.



4/13/65 -64

With reference to the first question, recent developments in 

steel, autos, rubber, and aluminum reemphasized the reasons for 

doubting the sustainability of the current level of industrial 

production. Some declines in the monthly index of industrial pro

duction were expected within the next six months, accompanied by a 

slower rate of gain of GNP. In forecasting the industrial production 

index, only 6 of the 23 economists participating in the recent round 

table expected the index to be higher in the fourth quarter of 1965 

than in the first quarter.  

Auto production was scheduled to decline in April, and auto 

sales had trended downward from extremely high levels since late 

January. On a seasonally adjusted basis, a cumulative drop could 

be noted of 20 per cent in sales between the last ten-day period in 

January and the last ten-day period in March. Adjusted monthly sales 

had also declined since January, and were expected to drop further 

in April.  

In steel, Mr. Hickman noted that the strike-hedge buildup 

of inventories continued, but there were wide variations in estimates 

of the extent of the accumulation. On the basis of estimates by 

steel industry analysts, it appeared that the current buildup would 

fall somewhere between the moderate accumulations of 1962 and 1963 

and the high of 1959, with the amount varying directly with the 

length of time required to reach a labor settlement. One of the



4/13/65 -65

Cleveland Bank's directors, a major executive in the industry, 

believed that the contract deadline would be postponed for a month 

or two and that current levels of production could be maintained 

throughout much or all of the second quarter. Once a settlement was 

reached, steel shipments might decline by as much as 25 per cent from 

current levels and hold at that reduced level for two or three quarters.  

Other key industries affected by the same or similar developments 

included aluminum and rubber. Labor negotiations in aluminum had a 

strike deadline falling one month after that of steel. An economist 

for a major aluminum producer in the Fourth District expected that 

shipments of ingots and mill products during the second half of this 

year would average some 9 per cent below the first half. Representatives 

of three major rubber companies attending the recent meeting of the 

Economists Round Table agreed that tire sales were being borrowed from 

the future, and that there would be a second half slowdown, the extent 

depending on autos.  

So far as the question of prices and costs was concerned, 

Mr. Hickman said, the consensus of the meeting of the economists was 

that the high rates of output achieved thus far this year had not led 

to serious inflationary pressures, although occasional price increases 

were reported. An a priori explanation was that expanded output had 

lowered unit labor costs and raised profit margins.



4/13/65 -66

With respect to the balance of payments, Mr. Hickman believed 

the preliminary data for the first quarter to be too fragmentary 

for firm conclusions. Indications that the deficit was less than 

one-half that of the fourth quarter, after seasonal adjustment, and 

that the March surplus was larger than usua: were encouraging, but 

the dock strike settlement robbed the figures of much of their glow.  

A return of ccrporate funds formerly held overseas was reported at 

the recent meeting by several Fourth District business economists, and 

this response was presumably nationwide. Some, however, were puzzled 

by seeming inconsistencies in the groundrules being used by the 

Department of Commerce.  

As to the fourth question, the behavior of bank credit and 

deposits thus far in 1965 was basically what should be expected in 

a period of strong business expansion, following a change in 

Regulation Q. In this connection, comparisons between the first 

quarter of 1965 and the first quarter of 1962 were striking. In the 

earlier period the money supply increased at an annual rate of 1.4 

per cent, while time deposits rose at a rate of 14 per cent; more 

recently the money supply growth had been at an annual rate of one 

per cent, and time deposits had increased at an annual rate of nearly 

19 per cent. The correspondence would have been even closer if it had 

not been for the fact that Government deposits declined by $100 

million in the first quarter of 1962 and rose by $600 million in the 

first quarter of 1965.



4/13/65

The business readjustments referred to earlier would be 

associated with inventory liquidation and lower sales of consumer 

durables, Mr. Hickman continued, and these in turn would restrain 

bank loan expansion. Such a development would be reinforced by the 

return flow of funds from abroad under the voluntary credit restraint 

program.  

In this environment Mr. Hickman recommended a continuation 

of the monetary policy adopted at the last meeting, in order to sop 

up a redundant liquidity that might otherwise press interest rates 

down and offset some of the favorable effects of the President's 

balance of payments program. In any event, the forthcoming Treasury 

financing called for no change in money market conditions over the 

next four weeks. He therefore recommended a bill rate in the range 

of 3.95-4.05 per cent, borrowings above $400 million on average, and 

net borrowed reserves at whatever level was required to maintain those 

objectives, say $50 to $150 million. Because of his appraisal of tne 

domestic business outlook, Mr. Hickman preferred to see figures at 

the lower, or less restrictive, end of the range.  

For that reason also, Mr. Hickman said, he would prefer the 

words "while accommodating moderate growth" (in the reserve base, 

bank credit, and the money supply) at the end of the first paragraph 

of the current economic policy directive to the words "by moderating 

growth" suggested in the staff draft. The money supply was now barely

-67-



4/13/65 -68

back to where it was two months ago, and he would not like to "moderate" 

that rate of growth further. On the other hand, he thought the 

Committee should refer to the forthcoming Treasury financing, as the 

staff suggested in the second paragraph. On the whole, perhaps the 

first paragraph of the present directive and the second paragraph of 

the suggested revision could best be used.  

Mr. Bopp said discussions with a dozen large bus:.ness firms 

in the Third District suggested that the larger-than-usual March 

balance of payments surplus might indeed be associated with the voluntary 

restraint program. Each of the corporations with whom the Philadelphia 

Reserve Bank spoke indicated a thorough awareness of the President's 

program, and nine out of the twelve reported that a "plus" payments 

position would be achieved in 1965. Of those nine, five indicated 

with a good degree of certainty that 1965 would be "more plus" than 

1964. A very large chemical company, for example, reported plans to 

achieve a 15 per cent improvement over 1964's favorable balance. As 

for how the balance was to be improved, four firms were making no new 

portfolio investments abroad and were pulling down existing portfolio 

investments; four planned to finance expansion abroad either from foreign 

borrowing or from earnings of subsidiaries; three planned to repatriate 

additional earnings; and two had plans to defer direct investment 

abroad.



4/13/65 -69

Turning to the steel situation, Mr. Bopp reported that a 

survey of producers in the Third District indicated that the mills 

were running as close to capacity as possible, that they were selling 

all they could produce, and that they had added little inventory at 

the mill. The producers estimated that consumers had built up a three 

to four week supply of steel in addition to their normal stocks as a 

strike hedge. They felt, however, that only a short strike would 

occur, if there was a strike at all. Hence the greatest economic 

dislocation would probably come from a situation of protracted ne

gotiations during which further additions to inventory would be made, 

with greater reductions of orders when a settlement was reached. The 

producers expected that the final settlement would result in some 

increase in labor costs and perhaps some pressures on profits.  

With respect to policy, Mr. Bopp commented that the economy 

continued to exhibit basic strength, although some slowdown might result 

from curtailed production in autos and steel. He was pleased with 

the improved employment picture, with the apparent response to the 

voluntary restraint program, and with the continued stability in 

prices and unit labor costs. He saw no reason to depart from the present 

posture of monetary policy. Hence, he recommended using the first 

paragraph of the existing directive and the second paragraph of the 

proposed directive.



4/13/65 -70

Mr. Bryan reported that the economy of the Sixth District 

seemed to be expanding vigorously. In two States, Georgia and Florid, 

the insured unemployment rate was now down to 2 per cent. So far this 

year the District's weekly reporting member banks had shown loan 

expansion three times greater than in the corresponding period last 

year.  

As to the staff questions, Mr. Bryan found the comments on 

them thus far, including the staff comments, quite satisfactory. He 

did feel there was a tendency to lay a little too much emphasis on 

the unit labor cost as a statistic. This was a figure that, if he 

recalled correctly, covered only about, a 30 per cent sample of total 

nonfarm employment in this country.  

As far as monetary policy was concerned, it seemed to Mr. Bryan 

that barring strikes or the unexpectec the economic news was reassuring, 

with no adverse reaction, thus far at least, to the mildly firmer 

credit policy that the Committee presumably had been following. Indeed, 

there was some question in his mind whether the Committee had really 

been following a much firmer policy. Total reserves in March, as well 

as the first quarter as a whole, were up contraseasonally, and by a 

large amount; required reserves were up contraseasonally, and by a large 

amount; nonborrowed reserves were up contraseasonally, and by a large 

amount. Short-term rates had been somewhat firmer, to be sure, and in 

the two weeks ended April 7 net borrowed reserves had been over $100



4/13/65 -71

million. Yet there had also been a startling acceleration in the 

growth of bank credit.  

It seemed to Mr. Bryan, therefore, that the Committee had been 

influencing the bank credit situation only marginally, although it had 

moved into a position of net borrowed reserves. In response to strong 

loan demands, member banks apparently had been willing to borrow 

enough to more than offset the modification in reserve availability 

stemming from System operations and market forces. If loan demands 

continued to be as strong as they were in March and the Committee was 

guided largely by the net borrowed reserve figure, it was likely to be 

trapped into supplying more reserves than the country could tolerate.  

Under conditions of strong credit demand, a given net borrowed figure 

exerted less effect on reserve expansion than at other times. There

fore, if the Committee was going to continue to use a net borrowed 

reserve target and expect to allow only a moderate increase in bank 

reserves, it was going to have to bring the banks into a further net 

borrowed reserve position. Just how large that should be, he did not 

know, but he believed the Committee should be feeling its way toward 

a further increase in net borrowed reserves and a further increase in 

the use of the discount window. It seemed to him there should be an 

average of net borrowed reserves of around $150 million, fluctuating 

between $100 and $200 million. He would not consider this to be a 

further tightening of policy but merely an effort to implement the 

policy already decided upon.



4/13/65

Having said this, Mr. Bryan commented, he must recognize the 

fact of the imminent Treasury financing and on that account vote for 

an even-keel policy in the period ahead. Certainly he would not favor 

a change in the discount rate. He preferred the existing directive, 

with the second paragraph changed along the lines suggested in the 

staff draft.  

Mr. Shuford commented that, as had been pointed out by others 

around the table, economic activity was at a high level and was con

tinuing to rise rapidly. Most measures had gone up sharply in the past 

three months, and aggregate demand appeared to be exerting some upward 

pressure on prices, especially sensitive prices. In the Eighth District 

the economy had risen at an exceptional rate since last fall.  

Thus far, Mr. Shuford continued, the economic expansion appeared 

to have been accomplished without creation of sizable imbalances, but 

at the same time he had a feeling that a slowing down of the rate of 

economic advance would be a healthy development. Continued increases 

in the demands for goods and services at recent rapid rates could soon 

become excessive.  

With respect to the international situation, Mr. Shuford said 

the evidence, limited and uncertain as it was, indicated that the 

voluntary restraint program had been reasonably effective, at least 

in its initial stages, but some of those early gains had been partly 

the result of a one-time reflux of corporate funds and a possible

-72-



4/13/65 -73

catching up of exports in the wake of the port strike settlement.  

Whether the improvement in the balance of payments could be maintained 

remained to be seen.  

Mr. Shuford went on to say that he had been considering whether 

Committee policy had been restrictive enough or whether it should 

become a bit more restrictive. In view of the strength of the domestic 

economy, more monetary restraint was needed now than a year ago, but 

it appeared to him that the Committee had been achieving somewhat 

greater restraint during the past four months than previously. During 

most of last year the three-month bill rate was about 3.5 per cent, 

and recently it had been near 4 per cent. While total member bank 

reserves, time deposits, and bank credit had continued to rise markedly, 

this did not necessarily indicate a lack of restraint. The time deposit 

growth reflected the high level of liquid saving accompanying the 

economic expansion and the aggressiveness of banks in seeking those 

funds. Most of the reserves furnished to the banking system in recent 

months had been used to support those time deposits. Growth in bank 

credit had in large part also been a reflection of the large share of 

funds being attracted by commercial banks.  

The money supply rose at a 4 per cent rate last year, 

Mr. Shuford pointed out, and such a rate was appropriate then. But 

now, with economic activity pressing capacity, some moderation seemed 

to be called for. Since mid-December the money stock had been about



4/13/65 -74

unchanged on balance. In view of the changes in Regulation Q and 

other factors, this short-run situation had probably been appropriate.  

The spurt in time deposits, utilizing the reserves furnished, was 

apparently temporary. From February to March, time deposit growth 

returned to the rate of last year, and the money supply rose.  

With respect to policy, Mr. Shuford felt that the economic 

situation called for continuation of some restraining influence. He 

favored maintaining the tighter money marke: conditions that now 

existed, with the bill rate around 3.90-4.05 per cent and Federal funds 

in the 4 to 4-1/8 per cent range. This would necessitate net borrowed 

reserves, of course, and he favored whatever magnitude was necessary 

in order to reach the other objectives. He hoped that over a period 

of time, say four to six months, there would be a money supply growth 

averaging around a 2 per cent rate. He would leave the discount rate 

unchanged at this time.  

With respect to the directive, Mr. Shuford said there were 

several alternatives with which he could agree. The majority seemed 

to favor the first paragraph of the current directive and essentially 

the second paragraph of the draft directive, and he would accept such 

a solution.  

Mr. Balderston favored use of the first paragraph of the existing 

directive and the second paragraph of the staff draft. He was concerned, 

in view of the increase in bank credit in the first quarter, that



4/13/65 -75

holding an even-keel during the next four weeks not mean retrogression.  

In other words, he would not want the Committee to perpetuate rates 

at the long end or relax the slightly tighter stance that it adopted 

three weeks ago.  

Chairman Martin remarked that at the last meeting he had 

commented on the absence this year of the usual references to the 

February doldrums, and it seemed clear that there were no March doldrums 

either.  

As to the directive, the Chairman said it appeared that a 

majority favored the use of the first paragraph of the present directive 

and the second paragraph of the staff draft He inquired whether anyone 

felt strongly enough to dissent.  

There followed a discussion of some of the specific wording of 

the proposed directive, at the conclusion of which Chairman Martin 

remarked, as he had on previous occasions, that words meant different 

things to different people. With this observation, he suggested that 

the Committee vote on a directive in the form that had been suggested.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, to 
execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate a generally strong further expansion



4/13/65

of the domestic economy and the continuing need to improve 
our international balance of payments, as highlighted by 
heavy gold outflows in recent months. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy 
to reinforce the voluntary restraint program to strengthen 
the international position of the dollar, and to avoid 
the emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account 
the forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market 
operations over the next four weeks shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining the firmer conditions in the 
money market that have recently prevailed.  

It was understood that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 11, 1965, with the following meeting scheduled 

for Tuesday, May 25.

The meeting then adjourned.  Secretary

-76-



Attachment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) April 12, 1965 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on April 13, 1965 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate a continued rapid expansion of the domestic economy, 
reflecting broad underlying strength as well as extraordinary de
mands for steel and autos. At the same time, with the persisting 
drain in our gold stock, there is need to consolidate the recent 
improvement in our international balance of payments. In this 
situation, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current 
policy to reinforce the voluntary restraint program to strengthen 
the international position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence 
of inflationary pressures, by moderating growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account the 
forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market operations over 
the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
the firmer conditions in the money market that have recently 
prevailed.


