









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C. on Tuesday, August 10, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESE,: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Balder ton 
Mr. Daane 1/ 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 
Mr. Bopp, Alternate for Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Irons, Alternate for Mr. Bryan 
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes 

Messrs. Hickman and Clay, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Garvy, Holland, 

and Taylor, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Partee, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Bernard, Economist, Government Finance 

Section, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated in these minutes.



8/10/65

Messrs. Latham and Patterson, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, Tow, 
Green, and Craven, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Richmond, St. Louis, Kansas City, 
Dallas, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Sternlight, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on July 13, 1965, were approved.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the actions taken by mem
bers of the Federal Open Market Committee 
on July 28-29, 1965, authorizing negotiations 
to increase the outstanding swap arrangements 
with (1) the German Federal Bank from $250 
million to $500 million, and (2) the Bank for 
International Settlements from $150 million to 
$300 million, on the understanding that the 
additional facility with the Bank for Inter
national Settlements would be used by the 
System to acquire currencies other than Swiss 
francs in which the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York had been authorized by the Committee 
to operate, were ratified.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to report on the meeting 

of the Group of Ten Deputies that he had attended in Paris on August 3 

and 4.  

Mr. Daane remarked that the first afternoon of the meeting 

had been devoted to a review of the question of the next steps to



8/10/65 -3

be taken with respect to future international monetary arrangements, 

with particular attention given to the feasibility and desirability 

of an international monetary conference, since Secretary of the 

Treasury Fowler recently had indicated U.S. willingness to partici

pate in such a conference. Except for the U.S. representatives, the 

Group was unanimously negative with respect to an international 

monetary conference at this juncture or in the near future, and they 

were skeptical for the period beyond that. The consensus was that 

there were a number of basic differences in view on appropriate 

international monetary arrangements, but they reflected differences 

within the Group of Ten itself, and therefore should be worked out 

by that Group. Thus, the principal conclusion of the Deputies was 

that their owr efforts to prepare for changes in the international 

monetary system should be intensified without prejudging the 

question of the urgency of putting any changes into effect.  

The Deputies envisaged three phases for future discussions 

of international monetary arrangements, Mr. Daane said. In the 

first phase the objective would be to resolve differences among 

themselves on basic points. They hoped to get a mandate from the 

Ministers of the Ten at the time of the World Bank-Fund meetings 

in September that would permit them to move ahead and really come 

to grips with the problems as they saw them. They considered this 

phase to be an absolutely essential prelude to the second, negoti

ating phase; it was necessary, they thought, to see the outcome of



8/10/65 -4

phase one before moving on to more formal negotiations on the specific 

form of monetary arrangements. This left an international conference 

as a remote possibility for a third phase. From the discussion it 

was clear that there were serious doubts around the table as to 

whether such a conference ever would be necessary or even useful.  

Two other questions were discussed at the meeting, Mr. Daane 

continued. One concerned renewal of the General Arrangements to 

Borrow, on which agreement was required by October 1965, as he had 

mentioned on earlier occasions. At the previous meeting the 

Deputies had divided evenly on the issue of duration, with five 

countries favoring a two-year term and five a four-year term. At 

this meeting the discussion revolved almost entirely around a 

compromise British proposal, under which the GAB would be renewed 

for a four-year term, but with a specific provisio that a review 

would be made at the end of two years. Reaction was generally 

favorable, with the only unresolved question that of whether a 

country would have the advance consent of the others to withdraw 

from the Arrangements at the end of the two years; under the terms 

of the present GAB consent to withdraw was necessary. Of course, 

the whole question of renewal of the GAB was not one for decision 

by the Deputies, but rather for the Ministers of the Ten, and the 

matter was left open for decision at the Ministers' meeting in 

September.



8/10/65 -5

There also was a brief discussion of the measures that 

Britain had taken recently, Mr. Daane said. Those measures were 

viewed as a further step in the right direction, and the reactions 

to them were quite favorable.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account on foreign excharge market operations and 

on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies 

for the period July 13 through August 4, 1965, and a supplemental 

report for August 5 through 9, 1965. Copies of these reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the ,old stock would remain unchanged this week. The 

Stabilization Fund still had $83.4 million cf gold on hand, with 

prospective central bank orders this month cf roughly $57 million.  

In addition to such official demands for gold, however, the cost of 

financing intervention in the London gold market had become heavier 

From the beginning of the year through the end of July, total inter

vention by the London Gold Pool amounted to roughly $200 million, of 

which the U.S. Treasury share was $100 million, or 50 per cent.  

During the first week of August, the Pool had had to put up an 

additional $35 million to keep the price under control. Chinese 

buying continued to be a significant factor in the market, with



8/10/65 -6

purchases of $2 million or so occurring every few days. The great 

bulk of demand for gold, however, seemed to be coming from all over 

the world and to reflect a fairly general feeling of anxiety; in a 

sense it reflected all of the troublesome problems of the day, of a 

political, military, and economic nature. In an effort to relieve 

the pressure somewhat, the price had been allowed to ride up to just 

a shade under $35.20, the informal ceiling under the Pool arrange

ment, at which point some expectation of a price dip might appear.  

That situation was a potentially dangerous one and had to be 

watched closely.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs remarked, since the 

last meeting of the Committee sterling had been hit by recurrent 

bursts of selling with speculative pressure becoming particularly 

intense just before the weekends. During July, British reserve 

losses exceeded $400 million and that compelled the government to 

announce new policy measures just before the end of the month. As 

Mr. Daane had reported, those measures were fairly well received 

among the European governments and central banks, and the initial 

market reaction to the program also was favorable. However, a new 

wave of pessimism struck the market last week as a result of a 

combination of events, including particularly the publication of 

British reserve figures giving evidence of the magnitude of the 

July reserve losses. During the first week of August the Bank of 

England suffered further reserve losses of roughly $225 million.



8/10/65

The market's lack of confidence in sterling was compounded 

of many things, Mr. Coombs observed, but he did not sense any wide

spread conviction that British prices and wages at the present moment 

were so seriously out of line as to render devaluation inevitable.  

The crisis of confidence seemed, instead, to be rooted in what the 

market regarded as a basic unwillingness of the present British 

government to come to grips with the problem. The government had 

acted in piecemeal fashion, and each set of measures had appeared 

to the market to be inadequate to the magnitude of the problem.  

When one considered all of the measures that had been taken they 

added up to an impressive package and it was possible that relatively 

little more in the way of either fiscal or credit restraints would 

be needed. There remained, however, the major risk that the present 

voluntary program for limiting price and wage increases would prove 

ineffective and consequently would result in a gradual undermining 

of the present exchange parity. That, he thought, was what the 

market most feared.  

Perhaps the most urgent need was fo: some dramatic move 

designed to demonstrate the Labor Government's determination to hold 

the price and wage line, Mr. Coombs said. If such a move were made, 

in view of all the other measures that had been taken there was a 

reasonable chance of producing a turn in the situation. With sterling 

so heavily oversold, there was an enormous technical position that



8/10/65 -8

could be exploited. The U.K. trade figures for July, just released 

this morning, showed a considerable narrowing of the deficit--from 

about £80 million in June to £50 million. There had been a sharp 

increase in exports, with the rise well distributed by type of 

commodity. On the whole, the situation appeared to be far from 

hopeless, the outcome rather depended on whether the British could 

make a final determined effort.  

In other exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, there had 

been continuing flows of funds to Italy, partly reflecting seasonal 

patterns, and new inflows into Switzerland, the Netherlands, Belgium, 

and France, reflecting both the sterling crisis and a tightening of 

credit conditions in certain of those markets. As a result, it had 

been necessary to make new drawings on the swap lines with the Dutch 

and the Belgians, and additional drawings of Swiss francs might 

shortly be required.  

Mr. Coombs then referred to the action by members of the 

Committee on July 28-29 that had been satified today, approving his 

request, transmitted by telegram, for authority to negotiate increases 

in the swap lines with the BIS and the German Federal Bank. He 

regretted having had to resort to the unusual procedure of asking 

for such an authorization between meetings of the Committee, but the 

combination of a prospective Presidential message on Vietnam, the 

rapid build-up of speculation against the pound sterling, and the 

heavy pressure on the London gold market all seemed to urge an



8/10/65

immediate reinforcement of the country's financial defenses. The 

increase in the swap line with the BIS had been consummated quickly, 

and would provide the System with a further source of guilders and 

Belgian francs in the event of heavy inflows into Amsterdam and 

Brussels. In that event, drawings would, of course, first be made 

on the direct swap lines with the central banks of the Netherlands 

and Belgium. He was disappointed that it had not been possible as 

yet to consummate the recommended increase in the swap line with 

the German Federal Bank. Although the senior officials of that 

Bank would have preferred action earlier, they felt it was desirable 

to bring the matter before a meeting of their full board of directors, 

which was scheduled to convene this coming Thursday (August 12).  

Mr. Coombs was hopeful that he would get an affirmative response 

at that time and that it would be possible to announce an increase 

in the swap line with Germany on Thursday afternoon.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
July 13 through August 9, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the interest rates applicable to 

drawings by either party under each of the System's reciprocal 

currency arrangements had been negotiated on a country-by-country 

basis and that for the most part it had been possible to secure 

agreement to employing the U.S. bill rate. In four instances,



8/10/65 -10

however, it had been found desirable to acquiesce in the suggestion 

of the other party that a fixed rate of interest should be employed.  

In the case of the National Bank of Belgium, for example, a rate of 

3-3/4 per cent had been agreed upon under the $50 million standby 

arrangement, and a rate of 3-7/8 per cent or the fully-drawn arrange

ment for another $50 million. He thought those rates were roughly 

appropriate and should be allowed to stand. On the other hand, the 

rate of 2 per cent on the swap lines with the Bank of Canada and 

the Bank of England and the 3 per cent rate under the agreement 

with the Bank of Japan were set when U.S. Treasury bill rates were 

considerably below their present levels, and had become unrealistic 

with the passage of time. Therefore, he requested authorization 

to renegotiate those rates, either securing agreement to use the 

U.S. bill rate or, if the other party preferred an arbitrary rate, 

establishing one that approximated the present U.S. bill rate more 

closely. He had informally sounded out both the Bank of England 

and the Bank of Canada on the matter and thought they would be 

agreeable to such a renegotiation.  

Renegotiation of interest rates 
applicable to drawings on the standby 
swap lines with the Banks of England, 
Canada, and Japan, as recommended by 
Mr. Coombs, was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then recommended two revisions in the Committee's 

continuing authority directive for foreign currency operations.



8/10/65 -11

First, he recommended that the dollar limit on the aggregate amount 

of foreign currencies that might be held under reciprocal currency 

arrangements, specified in the first paragraph of the directive, 

be increased from $2.65 billion to $2.8 billion, in view of the 

$150 million increase in the swap arrangement with the BIS that had 

been approved by members last week and ratified today. Such an 

increase in the aggregate limit would be consistent with the 

Ccmmittee's practice of establishing that limit at an amount equal 

to the sum of all individual swap arrangements. Secondly, he 

recommended that the following language be added as a new final 

paragraph of the directive: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to make purchases of sterling on a covered or 
guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar up to a total of $50 
million equivalent.  

In connection with the latter recommendation, Mr. Coombs 

noted that the Account Management now had authority to hold up to 

$150 million of foreign currencies acquired as a result of outright 

purchases. At present, $28 million was employed in holdings of 

sterling, $63 million in German marks, and $10 million in other 

currencies, for a total of $101 million, leaving an unused margin 

of $49 million. He would be reluctant to acquire any more sterling 

outright at this time; in fact, the Account's sterling holdings had 

been brought down by 50 per cent from the peak of $56 million reached 

last fall. However, there had been some recent indications that the



8/10/65 -12

British might be prepared, within limits, to provide an exchange 

guarantee on sterling holdings of the System and the U.S. Treasury.  

The Treasury had indicated that it would be willing to acquire a 

moderate amourt of sterling on such a basis.  

In Mr. Coombs' judgment, an additional limited authority 

such as he was recommending would be useful on several counts.  

First, it would enable the System to acquire additional sterling 

without exchange risk. That sterling could be used to meet any 

future needs not only for sterling but also for other currencies 

that might be urgently needed and that could be acquired through 

sterling swaps. Secondly, a relatively small amount of dollars 

put through the exchange markets as a result of such covered 

purchase:; could have a substantial effect at critical moments.  

Finally, there was the possibility that such an arrangement could 

be generalized. For example, the International Bank had a large 

amount of money placed in dollar assets in New York. If the 

British government were able to provide a guarantee, it was con

ceivable that a substantial part of those holdings could be exchanged 

into sterling.  

In response to a question by Chairman Martin, Mr. Coombs 

said that either of two alternative procedures might be followed 

in implementing the authority he proposed. Under one possible 

procedure the System would buy sterling at, say, an exchange rate



8/10/65 -13

of $2.79, and simultaneously sell it forward to the Bank of England 

at a rate of, say, $2.78. For the holding period the funds could 

be invested in Britain, where they would yield a return higher than 

the U.S. bill rate. As interest accumulated the original cost of 

the sterling could be written down to $2.78 and the interest return 

calculated on the basis of that price. The alternative possibility 

would be much simpler; instead of arranging for forward cover, the 

Bank of England would guarantee at par--a rate of $2.80--some 

specified amount of sterling that the System would acquire. If the 

Bank of England extended such a guarantee, however, Mr. Coombs 

suspected that they would be unwilling to sec the funds invested in 

the London market. They might suggest instead that they be placed 

in a "money-employed" account at the Bank of England at a rate equal 

to the U.S. bill rate. Whichever procedure was followed, sterling 

acquired under such an authorization would not be exposed to the risk 

of devaluation, unlike currencies acquired under the present authori

zation for holdings of up to $150 million of currencies bought on an 

outright basis.  

Mr. Daane said he would agree that the proposed authority 

would be useful under present circumstances, although he found the 

second reason Mr. Coombs had mentioned to be a little more persuasive 

than the first; there clearly were times when relatively small sums 

put through the exchange markets could make a great difference. The



8/10/65 -14

action would align the System with the Treasury in the effort to be 

of maximum help to the British, and at the .,ame time would be very 

much in this country's own interest. There was no risk to the System 

in the suggested arrangement, and Mr. Coombs was proposing that it be 

employed on a limited scale. The question of which of the two proce

dures should be followed was largely a technical matter, but he would 

expect the British to favor the forward cover alternative. To give 

a dollar guarantee might imply some reflection on the standing of 

the pound and might have undesirable implications for other sterling 

holders.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the System obviously would be 

protected against financial loss on sterlin, acquired under a 

guarantee by the Bank of England. He noted, however, that it was the 

policy of the U.S. Treasury not to guarantee outright foreign official 

holdings of dollars. Under the proposal, therefore, the System would 

be accepting a guarantee from a foreign central bank of a type the 

United States was not prepared to offer other countries. Such an 

act, in his judgment, was likely to expose the U.S. to demands for 

similar guarantees of foreign official dollar holdings. The kinds 

of techniques the System presently employed seemed to him to be more 

consistent with the posture of the U.S. Treasury on the subject of 

guarantees.



8/10/65 -15

Mr. Coombs commented that he personally was inclined to favor 

the forward contract procedure. Under that alternative, however, 

agreement would have to be reached on the focward rate to be employed 

in each transaction, and operations could become rather cumbersome, 

particularly if others also entered into such transactions with the 

Bank of England. Accordingly, the British might feel that limited 

guarantees were preferable on grounds of simplicity. The magnitude 

of the risk that Mr. Mitchell saw would depend on the form of the 

guarantees. If they were made for relatively short periods--say, 

6 or 12 months--and for limited amounts of sterling, the transactions 

would not differ very much in substance from forward contract 

transactions.  

Mr. Daane observed that in principle Mr. Mitchell's point 

was well taken; if transactions of the type suggested were carried 

too far they could easily raise questions of guarantees for foreign 

official dollar holdings. He doubted, however, whether such demands 

would be provoked by guarantees of System sterling holdings on the 

limited scale contemplated. On that scale the differences from 

forward contracts were more of form than substance.  

Mr. Wayne said that he would be concerned that the United 

States might be put in the position Mr. Mitchell feared if the System 

simply requested the British to guarantee outright sterling holdings.  

However, he thought a distinction should be drawn between such a



request, on the one hand, and acceptance of a proposal by the British, 

on the other, that the guarantee procedure should be followed as an 

alternative to the forward contract procedure.  

In reply to Mr. Hickman's question concerning the possibility 

that other central banks might ask for similar guarantees of their 

sterling hold:ngs, Mr. Coombs commented that continental European 

central banks now held virtually no sterling. In the past, under 

the so-called European Monetary Agreement, their sterling holdings 

had been on a guaranteed basis, for the most part, but the guarantee 

privilege had been largely withdrawn about two years ago because of 

concern by the Bank of England that sterling-area countries might 

ask for similar guarantees. He was not able to predict whether, in 

an emergency, the British would feel that they could justify 

restoring such arrangements with the continental central banks.  

The earlier guarantees had been in terms of dollars, but that was 

not a necessary element of the arrangements; any new guarantees 

might be in terms of the currency of the sterling holder.  

Chairman Martin commented that Mr. Mitchell's point was well 

taken. For present purposes, however, he thought the choice between 

the two alternative procedures was primarily a technical question, 

and perhaps the opinions of British officials had not yet solidified.  

On the whole, the proposed additional authorization struck him as a 

useful precautionary measure, since it offered an additional means

8/10/65 -16-



8/10/65 -17

for helping to stabilize the market, although it was possible 

that it might not be used.  

Mr. Daane said that if Mr. Coombs' recommendation was 

approved it would be important, in his judgment, not to give the 

impression that the arrangement was open-ended and capable of 

indefinite enlargement. The Chairman concurred in this view.  

In response to questions, Mr. Coombs said that he was 

limiting his proposal now to sterling out might later want to 

request similar authority in connectio. with other currencies, 

and that he had no present intention of increasing the Account's 

outright holdings of sterling. As he had noted earlier, such 

holdings had been reduced by half since last autumn.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the continuing authority directive 
for foreign currency operations was 
amended to read as follows, effective 
immediately: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized 
and directed to purchase and sell through spot trans
actions any or all of the following currencies in 
accordance with the Guidelines on System Foreign Currency 
Operations as amended March 23, 1965; provided that the 
aggregate amount of foreign currencies held under 
reciprocal currency arrangements shall not exceed 
$2.8 billion equivalent at any one time, and provided 
further that the aggregate amount of foreign currencies 
held as a result of outright purchases shall not 
exceed $150 million equivalent at any one time:



8/10/65

Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Netherlands guilders 
Swiss francs 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Austrian schillings 
Swedish kronor 
Japanese yen 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to operate in any or all of the foregoing currencies 
in accordance with the Guidelines and up to a combined total of 
$275 million equivalent, by means of: 

(a) purchases through forward transactions, for the 
purpose of allowing greater flexibility in covering 
commitments under reciprocal currency agreements; 

(b) purchases and sales through forward as well as 
spot transactions, for the purpose of utilizing its 
holdings of one currency for the settlement of 
commitments denominated in other currencies; 

(c) purchases through spot transactions and concurrent 
sales through forward transactions, for the purpose 
of restraining short-term outflows of funds induced 
by arbitrage considerations; and 

(d) sales through forward transactions, for the purpose 
of influencing interest arbitrage flows of funds 
and of minimizing speculative disturbances.  

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized and 
directed to make purchases through spot transactions, including 
purchases from the U.S. Stabilization Fund, and concurrent sales 
through forward transactions to the U.S. Stabilization Fund, of 
any of the foregoing currencies in which the U.S. Treasury has 
outstanding indebtedness, in accordance with the Guidelines and 

up to a total of $100 million equivalent. Purchases may be at 

rates above par, and both purchases and sales are to be made 

at the same rates.

-18-



8/10/65

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to make purchases of sterling on a covered or 
guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar up to a total of 
$50 million equivalent.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period July 13 through August 4, 1965, 

and a supplemental report for August 5 through 9, 1965. Copies of 

both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

Money market developments and a routine Treasury 
refunding operation in recent weeks have been overshadowed 
by uncertainties about the interest rate outlook generated 
primarily by external factors. A foremost source of concern 
to domestic financial markets has been the outlook for sterling, 
with U. S. bond market participants now watching for Britain's 
reserve statistics and trade data with an avid interest 
previously concentrated on more domestic matters such as 
business loans, free reserves, or unemployment. The market's 
concern about sterling rests on a belief that drastic action 
to aid the pound will quickly put pressure on the dollar, 
presumably calling for a tighter monetary policy to protect 
our own currency. Alongside this concern, there has been a 
growing conviction that stepped-up hostilities in Vietnam 
will, before long, make greater demands on the U.S. economy 
in general and on the Treasury in particular. Bond prices 
have moved significantly lower in this atmosphere, not in 
a drastic or disorderly fashion, but also without generating 
much of a feeling that a more "tradable" price level is 
being reached. Perhaps a little paradoxically, the continuing 
sizable dealer positions in bonds over five years to maturity 
help to explain both the heavy feeling of the market, and the 
moderation of the price decline, as dealers have sought to 
protect the value of existing positions.

-19-



8/10/65

Against this background, the Treasury's August refunding 
went as well as could be expected. Dealers expressed some 
dismay at the Treasury's reopening of a 3-1/2 year bond, and 
they clearly would have preferred a single issue in the 18
month area--a preference that was underlined not only in their 
comments but also in their very limited participation in the 
offering. Investors did have some moderate interest in a 
longer option, however, and about $800 million of the roughly 
$3 billion of public holdings was exchanged for the reopened 
bond. Of the remaining public holdings, all but about $200 
million was turned in for the 18-month notes, leaving a modest 
amount of attrition.  

Through most of the past four weeks, the Treasury bill 
market enjoyed a resurgence of demand that carried rates down 
from the higher levels that had been reached in early July.  
Demand in mid-July was enlarged in part by dealer purchases 
in anticipation of increased activity that was expected to 
be associated with the Treasury's August refunding. By the 
end of July, however, the bill market turned around and rates 
tended to back up--partly because the demand related to the 
refunding fell short of expectations while System buying of 
bills was also lower than expected by the market. Toward the 
end of the period, with a generally nervous atmosphere 
beginning to affect bills as well as coupon issues, the 
System was able to provide reserves through sizable bill 
purchases with no significant impact on rates. In yesterday's 
auction, the three- and six-month issues were sold at average 
rates of about 3.85 and 3.95 per cent, respectively, compared 
with a low point in the recent period of 3.80 and 3.87 per cent, 
respectively (on July 26), and not far different from the rates 
prevailing in the auction four weeks ago.  

System open market operations alternately withdrew and 
provided reserves over the past four weeks, mirroring the 
injections and absorptions of reserves by market factors 
while maintaining fairly persistent firmness in the money 
market. On balance, operations in Treasury issues added a 
net of $133 million of reserves on a commitment basis. Large 
scale use was made of repurchase agreements during the period, 
both to meet temporary reserve needs and on occasion to avoid 
adding to the immediate pressure of demand for Treasury bills.  
While some use was made of the Desk's authority to arrange 
repurchase agreements against a broader maturity range of 
issues during financing periods, this authority was used 
less extensively than in May.

-20-



8/10/65

Net borrowed reserves during the period moved in a range 
from around $100 million to $230 million, while member bank 
borrowings hovered around the $1/2 billion level. Federal 
funds traded largely at 4-1/8 per cent, that being the 
effective rate on three out of five days.  

Over the four weeks as a whole, outright System holdings 
of Treasury bills were increased by $91 million while holdings 
under repurchase agreements rose a net of $42 million. Out
right holdings of coupon issues were unchanged during the 
period, except for the commitment to exchange the Account's 
holdings of maturing notes for new notes and reopened bonds.  

Looking ahead to the next three weeks, current projections 
suggest only a modest need for System operations--probably 
starting with some absorption of reserves as mid-month 
approaches and then with a net provision toward the end of 
the month. Given a continuation of the current heavy atmosphere 
in the bond market, some of that later provision of reserves 
might appropriately be accomplished through purchases of coupon 
issues.  

Corporate bonds, like Treasury issues, tended to decline 
in price over the recent period, and the relatively attractive 
yields available on corporate issues remained a factor tending 
to divert investors to this area and away from Governments.  
New issues won mixed receptions, with some higher-yielding 
offerings moving out quickly and others remaining in under
writers' hands and requiring subsequent price cuts. Tax
exempt issues benefited from a pick-up in bank buying that 
succeeded in reducing advertised inventories over the 
interval.  

Payment for the current Treasury financing takes place 
this Friday. The Treasury's next debt operation, apart from 
routine bill rollovers, is likely to be a cash borrowing in 
the bill area--possibly not until early autumn.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the open market transactions 
in Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period July 13 
through August 9, 1965, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Secretary's Note: On August 2, 1965, the 
following message had been transmitted to 
members of the Committee, by telegram to 
those outside Washington, by Mr. Young:

-21-



8/10/65

Referring to current Treasury refunding, System Account 
holds $3,891,732,000 of notes maturing August 13, 1965, about 
53 per cent of total outstanding. Account Management proposes 
that Account exchange its entire holdings through subscription 
for $2,891 million, about three-quarters, of the 4 per cent 
notes maturing February 15, 1967 and $1 billion, one-quarter, 
into 4 p.r cent bonds maturing February 15, 1969. System 
Account already holds $84 million of the bonds. Principal 
reasons for proposal are avoidance of excessively heavy System 
holdings of any single Treasury issue, the ample System holdings 
maturing in one and two years, the relatively short term of the 
bond offered by the Treasury.  

1. Assuming the public subscribes to $1 billion 
4's of 1969, the amount of 4's of February 15, 1967 
taken by System Account would be about 57 per cent of 
the new issue, only a slightly larger proportion than 
the System's present holding of the issue being 
refunded. If the System's entire holding of the 
maturing issue were exchanged into 4's of February 15, 
1967 it would represent 64 per cent of the issue.  

2. The amount of the 4's of February 15, 1969 
taken by the System Account would be about the same 
as the amount expected to be taken by the public, but 
would represent only 28 per cent of the total issue, 
including the amount already outstanding.  

3. After the exchange 59 per cent of the total 
System Account will mature in one year and 84 per cent 
in two years.  

Please wire today whether you agree with Manager's proposal.  

Advices subsequently were received 
from all available members of the Committee 
that they agreed with the Manager's proposal.  

Chairman Martin noted that a prospectus for a proposed study 

of the dealer market in Government securities, dated July 9, 1965, had 

been distributed to the Committee on August 2, primarily for information 

purposes at this time. He had discussed the matter with the Secretary

-22-



8/10/65 -23

of the Treasury, Mr. Fowler, and with Under Secretary Deming, and had 

found that they were amenable to the proposed study and were anxious 

to cooperate with the System on it. The thinking was that the study 

should not be undertaken immediately, but rather sometime this fall.  

The Chairman thought it would be desirable for all members of the 

Committee and other Reserve Bank Presidents to review the prospectus 

carefully and offer any thoughts they had on the matter.  

The Chairman then remarked that in light of recent develop

ments in Vietnam and in view of the sterling situation there had been 

some discussion with the Treasury of problems that might arise in the 

Government securities market, which he would ask Mr. Young to summarize.  

He personally did not consider it necessary for the Committee to take 

any action in this connection today, nor did he anticipate that action 

would be required later. However, since it was impossible to predict 

what might happen, he thought it would be desirable for Committee 

members to have the matter in mind in case a problem should arise 

suddenly.  

Mr. Young said that Messrs. Balderston, Holland, and he had 

met on Friday (August 6) with Mr. Volcker, Deputy Under Secretary of 

the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, to discuss informally the nature 

of possible reactions in the Government securities market if the market 

was suddenly confronted with a devaluation of sterling or other drastic



8/10/65 -24

actions by the U.K. authorities, or if developments in Vietnam should 

greatly heighten nervousness. It was agreed that the market was 

particularly sensitive at present because of the large dealer positions 

in longer-term issues, and that the first question to be faced was 

whether the dealers should be relieved of those holdings by official 

purchases. The consensus was that dealer holdings should be lightened 

by official buying, at prices somewhat under those prevailing at the 

time, with the System and the Treasury coordinating operations closely 

in achieving that end. It also was agreed, in light of earlier expe

rience, that the market should be permitted to make downward adjust

ments, perhaps with some cushioning purchases, but that there should 

be no massive intervention until it was felt the point had been 

reached where such intervention could turn market psychology, thus 

making the market self-supporting.  

If the external crisis was only moderate in nature, Mr. Young 

continued, it would not be likely to have serious repercussions 

either internally or on other countries abroad. In that event the 

adjustment in the Government securities market could be expected to 

be moderate, making it possible to improvise tactics on the basis 

of market reactions. If, however, the crisis was more serious, it 

could have extensive repercussions on other countries, and the impact 

on the Government securities market could be far more serious. What

ever the market intervention problem, the Treasury probably would want 

to limit its buying to the longer-term sector, leaving the intermediate

and shorter-term sectors to the System. It was thought that little if



8/10/65 -25

any intervention would be needed in the market for bills and short

term coupon issues because the short-term sector would be attractive 

to investors under the circumstances assumed.  

Although the discussion did go some distance, Mr. Young 

concluded, it was, of course, entirely hypothetical. He added 

that Mr. Holmes would be invited to participate in any future 

discussions of a similar nature.  

Mr. Daane commented that it might be useful to recirculate 

a basic planning document that had been prepared in 1959 by 

Charls Walker, then of the Dallas Reserve Bank, Spencer Marsh of 

the New York Reserve Bank, and himself, then at the Richmond Bank, 

While the study was concerned with open market operations in the 

event of an enemy attack, he thought it had some relevance to the 

present situation, particularly to consequences of possible 

developments in Vietnam.  

Mr. Young noted that additional relevant material was 

included in the "blue book" containing the Board's Emergency Plan, 

copies of which were in the possession of all Committee members 

and other Reserve Bank Presidents. The discussion with the 

Treasury on which he had reported was, in his judgment, not 

inconsistent with those documents.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the staff bring together any 

such materials that might be helpful to the Committee for back

ground purposes. It was his hope that such steps would prove to



8/10/65 -26

have been needless precautions but it was important for the Committee 

to be alert to possible developments. The materials in question 

might, incidentally, be valuable in connection with the proposed 

study of the dealer market in Government securitites.  

Mr. Hickman said he was concerned about the possibility of 

moving into something close to a pegging operation if the Vietnam 

situation worsened. Mr. Young replied that it had been agreed in 

the discussion with the Treasury that the approach to the problem, 

if one arose, should not be one of reestablishing a peg. The 

objective would be to provide some general support to the market, 

but such intervention as might be appropriate would be directed to 

the stabilization of market psychology, so that the market could 

settle down to self-reliant functioning.  

Chairman Martin commented that this was the kind of 

questicn that members of the Committee had to bear in mind in 

considering how to deal with potential problems of the sort under 

discussion.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

A first impression of the domestic economic scene, on 

the part of one returning after a short absence, is that of 

surprising vigor in both activity and expectations. When I



8/10/65

last reviewed the situation for the Committee, almost two 
months ago, expectations were generally for a slowing in the 
rate of economic expansion. The impetus provided by steel 
inventory accumulation was apparently beginning to lose force, 
and auto sales had already adjusted down in April, May, and 
early June from the exceptional winter rates. With consider
able new plant coming "on line," and an influx of teenagers 
into the labor force expected, prospects were for some 
slackening in the rate of resource utilization.  

This prospect may still be ahead, but July data do not 
suggest that it has already started. Even though inventory 
accumulation has undoubtedly moderated, industrial production 
rose in July by at least as much as in each of the preceding 
three months, and final figures may show an even greater 
increase. Auto sales picked up in late June and the momentum 
carried through in July, with domestic car sales for the month 
rising to a 9.0 million unit rate. Most auto plants are now 
shut down for model change-over, and maintenance of the July 
sales pace should permit dealers to reduce their relatively 
large inventories of new cars to manageable proportions by 
the time of introduction of the new models.  

Strength in consumer spending was not limited to autos 
last month. Other categories of retail sales, which had 
shown some lag in June, were up again, in July, and total 
sales rose substantially.  

Most heartening of all the July developments was in 
the youth employment area. The expected flood of teenagers 
hit the market in July, but this year they found jobs. We 
finally appear to be making some progress in this hitherto
intractable area. The unemployment rate for young workers 
declined somewhat, and long-term unemployment also declined, 
bringing down the total unemployment rate to 4-1/2 per cent, 
the lowest in nearly eight years.  

Does the economy have the momentum to continue to turn 
in such a performance? To answer this, one must assess a 
pretty fine balance of forces, and do it blindly for lack 
of relevant historical experience or adequate current data.  
On the one hand, we're only 3 weeks from what, hopefully, 
will be a termination of the long drawn-out steel wage 
negotiations. Output is likely to suffer whatever the 
outcome--strike, continuation under a Taft-Hartley injunc
tion, or settlement. There doesn't seem to be a consensus 
among industry or Government economists as to how adequate 
or excessive steel stocks have become, but the recent 
slackening in pace of advance steel ordering suggests that 
the bulk of steel consumers are pretty well satisfied with 
their inventories in the context of expected rates of

-27-



8/10/65

activity. At a minimum, then, we can expect some reduction 
in steel output after September 1, and the drop could be 
substantial. A more-than-seasonal drop in auto stocks is 
also possible this month and next. Reflecting both steel 
and autos, total inventory accumulation in early fall is 
likely to be at a much slower rate than in recent months.  

But in assessing the outlook for aggregate demand, 
there are several potential offsets to a slackening in 
inventory demand to keep in mind. Plant and equipment 
spending is scheduled to rise further, and the latest 
(June) data on new orders suggest that spending schedules 
are likely to be met. Unfilled orders for durable goods 
continued to expand in June, with most of the rise for 
the month representing further growth in machinery back
logs, and commercial and industrial construction outlays 
continued strong through July.  

The mailing of checks to Social Security beneficiaries, 
including both the new higher scale of payments and lump
sum retroactive benefits, will be adding to disposable 
personal incomes shortly. The amounts involved would about 
offset the steel payrolls that might be lost in a month
long strike. How rapidly, and for what goods or services, 
recipients of the benefits will spend their funds is a 
big unknown; we have very little basis for estimating the 
consumption function for this older age group. But it's 
hard to believe that the bulk of it won't get into the 
spending stream fairly promptly.  

Further stimulus to the economy will come from ex
panded Government procurement for Vietnam hostilities.  
The recent request for additional appropriation authority 
is not a good guide to the pace at which actual outlays 
will be made, particularly since substantial unobligated 
appropriations exist which could be drawn on promptly.  
As noted in the staff comments on question 1,1/ the 
increases in spending and in the armed forces now pro
posed do not appear significant enough to touch off 
widespread commodity or labor shortages or widespread 
price increases. Nevertheless, the increases will bolster 
aggregate demand to some extent, and operate to offset 
the letdown that might follow a steel settlement.  

1/ Certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, 
and staff comments on them, are given at a later point in these 

minutes.

-28-



8/10/65

All in all, though I'd be hard pressed to quantify 
the judgment, the balance of economic forces seems to 
me to be likely to resolve on the plus side. That is, 
barring an unusually severe adjustment in steel, I would 
expect the economy to continue to expand at close to 
the pace of recent months, perhaps not fast enough to 
keep up with resource growth over the longer-run, but 
also not fast enough to create additional upward price 
pressures in the near-term. If this judgment is right, 
it would seem premature now to add monetary stimulation 
to the picture--at least not until the dimension of 
consumer responses to the Social Security payments 
becomes more evident or the pace of the defense buildup 
becomes clearer. It would seem particularly inappro
priate to take an easing step on the eve of a major wage 
settlement, one which might eventuate, as did the 
aluminum settlement some weeks ago, in an above-guidepost 
wage increase and an unwarranted price rise.  

But uncertainties also argue against any significant 
move toward monetary restraint. SteeL stocks may be much 
higher than we or most other analysts have estimated, and 
the adjustment process may be correspondingly more diffi
cult. Moreover, we may have run out the string on 
favorable automobile years. Consumer tastes are fickle, 
and in the absence of major innovations even the most 
sophisticated analysis of demand factors can be frus
trated.  

While the mild industrial price creep has continued, 
there are no signs of its turning into a gallop. Stocks 
of consuner goods are high, and industrial capacity 
increases already underway should serve to limit the 
possibility of shortages. The market response to 
Vietnam developments doesn't suggest any widespread 
fears of shortages, rationing, or inflation. On 
balance, then, the domestic evidence isn't clear enough 
to me to justify a significant policy move in either 
direction at this juncture.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

It seems possible that some days of trial could lie 
ahead for our financial markets.

-29-



8/10/65

Discussion this morning has already reviewed the 
market's immediate reactions to the stresses to date, and 
its technical position for withstanding further strains-
fairly strong in some sectors, but weak especially in the 
long Government area. Let me try to assist your delib
erations this morning by appraising the trends in 
underlying financial flows and judging whether they are 
such as to weaken or strengthen the market's technical 
ability to weather a financial crisis.  

There have been times during this expansion when such 
an appraisal would have led to a pessimistic conclusion, 
but--to give my conclusion today in a nutshell--I judge 
the present status of underlying supplies and demands 
for funds is such as generally to cushion rather than to 
aggravate any immediate market shocks.  

Such a conclusion cannot be reached, of course, with
out making a good many assumptions--the more so because 
our knowledge is still at a stage where judgments have to 
substitute for tested objective relationships with respect 
to a good many linkages in the financial process. But the 
most important caveats I should sound concerning this 
conclusion are three: it would become unrealistic (a) 
if our Vietnamese build-up grows rapidly enough to produce 
a marked expansion of demands for real resources, or (b) 
if it is expected to do so by businesses and consumers, 
or (c) if for these or other good reasons monetary policy 
is tightened significantly.  

Let me briefly sketch the main facts that lead me to 
my conclusion. The market for Treasury coupon issues is 
demonstrably thin, and has remained in rough balance 
chiefly because no major group of holders has been led 
to attempt really large-scale unloading of Treasury notes 
or bonds in order to accommodate other earning assets.  
In fact major changes in private supplies and demands 
for funds have evolved over the past year, but the finan
cial system has fairly well adjusted to these without 
major pressure on the Government bond market.  

The most significant change that took place was the 
enlarged external financing of the corporate sector, as 
its over-$50 billion annual rate of spending on capital 
equipment and inventories outstripped the high but no 
longer rising flows of internally generated business 
funds. Somewhat higher rates of return on corporate 
borrowing have already sweetened its attractiveness to 
lenders. Given the general preference of banks and 
insurance companies for such debt, no further big market

-30-



8/10/65

rate adjustment on corporate instruments seems required 
unless the net increase in business borrowing grows even 
bigger, and that eventuality is rendered less likely by 
the expected imminent shift from steel inventory accumu
lation to decumulation.  

In the municipal market the story may be a little 
different. More than once before in this expansion, 
analysts--myself included--have cried "Wolf!" over the 
municipal market, anticipating a major upward rate move
ment as the high level of borrowing seemed to be out
stripping the buying capacity of a banking system 
constrained by tightening reserve availability. On each 
occasion, the worst failed to happen, mainly because 
banks continued to be able and willing to issue enough 
time deposits to meet loan demands and buy an impressive 
amount of municipals besides. With corporate demands 
for bank funds now strong and dealer inventories of 
municipals still heavy, some further relative upward 
yield adjustment in municipals has to be counted a 
possibility, but the necessity for this action will 
depend importantly on banks' continued success in 
attracting time depositors.  

The viability of the mortgage market at current rate 
levels may also be partly dependent cn the competitiveness 
of banks for savings. After some reduction in the net 
increment of growth last year, demand for housing is 
showing signs of strengthening. At the same time, banks 
are again being appreciably more successful in attracting 

deposit-type savings than are the more specialized 
mortgage lenders. While banks have also been sizable 
mortgage lenders in this expansion, the strengthened 
credit demands of their preferred business customers 
could lead banks to direct more savings away from 
mortgages. The consequence could be a mortgage market 
in which demand is beginning to rise faster than credit 
supply, with some resultant tendency for a little firming 
of both credit standards and terms.  

You can see that, in my view, the key to a stable set 

of underlying financial flows in these major markets is a 
continued large--but not too large--expansion of bank time 
deposits. That requires, in turn, that banks continue 
willing to pay the cost of raising time money, rather Lhan 
stepping up their liquidation of securities as a source 
of funds; that the nonfinancial sector continue willing to 

expand its time deposit holdings, even as it goes on 

borrowing; and that the Federal Reserve continue to supply 
the reserves to accommodate the consequent bank expansion.

-31-



8/10/65

So long as these circumstances obtain--and they still seem 
to, on the latest reading of the evidence--the network of 
underlying financial flows should remaii reasonably in 
balance.  

I do not see enough strength in this fabric to 
stabilize the market without official help in any financial 
crisis, for the expectational shifts in the market could 
be very sharp and the dealer mechanism, with its exposed 
long bond position, is peculiarly susceptible. But big 
expectaticnal shifts do not persist unless sustained by 
some corresponding shifts in basic flows. For that reason, 
I think that the rough balance of underlying flows that I 
have described provides some measure of hope that well-timed 
official ,tabilization purchases could calm a crisis market 
atmosphere effectively.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

This morning, as Mr. Coombs has mentioned, the United 
Kingdom announced a 12 per cent jump in exports, seasonally 
adjusted, in July. This may justify merely a sigh of relief 
all round, rather than a loud cheer, since the export figures 
typically zig-zag widely. So far, the market is not quite 
cheering. Sterling made some gain early in the day immediately 
after the announcement of the trade figures. The Bank of 
England reported an hour ago, however, that there was little 
steam behind the movement, and that the rate had since drifted 
off a bit.  

But averaging July with earlier months shows that there 
has been a significant improvement in Britain's trade position 
so far this year. In the first 7 months, exports were up 
5 per cent from the average rate for 1964 while imports were 
down 1 per cent. The trade deficit in this period averaged 
only half as large (on a balance of payments basis) as during 
1964. This suggests that the current account deficit so far 
this year has been running at only about one-third of last 
year's swollen $1 billion rate. Substantial further progress 
is needed, of course, to eliminate the current deficit 
entirely this year and achieve a surplus in 1966 and later 

years. Some short-run help in this direction may reasonably 

be expected later this year from a decline in imports as 

domestic restraints finally begin to bite.  
There are signs that these restraints are beginning to 

exert some of their intended effects internally. But, of course,

-32-



-33-

it will take a run of good trade figures to demonstrate 
that resources freed at home can be shifted to exports.  
Particularly troublesome still, as Mr. Coombs noted, are 
excessive price and wage increases, and also scattered 
wildca; strikes.  

For the United States, our own merchandise trade 
position is becoming increasingly worrisome. In June, 
exports were no higher than last autumn, while imports 
were up 18 per cent. Steel imports have about doubled 
in this period, but they account for less than one-third 
of the total import expansion, other imports are up more 
than 10 per cent in the 9-month period.  

The rise in imports has been sharper than at any 
time since 1959, and has been spread over a wide variety 
of goods, excepting only foods. From the second quarter 
of 1964 to April-May 1965, imports of industrial supplies 
other than steel--a category that covers nearly half of 
total imports--rose 12 per cent, compared with only 3 or 
4 per cent in each of the preceding 2 years. Imports of 
consumer goods rose 20 per cent, as they had the year 
before; this fast-rising group which used to be small now 
approaches one-fifth of total imports. Imports of capital 
equipment are up a whopping 43 per cent, compared with 24 
per cent a year earlier and only 7 per cent the year before 
that. By areas, for which we have complete second quarter 
data, imports are up from a year earlier by 44 per cent 
from Japan, 29 per cent from continental Europe, 19 per 
cent from the U.K. (19 per cent being also the increase in 
total imports), 15 per cent from Canada, 14 per cent from 
Latin America, and 10 per cent from all other countries 
except Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, the latter 
group having been almost unique in suffering a decline in 
sales to this country.  

I cite this long string of figures because I think 
they indicate a very wide-ranging boom in U.S. imports.  
To some extent, no doubt, our imports have been temporarily 
swollen by heavy inventory demands that will later subside.  
But the boom in imports of consumer goods and of capital 
equipment is unlikely to be of this kind. Furthermore, 
earlier import expansions associated with inventory upswings 
here have tended to leave a residue of further penetration of 
U.S. markets, notably in the case of steel.  

In short, recent import expansion is a sobering reminder 
of the adverse effects that rising domestic pressures on 
capacity can have upon the trade balance, even when broad 

price averages are not moving adversely. The flattening out



-34-

of our exports may also owe something to internal U.S.  
demand pressures, although a leveling off of foreign 
demands in almost every major area except Canada has 
probably been much more important.  

The National Foreign Trade Council Balance of 
Payments Group felt able last month to forecast a trade 
surplus for the full year of $5-1/2 billion, equal to the 
second-quarter rate that was swollen by favorable, post
strike effects, and well above the $4-1/2 billion rate of 
the first half-year. For this cheerful forecast to be 
fulfilled, the trade balance will have to average $400 
million a quarter better in the second half year than in 
the second quarter.  

Other elements in the balance of payments seem certain 
to weaken by more than this amount, Reflows to the United 
States of U.S. bank credit and of liquid funds exceeded 
$600 million in the second quarter. These will almost 
certainly give way to moderate renewed outflows later in 
the year. The banks have considerable scope for renewed 
lending within their VFCR targets. Also, foreign borrowing 
through new security issues here, particularly by Canada, 
is expected to be larger in the second half.  

Finally--a point that overlaps those already noted 
but is to some extent additive--it seems likely that a 
return of confidence in sterling, whenever and however it 
comes, will adversely affect a number of items in our 
payments accounts. You will recall that in 1962, the 
Canadian exchange crisis and its subsequent resolution 
(partly through a devaluation) made our deficit very 
small in the first half year and very large in the second.  
Our connections with Britain are less close and direct than 
with Canada. But, on the other hand, the British crisis 
has been of much larger dimensions. Canada lost less than 
$1 billion of reserves in 6 months. Britain has lost some 
$3-1/2 billion in 10 months. This must have helped our 
balance of payments almost across the board: on trade, 
services, and particularly on certain kinds of capital 
flows. British losses of more than $400 million in July, 
for example, are likely to have had significant, though 
not closely identifiable, effects that helped to hold 
our overall July deficit to less than seasonal proportions.  

Thus, the fact that July has now been added to the 
string of recent months in which there has been an overall 
surplus on a seasonally adjusted basis does not at all 
contradict the view Mr. Hersey expressed at the last 
meeting: that the U.S. balance of payments is likely to 
be deeper in deficit during the second half year as a 
whole than it was in the first half.

8/10/65



8/10/65

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(1) Business conditions and prices.--What are likely to 
be the short-term effects of the step-up in U.S. activities 
in Vietnam on prices, inventories, unemployment, and 
economic developments generally? 

Expenditure plans arising from the latest increase in 
U.S. military operations in Vietnam have been undergoing 
almost daily change. Although additional amounts may be 
appropriated now, the Department of Defense has considerable 
flexibility in placing orders, because of both unobligated 
appropriations carried over from fiscal 1965 and plans to 
request supplementary appropriations in January.  
Preparations for a much greater degree of mobilization have 
been under way, moreover, should a still larger military 
effort be deemed necessary.  

The increases in defense spending and the armed forces 
proposed now, however, appear small--both in relation to 
recent levels of the defense program and to total spending 
and the labor force. The President has, requested $1.7 
billion in addition to the $45.2 billion Department of 
Defense appropriation request for this fiscal year now 
before Congress. Defense spending was already on the rise, 
and from the second quarter of 1965 to the second quarter 
of 1966 the annual rate of expenditures is now expected 
to increase by about $4 billion rather than by $2 billion.  
These magnitudes must be appraised against the recent 
annual rate of defense spending of $55 billion (GNP basis), 
total GNP of nearly $660 billion, and quarterly increments 
to GNP that have averaged about $10 billion over the last 
2 years.  

The armed forces will be increased by 340,000 over the 
next year to a total of 3.0 million. At the time of the 
Korean outbreak, it may be noted, only 1.5 million men and 
women were in the armed forces, and more than 2.0 million 
were added in less than two years. Compared with mid-1950,

-35-



8/10/65 -36

the labor force currently is 13 million or nearly 20 per 
cent greater, and the absolute number of unemployed and 
the rate of unemployment are somewhat higher.  

Use of the draft, as opposed to calling up reserves, 
tends to minimize the impact on labor markets. Most of 
those to be drafted are in the 20 to 22-year-old group 
and are among the employed. (Defermnts are high for 
those in school, and rejections are high among the un
employed.) But workers in this age group are generally 
below average in training and skill and probably can be 
replaced more easily from among the unemployed and those 
outside the labor force than would more highly skilled 
reservists.  

Since the extent of the defense expansion as 
announced is relatively small and is sheduled to come at 
a time when moderation in the pace of expansion in 
economic activity was widely anticipated, the increases 
now contemplated in military requirements, while adding 
to aggregate demand, should not push it to excessive 
levels. Moreover, any substantial acceleration or 
enlargement of the defense build-up would undoubtedly 
reduce the possibility of a tax cut or other fiscal 
stimulus next year. Given the manner in which the 
armed forces will be increased and the nature of pro
curement, widespread or serious production bottlenecks 
are unlikely. Commodities now in or close to a tight 
position, such as copper, may be noticeably affected, 
but should these or other stockpiled materials threaten 
to cause serious production bottlenecks and upward price 
pressures, legislative authority exists for the President 
to order supplies released from the stockpile "for 
purpose of the common defense." 

The announced program is smaller than was widely 
expected, and the behavior of commodity and security 
markets since the announcement does not suggest much 
public concern over shortages, inflation, or direct 
economic controls. With business and consumer stocks 
of many goods already large, no significant move to 
protective buying has been provoked.  

(2) Balance of payments.--What implications do changes 
in international interest rate relationships over the 
past several months have for the U.S. balance of pay
ments?



8/10/65

The tightening of Canadian and major European capital 
markets in recent months increases the likelihood that net 
outflows from the United States of over-one-year capital 
other than direct investments will be larger in the second 
half of 1965 than in the first. Even though the voluntary 
program for bank and nonbank lenders, and, with lessening 
force, the Interest Equalization Tax, are restraining major 
categories of capital outflow, there remains scope for 
outflows to increase.  

European domestic long-term interest rates have risen 
on the order of 3/8 per cent since March, reflecting 
increasing market pressures of demand for lendable funds 
and unremitting efforts of the monetary authorities in 
all countries but Italy and France to restrain bank credit 
expansion. Such rate increases have been considerably 
larger than the rise in new issue yields in the United 
States.  

Further tightening of capital market conditions in 
Europe does nothing to increase chances for borrowers in 
less developed countries to obtain long-term funds there, 
and it is likely that the United States will continue to 
be their primary source of funds. Moreover, some borrowers 
subject to the I.E.T. (including British and Australian, and 
also Japanese borrowers on term loans) have entered into 
commitments to pay the tax on its present rates.  

The claims on foreigners of U.S. banks that are subject 
to the VFCR are nearly $400 million below the 105 per cent 
target, so that there is room for a renewed net outflow of 
bank credit, long- and short-term, in the rest of 1965. The 
voluntary program for nonbank financial institutions is 
helping to restrain placements with these institutions of 
obligation; with maturities up to 10 years, and of longer
term continental European securities. However, the nonbank 
ceilingsdo not apply to longer-term, IET-exempt, issues by 
Canadian provinces, municipalities, and corporations.  

Weakening of the Canadian balance of payments on current 
account, partly in response to domestic inflationary 
pressures, is among the factors that have led the Canadian 
authorities to permit an advance in Canadian interest rates, 
both short-term and long-term, on the order of 1/4 per cent 
since March. These developments will encourage heavier 
Canadian borrowing through new issues in the United States.

-37-



8/10/65 -38

Recent developments in the London market for Euro
dollars have not been such as to induce outflows from the 
United States through Canada. Euro-dollar interest rates 
eased off in June and July, partly in consequence of 
movements out of sterling. Short rates are up less from 
a year ago than rates for U.S. CDs ard Federal funds, and 
some U.S. banks have again been drawing money from the 
Euro-dollar market for use in the United States. The 
longest Euro-dollar rates have not eased much and remain 
relatively high, perhaps partly because the foreign 
branches of U.S. banks have continued bidding for longer
term funds to finance transfers of head-office foreign 
loans to the branches in order to reduce claims subject 
to the VFCR, 

The small recent fluctuations in U.S. Treasury bill 
rates have been of no significance for the U.S. balance 
of payments during a period when forward exchange rates 
for sterling have varied widely under the influence of 
confidence factors and when liquid flows between the 
United States and Canada have been deminated by the VFCR.  

(3) Bank credit.--What do June-July bank credit developments 
suggest as to the Underlying strength of loan demands? 

Total bank credit in July, adjusted for seasonal 
influences, probably declined a little, after the sharp 
expansion of June. This variation in movement over the 
last two months, however, is due principally to the 
unusually large end-of-June borrowing by security 
dealers and finance companies, which was repaid in July.  
Nonfinancial loans have continued to increase and banks 
ha.e reduced their security holdings further. On the 
whole, underlying loan demand has been strong, and 
appears likely to remain so in the near-term.  

Real estate and consumer loans continued to expand 
in July at about the same rate as during the second 
quarter. Business loans appear to have increased at an 
annual rate of about 15 per cent in July, and about 19 
per cent in June-July taken together. These growth rates 
are considerably below the unusually high rate of the 
first quarter, but considerably above those in 1964 and 
other recent years.



8/10/65

This strong business loan expansion has occurred 
despite several months of increased capital market financing.  
Plant and equipment and inventory experditures by manufacturing 
corporations appear to have exceeded their internally-generated 
funds in both the first and second quarters, and this gap is 
probably persisting in the third quarter. Increasing business 
capital expenditures may also be reflected in the contraseasonal 
rise in term loans at New York banks in July, to a near-record 
high proportion of total business loans, outstanding.  

Industry data (including figures through July 28) indicate 
that a large portion of the July increase in loans to business 
has resulted from demands of public utility firms and the metal 
and metal products industries. When the steel negotiations are 
settled--or a strike comes--liquidation of steel stocks will 
lead to some loan repayments. However, general financing needs 
arising from the capital goods boom may have become more impor
tant than inventory financing in the loan demands of steel 
producers and users.  

(4) Bank reserves.--Assuming no major change in monetary policy 
or in prevailing economic trends, what are the likely dimensions 
of bank reserve needs over the remainder of the year and what 
problems, if any, might arise in meeting these needs through 
open market operations? 

Member bank reserve needs are expected to fluctuate widely 
during the remainder of the year and should cumulate to seasonal 
highs by early November. Staff projections of the usual type, 
plus some allowance for continued deposit growth,1/ imply that 
(a) gross open market operations may need to be somewhat larger 

1/ These projections, shown in the accompanying table, allow for 
moderate gold outflow and growth in currency outside banks, 
consistent with the more detailed projections shown in the reserve 
memorandum. An additional arbitrary allowance for growth in 
private deposits at the 1964 rates--13 per cent annual rate for 
time and 3 per cent for demand deposits--is included in the 
accompanying table, but not in the regular reserve projections.  
These trend factors, if appropriate for the months ahead, would 
cumulate over the period and constitute a permanent absorption of 
a sizeable portion of the reserves injected to meet peak seasonal 
needs.

-39-



8/10/65

over the rest of this year than in recent months to offset 
expected wide intra-monthly fluctuations in market factors 
and required reserves; and (b) operations will need to meet 
a sharp and partly permanent reserve drain around the end 
of October and early November. Such operations might give 
rise to short periods of downward pressure on Treasury bill 
rates, but probably not of a dimension or duration great 
enough to pose serious market problems given the offsetting 
influences that would be present in the market or might be 
exercised by optional official actions.  

Peak reserve needs--about $1.6 billion higher than current 
levels--are projected for the week ending November 10, largely 
reflecting a rapid two-week expansion of required reserves and 
drains from float and currency. A similar peak is projected 
for the week ending December 8, following intra-monthly swings 
in float and required reserves which are expected to reduce 
reserve needs by about $600 million in the two intervening 
weeks. Cumulative reserve needs are expected to remain above 
current levels by a minimum of $1.0 billion over the 12 weeks 
from October 28 to January 19.  

Assuming that the System maintain net reserves near 
recent levels, the above projections call for several sizable 
concentrations of operations, the largest in the period 
October 28 - November 10. Such open market operations, if 
confined to Treasury bills, would exert some downward pressure 
on bill rates. This pressure might not be great enough to 
override the usual firming in bill rate; that accompanies 
seasonal shifts in private and public needs for funds over 
the fall as a whole, but the necessity "or concentrated System 
purchases in some weeks could tend to depress bill rates 
slightly for brief periods.  

As on occasion in the past, such downward rate pressure 
could be mitigated by several types of official action. Some 
offsetting influence might be exercised by Treasury debt 
management operations. The Treasury is expected to increase 
the supply of bills at least by early October to cover its 

seasonal cash needs, and the timing and dimensions of such 
bill sales might be partly adapted to counter any undesired 
strength in bill markets.

-40-



8/10/65 -41

The bill rate impact of System buying might also be 
moderated somewhat by supplying part of the indicated reserve 
needs through purchases of coupon issues and through repurchase 
agreements with dealers. Dealer financing needs may be sizable 
as a result of Treasury financing this fall and on such 
occasions there should be considerable opportunity for making 
repurchase agreements. In particular, if a "rights" issue is 
included in the November refunding, sizable repurchase 
agreements against rights and other issues might be feasible 
around late October and early November, the period when 
projections indicate the largest increase in reserve needs.  

One other means of accommodating short-term fluctuations 
in reserve needs with minimum bill purchases would be the 
occasional lowering of the Treasury balance at Federal Reserve 
Banks, thereby injecting reserves and lightening pressures on 
the large money market banks.



8/10/65

Projected Reserve Needs--August 1965 through January 1966

Changes in reserves Allowance for con- Cumulative 
Period as projected in tinued growth in change (from 

reserve memorandum 1/ private deposits 2/ week of 

July 29-Aug. 4) 

(millions of dollars change 
in reserve week averages) 

Aug. 5-Sept. 8 540 106 646 

Sept. 9-22 - 895 42 - 207 

Sept. 23-Oct. 13 1,080 63 936 

Oct. 14-27 - 770 42 208 

Oct. 28-Nov. 10 1,360 42 1,610 

Nov. 11-24 - 570 42 1,082 

Nov. 25-Dec. 8 565 42 1,689 

Dec. 9-Jan. 26 - 970 148 867 

1/ Projections in the reserve memorandum reflect principally estimated 
seasonal changes in factors affecting reserves and in deposits absorbing 
reserves. In addition, those projections allow for growth in currency 
outside banks at a 3 per cent annual rate, gold outflow after August at 
the rate of about $50 million per month, and estimated reserve absorption 
by U.S. Government demand deposits reflecting anticipated receipts, 
expenditures, and cash financing operations. Projections above also 

reflect effects of System operations through August 4, including 
scheduled maturities of repurchase agreements against U.S. Government 
securities in current weeks.  

2/ Annual rates of expansion assumed at the same rates as in the year 
1964--about 13 per cent for time deposits and 3 per cent for demand 

deposits. Such expansion would absorb about $525 million of reserves, 

or about $21 million per week.

-42-



8/10/65

(5) Money market relationships.--Assuming a continuation of 
current nonetary policy and taking into account the Treasury 
refunding, what range of money market conditions, interest 
rates, reserve availability, and reserve utilization by the 
banking system might prove mutually consistent during the 
coming weeks? 

In recent weeks net borrowed reserves and member bank 
borrowings have averaged about $160 million and $525 million, 
respectively, although with considerable week-to-week 
fluctuation. The 3-month Treasury bill rate, affected by 
swings in investor demand and dealer psychology, has moved 
back and forth in a 3.80 to 3.88 per cent range. Federal 
funds have traded mainly at 4-1/8 per cent, although occa
sional trading below that level was induced by the relatively 
comfortable reserve position of major New York banks, which 
experienced some seasonal decline in their loans in July 
along with an expansion in their CD deposits.  

If net borrowed reserves continue at their recent levels 
and market concern with the international situation does not 
mount, bill rates appear likely to remain within their recent 
range, with the 3-month bill probably fluctuating between 
3.80-3.90 per cent. Seasonal influences will be tending to 
firm bill rates in the weeks ahead, and such a tendency could 
be accentuated by international uncertainties. The market 
is in a good technical condition, however, with dealer bill 
inventories reduced. This should help to restrain an increase 
in rates, especially if the basic reserve positions of major 
New York banks do not tighten further. On the basis of 
current projections, the System will not be an important 
factor in the bill market for several weeks ahead; reserve 
needs will require only minor operations on both sides of the 
market.  

Long-term interest rates, which have fluctuated in a 
fairly narrow range in recent weeks, are not likely to show 
significant change in the weeks ahead, barring a sudden shift 
in expectations related to developments in Vietnam or the 
United Kingdom. Some further up-drift in U.S. Government 
yields and some down-drift in corporate yields could occur 
as a result of investor arbitrage. Also, dealer positions 
in intermediate- and long-term Government bonds remain large, 
at just over $1/2 billion. Recent Treasury investment account 
purchases, however, have reduced some of the overhang in the 
market and dealer acquisitions of 1969 bonds in the current

-43-



8/10/65

refinancing were small. The corporate and municipal calen
dars in August will be seasonally light--although there are 
indications of a pick-up in volume in September--and further 
distribution of recent underwritings should proceed with 
little impact on yields.  

Given the economic prospects and credit trends outlined 
in the staff comments on questions 1 and 3, expansion in 
bank credit and money is likely to be vigorous over the next 
few months, although loan growth may moderate somewhat after 
a resolution of the steel labor situation. Banks probably 
will continue to encourage growth in their time deposits, 
both to meet current needs and in anticipation of seasonal 
loan demands later. The projected decline in Treasury 
deposits at commercial banks in the weeks ahead should 
contribute to continued growth in private demand deposits.  
On balance, an annual growth rate in private demand deposits 
of between 4 and 5 per cent may be a reasonable expectation 
for the months immediately ahead. This growth rate would 
be considerably smaller than the June-July average, but 
substantially above the 2.7 per cent average rate for the 
first 7 months of the year.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement: 

Business activity continues to expand, and further 
growth is in prospect. Developments in Vietnam have had, 
and will continue to have, an importan: stimulative effect 
on the domestic economy; they have virtually removed any 
prospect of an economic let-down in the second half of 1965.  
It is apparent that there will be increased spending in 
connection with Vietnam, although the amount of the spending 
and its timing are uncertain. It is quite clear, however, 
that the changed situation is already having an effect on 
the thinking of businessmen and of the public in general.  

Except for automobiles, inventory increases at the 
wholesale and retail levels remain moderate. The recent 
build-up in inventories has taken place largely at the 
manufacturers' level. The speed and size of inventory 
liquidation following a wage settlement in the steel 
industry will, of course, have an important effect on the 
total business expansion. The Vietnam build-up will 
probably moderate the liquidation, making it easier for 
the economy to absorb it.

-44-



8/10/65

Trends in prices, both wholesale and retail, are 
disturbing. The first half of 1965 witnessed a 
substantial increase in employment. While there are 
still a number of areas of substantial unemployment 
those areas are declining, and in many there are special 
situations which would be affected in only a very 
limited way by an increase in over-all demand. A 
number of wage increases under collective bargaining 
in the first half of 1965 apparently have exceeded by 
significant amounts the guidelines of the Council of 
Economic Advisers. Labor costs per unit of output in 
manufacturing apparently are now rising after declining 
gradually over a period of several years. Although in 
the past an increase in unit costs has usually occurred 
on the upswing of the business cycle, fortunately it 
did not occur on the upswing beginning in 1961. But 
this development now seems to be with us. In the meantime, 
profits continue to rise. We have not seen many instances 
where the fruits of greater productivity are being passed 
on to consumers in the form of lower prices.  

As for the international situation, our second-quarter 
balance of payments surplus rests largely on special and 
nonrecurrent factors. There is little evidence of a 
fundamental improvement in our basic balance of payments 
position. Indeed, so far this year our trade surplus has 
not been as good as it was in the corresponding period 
last year; and now it appears probable that for the year 
1965 it will be less than it was in 1964. Tourist and 
transportation expenditures are likely to increase 
substantially. And we continue to lose gold.  

The voluntary credit restraint program has had its 
greatest effect on the repatriation of short-term capital 
funds. It is doubtful that the movement of such funds 
from abroad will continue at the rate experienced in the 
first half of 1965. Indeed, the program and the weakness 
of sterling have tended to make international rate comparisons 
less significant. While movements of funds from the United 
States in order to take advantage of short-term rate 
differentials are not likely, there is still plenty of 
incentive for longer-term credits and investments abroad.  
Since most of the major banks are now below their 105 per 
cent credit ceiling under the voluntary program and the 
credit leeway of the whole banking system is fairly large, 
a moderate outflow of bank credit may be expected during 
the remainder of the year. It is hard to see any 
significant improvement in our balance of payments position 
in the second half of 1965 compared with the first half; 
indeed, some deterioration seems likely.

-45-



8/10/65

There have been increasing uncertainties in 
international financial sentiment, as evidenced by the 
highly delicate situation of sterling and the rise in 
the demand for gold, and the price of gold, in the London 
gold market. Further deterioration in sentiment could 
bring pressures on the dollar in international markets 
and on our highly sensitive domestic markets.  

The demand at home for bank credit continues to be 
strong. The large New York City banks are projecting 
significantly greater, than seasonal gains in business 
loans for the third quarter as a whole. Bank credit, 
and the money supply, have continued to rise in recent 
months, at about the same rate they have risen over the 
last several years. Bank credit and all types of credit 
taken together have risen more rapidly than has overall 
production. The ratio of total nonbank liquid assets to 
GNP has risen further; it is now near the highest level 
in a decade.  

In considering the need for supplying reserves to 
the banking system this fall, it seems to me that the 
System should bear in mind the possibility of reducing 
member bank reserve requirements as well as using open 
market operations.  

Later this week the new securities offered by the 
Treasury to refund maturing notes will be issued and 
delivered to the purchasers. Dealer participation in the 
refunding was quite moderate, and "even keel" considerations 
related to the Treasury's operation would not in normal 
circumstances be a matter of serious concern to us in our 
own policy deliberations. There was, however, considerable 
uncertainty in the Government bond market last week 
stemming from discussion about the future of sterling 
and the implications of the Vietnam situation.  

As we approach policy, there are four basic factors 
to consider: 

(1) Recent domestic developments show forces operating 
in the direction of an inflationary disequilibrium; 

(2) Some deterioration appears in prospect for our 
balance of payments; 

(3) The situation in international financial markets 
continues to be most delicate; and 

(4) These factors and perhaps other factors have 
produced uncertainties in the U.S. Government 
securities market.

-46-



8/10/65

In my opinion, this combination of circumstances counsels 
a cautious restriction in domestic credit availability.  

The weakness in sterling rules out, it seems to me, 
a dramatic move such as an increase in the discount rate 
at this time. Such a move on our part might be interpreted 
here and abroad as an indication of a withdrawal by the 
United States of its concern for the pound, and of a con
centration on our own problems; resultant market reactions 
would, no doubt, place greater pressures on sterling. But 
a judgment that, on balance, a dramatic move at this time 
might do more harm than good need not result in no action 
at all. We still have the danger of excessive domestic 
liquidity and the distortions that excessive use of credit 
are likely to breed; and we st.ll have the balance of payments 
problem.  

Therefore, it seems to me that we should move with 
caution toward somewhat firmer conditions in the money 
market. Somewhat higher net borrowed reserves and some
what greater member bank borrowing fron the Federal 
Reserve Banks would seem appropriate. The effect of 
the move might become apparent in the statistics published 
next wee or the week thereafter. As for the form of the 
directive, I favor alternative B. 1/ 

Mr. Shuford commented that economic activity this summer had 

proceeded with all the strength that could have been anticipated and 

that was appropriate. Employment had been increasing rapidly. The 

rate of increase in personal income had accelerated in recent months.  

As further evidence of strong aggregate demand, wholesale industrial 

prices had increased more rapidly than in the last several years.  

Recent and current monetary and fiscal developments had been 

quite stimulative, Mr. Shuford said. The money supply had increased 

rapidly since May and at a rate of about 3 per cent since the beginning 

1/ Three alternative drafts of the directive prepared by the staff 
are appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-47-



8/10/65 -48

of the year. The planned Federal budget recently had turned more 

expansionary. Beyond the current strength of the economy and recent 

monetary and fiscal developments, continued and additional fiscal 

expansion would be faced in coming months. The planned budget would 

continue stimulative during the second half of the year and, as 

already had been noted, there would be a further increase in military 

spending.  

In view of the impact of the fiscal stimulation which had been 

anticipated earlier and that which would result from the new military 

situation, Mr, Shuford continued, excessive total demand could become 

more definitely the major stabilization problem. It might be that 

over the next few months a more restrictive combination of monetary 

and fiscal measures would be appropriate. It was not likely that 

fiscal policy--to any great extent--could be made more restrictive 

during the remainder of the year. Consequently, developments in 

stabilization policy during the next few months would have to be 

primarily on the monetary side.  

If monetary restraint should be appropriate during the next 

few months, Mr. Shuford observed, it would not only help to prevent 

excessive total demand for goods and services and resultant price 

inflation but it should tend to bring U.S. interest rates into better 

alignment with those in some other major countries. That would aid 

in restoring reasonable balance to the international accounts, and



8/10/65 -49

it would be a contribution to the fundamental adjustment which, sooner 

or later, had to take the place of the present temporary voluntary 

restraints on the flow of capital. He hoped that at the same time 

certain foreign countries could be persuaded to adopt tighter fiscal 

and easier moretary policies, thereby pushing down their interest 

rate levels.  

As far as the next few weeks were concerned, Mr. Shuford did 

not suggest that the Committee should take any overt action. For the 

immediate future he favored moderate rates of increase of reserves 

and money, lower than the average rates of the past twelve months.  

Reserves should not be supplied so rapidly as to support unduly 

large increases in bank credit. In view of the strength of business, 

the fiscal situation, and developing seasonal pressures, he thought 

such a policy stance would be consistent with some upward movement 

in interest rates. Somewhat higher interest rates would be appropriate 

if the domestic economy generated greater credit demands, from either 

the private or the Federal sector.  

As at the previous meeting, Mr. Shuford said, his position on 

policy was close to one of "no change," and the first paragraph of 

alternative A of the draft directives was acceptable to him. However, 

he again would recommend a revision of the second paragraph, as he had 

last time, in order to emphasize the need for preventing any excessive 

increase in demand. Specifically, he would revise the language 

following the phrase "with a view to maintaining" to read, "at least



8/10/65 -50

as firm conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent 

weeks, and to permit some tightening if demands for credit 

strengthen." 

Mr. Patterson said that at the risk of overworking an 

attractive definition introduced by Mr. Noyes at the previous 

meeting of the Committee on the "new semantics" that had developed 

along with the "new economics"--when he said that nowadays things 

were "unchanged" when they were increasing at the same rate as 

before, and things were going up only when the rate of increase 

exceeded the one previously established--he would carry Mr. Noyes' 

theme a little further and say there also was a "new semantics" 

with respect to declines. For example, there seemed to be three 

sorts of declines developing in the Sixth District, only one of 

which constituted a decline in the old serse. Some of the District 

statistics showed rates of gain lower than those previously 

established, and some were showing relative stability, both of which 

were declines according to Mr. Noyes. In addition, there were a 

few actual declines.  

In the first category (rates of increase less than formerly), 

Mr. Patterson went on, one had to classify the behavior of the most 

recent statistics on employment, manufacturing payrolls, and personal 

income. The softness in manufacturing payrolls helped explain the 

slackening in the growth of personal income, although cash farm



8/10/65 -51

receipts, derived partly from rapidly rising farm prices, had helped 

to maintain income. For example, the first week's market for 

Georgia-Florida flue-cured tobacco, which opened July 28, yielded 

prices averaging $64.95 per 100 pounds, $12.75 above the same period 

last year. District livestock producers were, of course, sharing in 

the income gains from higher prices for cattle and hogs.  

In the second category of declines--those sectors exhibiting 

relative stability--one had to classify the behavior of retail sales, 

Mr. Patterson said. If the ups and downs from month to month in 1965 

were smoothed out, a chart would show an almost horizontal line.  

Construction outlays and construction employment also were moving 

horizontally on a high plateau.  

Finally, Mr. Patterson said, the District had been experi

encing a few old-fashioned actual declines. For example, construction 

contract awards had been in a downtrend since December 1964, with the 

decline concentrated in nonbuilding types such as missile and space 

projects, highways, and bridges. The downtrend in residential 

contract volume evidenced throughout 1964, however, had apparently 

been reversed, although the new uptrend was still in its infancy.  

Turning to banking, Mr. Patterson remarked that the District 

definitely had been experiencing increases measured by any man's 

semantics, new or old. For example, loans at the end of July were 

up 15 per cent from a year ago; investments, 4 per cent; and deposits,



8/10/65 -52

12 per cent. Placed in perspective, those increases were roughly 

twice as large as the increase in economic activity as measured by 

personal income. Moreover, there had been no letup in the rate of 

credit expansion over the first half of 1965, notwithstanding the 

firming of Federal Reserve policy this spring. Loan and deposit 

increases in the second quarter were equal to those in the first.  

Viewed from several angles, Mr. Patterson continued, firming 

in Federal Reserve policy had not retarded credit expansion at 

District banks. Those banks, which had been in a net borrowed 

reserve position in June, moved into a free reserve position in July, 

a movement that was accompanied by a decline in borrowing; on the 

average, the banks had been net sellers of Federal funds; and the 

member banks had been able to increase their loans with only a 

slight loss in their holdings of Government securities and municipals.  

Judging from the response of 73 member and nonmember banks to the 

recently completed survey of lending practices, changes in bankers' 

attitudes to their loan requests seemed to be related more to the 

strength of the business loan demand than to Federal Reserve 

operations.  

At the moment, Mr. Patterson was not prepared to say what all 

of those contrasting trends meant in terms of Federal Reserve policy.  

However, if he were voting and had to make a choice among the 

alternative draft directives it would be in favor of alternative A.



8/10/65 -53

Mr. Bopp reported that economic activity in the Third District 

had continued to expand in recent weeks, but at a somewhat slower rate.  

Steel production in the Northeast Coast region decreased considerably 

more than nationally, and the rise in department store sales in the 

past four weeks was much less there than for the United States, Loans 

of reporting banks declined in July, reflecting substantial repayments 

by securities dealers and sales finarce companies. Reserve positions 

of reserve city banks had tightened considerably, resulting in larger 

net purchases of Federal funds and additional borrowing from the 

Reserve Bank. Country bank borrowing from the Reserve Bank, however, 

had declined to a low level.  

Discussions with bankers and businessmen revealed, Mr. Bopp 

said, that except for a helicopter manufacturer who planned to add 

over 1,000 employees to meet increased defense orders, most saw the 

proposed buildup of U.S. armed forces in South Vietnam as having 

little effect thus far. There had been no tendency to mark up 

prices, and a possible increase in inventories was mentioned only 

once. A textile producer with inventory somewhat low as compared to 

others in the industry reported that he was seriously considering 

building up his stocks somewhat in order to be in a better position 

to handle new orders that might come from the stepped-up defense 

program. Some expressed the view that steel and metal product 

inventories might not be reduced so much following a wage agreement 

in the steel industry as would have occurred otherwise.



8/10/65 -54

Larger draft calls were unlikely to have much effect on 

unemployment in the Third District, Mr. Bopp thought. The average 

age of draftees currently was 21, and was expected to fall to about 

20-1/2 in the next year. The unemployment rate in that age group 

was far below that for teenage males. Also, nearly one-half of the 

men examined by Selective Service were rejected, and the probability 

was rather high that those rejected were not qualified for the kinds 

of work for which job opportunities were good.  

Those findings for the local area conformed with Mr. Bopp's 

expectations for the nation as a whole. The proposed step-up in 

defense expenditures apparently could be absorbed without any 

significant inflationary pressures. The increase estimated for the 

remainder of this year was small in relation to current GNP (only 

about 1/4 of 1 per cent), and the impact would be distributed among 

a number of industries. Moreover, it came at a time when the 

existing margin of unused resources, together with additions to 

capacity resulting from the high level of capital expenditures, 

appeared sufficient to meet prospective increases in aggregate 

demand.  

Mr. Bopp could find no evidence thus far of a general upward 

pull or push on the wholesale price level. The rise in wholesale 

prices of the past few months reflected primarily supply situations 

in farm products, processed foods, and nonferrous metals, rather 

than total demand pressing against productive capacity. Reduced



8/10/65 -55

marketings of livestock as a result of low prices last year and 

short supplies, of fruits and vegetables because of unfavorable 

weather were the principal reasons for the rise in the prices of 

farm products and processed foods. The rise in nonferrous metals 

reflected the usual price response of those products to wide 

cyclical swings in demand against a relatively inelastic supply.  

Generally stable labor costs per unit of output in manufacturing 

(the small fractional increases in the past three months were not 

sufficient to have much significance) and the rise in manufacturers' 

after-tax profits in the second quarter, and also in their profit 

margins, indicated no upward push on prices.  

It appeared to Mr. Bopp that the absence of any significant 

inflationary pressures would continue. At the same time, liquidation 

of steel inventories might soon become a downward drag on the 

economy. Those considerations, plus the fact that the improved 

balance of payments position was continuing, led him to the 

conclusion that additional restraint was not called for. On the 

other hand, he would not relax the present degree of firmness in 

view of the stimulus that would be provided by larger defense 

expenditures and a more expansionary fiscal policy. He recommended, 

therefore, that current policy be continued for the next three weeks.  

An additional reason for that view was the current feeling of 

uncertainty in the Government securities market. Any change in policy 

would be likely to have a greatly magnified effect. He favored 

alternative A of the draft directives.



8/10/65 -56

Mr. Hickman remarked that, while the economy continued to 

inch upward in July, the latest data on the leading indicators 

showed that a majority had either leveled off or declined slightly.  

Looking ahead, some uncertainties in the business outlook referred 

to at the previous meeting of the Committee had been alleviated by 

increased defense spending for Vietnam, but the steel settlement 

was still a major element to be resolved. It probably would be 

late September before it could be determined which way the economy 

would respond.  

In assessing recent business developments, the major 

contributions provided by steel and autos should be noted, Mr.  

Hickman said. Steel production, which amounted to a seasonally 

adjusted annual rate of 149 million ingot tons in July, would hold 

near that rate in August, but would decline appreciably in 

September, irrespective of a steel settlement. Assuming a settle

ment, the extent of the decline would be determined by the amount 

of inventories to be liquidated and the level of consumption, two 

measures about which there was a great deal of talk but little 

real knowledge. Because of Vietnam, steel inventory liquidation 

would not be as great as previously expected, but the extent of 

the adjustment could not be estimated until more was known about 

price developments and the impact of defense spending.  

The record of the automobile industry continued to confound 

the experts, Mr. Hickman commented. Auto production in July amounted



8/10/65 -57

to 9.7 million cars, seasonally adjusted annual rate, while 

estimates for August indicated adjusted output at a rate of nearly 

9.5 million cars. Car sales declined moderately in July, but were 

a record for the month; inventories increased slightly but were 

now declining sharply.  

Although some price indicators subsided in early July, the 

odds now seemed to Mr. Hickman to have shifted away from price 

stability in favor of moderate price inflation. Because of short 

supplies of pork, beef, and vegetables, the upward drift of the 

consumer price index had accelerated. Increases that were first 

reflected on the farm in February and March subsequently showed up 

in wholesale prices of processed foods and finally in consumer food 

prices. If typical lead-lag relationships held, a further rise 

could be expected at the consumer level before the modest decline 

that occurred in farm prices in July took hold.  

Vietnam had already had an impact on industrial prices, 

Mr. Hickman noted, with nonferrous meals, textiles, and hides and 

leather firming somewhat since mid-July. Upward pressure in non

ferrous metals in some cases reflected tight supply situations.  

While industrial prices would probably not move up as rapidly as 

they did at the outbreak of the Korean conflict, the general climate 

was now more conducive to price increases than at any time in the

recent past.



8/10/65 -58

At this juncture, past trends seemed to Mr. Hickman to be 

even less reliable guides than usual to future developments. The 

key question concerned the effects of the step-up in defense spending 

on economic activity. Whereas previously a rate of growth in GNP 

had been anticipated during the second half that would not close 

the gap in the economy's potential--implying an increase in the 

aggregate rate of unemployment--the expansion could not proceed 

at a faster rate. At this point, he felt intuitively that it would 

take a much sharper escalation than presently appeared to be in the 

cards to overheat the economy. But to formulate appropriate monetary 

policy the Co.mittee clearly needed to know much more than it did 

now about defense spending and the steel situation. Unfortunately, 

that was something it might not know for several weeks, perhaps 

until late September.  

In recent months, Mr. Hickman noted, he had felt that 

monetary policy was slightly firmer than it should have been on 

the basis of information then available. Now, however, with the 

advantage of hindsight, he thought that it had been about right 

after all, although perhaps for the wrong reasons. In any event, 

in view of the current Treasury financing, hesitancy in the capital 

markets, uncertainties in the domestic business outlook, and growing 

pressure on the pound sterling, no change in policy seemed to be 

desirable at this time. By "no change" he meant net borrowed 

reserves around $150 million and borrowings around $500 million,



8/10/65 -59

with a personal preference for a shading downward from those 

figures. He favored alternative A for the directive.  

Mr. Maisel agreed with the staff that the step-up in 

Federal activities resulting from Vietnam was nearly sufficient to 

offset the curtailment in private expenditures that had been 

expected during the coming periods. As a result, if the programs 

went forward as now projected, the rate of growth in the economy 

should continue about as it had recently. That would mean that 

existing slack would remain at the present levels.  

The relationships which had developed among international 

interest rates made it imperative, Mr. Maisel said, for the Commit

tee to undertake the careful reconsideration of current interest 

rate policy that was considered necessary when the present directive 

was adopted on March 23. Current indications were that the major 

European countries had decided to put the bulk of their faith in 

monetary rather than fiscal policy. That raised serious questions 

as to wh ther or not the United States could afford to be one of 

the few countries with its capital market open freely to buffeting 

from decisions made abroad. The voluntary foreign credit restraint 

program was clearly an indication that such pressures were basically 

unacceptable. As a part of the general reconsideration of its 

present policy, the Committee needed to consider the short-run 

implications for the balance of payments of existing short- and 

long-term interest rates while attempting to determine what type of



8/10/65 -60

capital markets, under what conditions, could be viable after the 

voluntary restraint program had passed. The Committee particularly 

needed a review of what capital market movements were a threat.  

Was the Committee concerned with Canada, Britain, developing 

countries, or continental Europe? Did short-run movements have 

the same implications as long-run ones? 

Mr. Maisel felt that, given the present uncertainties as 

a result of Vietnam plus the continued negotiations in the steel 

industry, the Committee ought not to alter policy, since any 

change could be misinterpreted. As a result, he would support 

the current directive--alternative A. At the same time he 

believed that the creeping growth in the amount of net borrowed 

reserves ought to be reversed. The average of free reserves 

expected at the conclusion of each week's operations had risen 

by $15 million in each month under the current directive. Because 

most of the biases currently appeared to be on the restrictive 

side, the amount of net borrowing had been even larger than 

projected at the end of operations.  

Since the market would be buffeted by many conflicting 

forces during coming periods, it seemed advisable to Mr. Maisel 

to recognize the existence of the voluntary foreign credit restraint 

program and to allow the bill rate to fall if that occurred as the 

result of normal market action. He did not feel that artificial



8/10/65 -61

pegging of the bill rate above the rate that the market would 

determine with the present level of reserves and demand for money 

ought to be the critical criterion for operations.  

Mr. Daane said he continued to believe that there were 

times when a decision to maintain the status quo with respect to 

policy was as significant as a decision to make a change. He felt 

strongly that the present was one of those times. The uncertainties 

existing in the markets for Government securities and foreign 

exchange, the absence of clear and compelling evidence calling 

for a change in policy noted by Mr. Brill, the considerable 

skepticism expressed by the staff regarding the permanence of the 

improvement in the balance of payments, the uncertainty as to the 

kind of settlement that would be made in the steel industry, and 

the fact that some period of digestion with respect to the current 

Treasury financing still lay ahead--all of those considerations 

quite clearly called for no change in policy.  

As to the draft directives prepared by the staff, Mr. Daane 

continued, he felt that there was too much change in wording for the 

sake of change alone. Assuming the consensus today was for no 

change in policy, he would recommend only a few revisions from the 

directive adopted at the previous meeting. Specifically, in the 

first sentence he would substitute the words "early in the year" 

for "the first quarter." Between the seccnd and third sentences



8/10/65 -62

he would inser: the sentence, "International developments are 

creating uncertainties in securities and foreign exchange markets," 

and leave the .:est of the first paragraph unchanged. In the second 

paragraph, he would replace the phrase, "and taking into account 

the forthcoming Treasury financing" with the phrase, "and taking 

into account the current Treasury financing and unsettlement in 

market conditions," and retain the remaining language.  

When the Committee was not making a policy change, Mr. Daane 

said, revisions of the directive language should be limited to those 

necessary to recognize significant developments, and in his judgment 

the only recent developments of major significance were the uncer

tainties and unsettlements occasioned by events in Vietnam and 

Britain. To make other revisions might suggest to the reader of the 

published reco-d that the Committee had modified policy when in fact 

it had not. One change of the several the staff proposed seemed to 

him to be particularly inappropriate--that cf substituting the words, 

"to defend the international position of the dollar" for the words, 

"to reinforce the voluntary restraint program to strengthen the 

international position of the dollar." 

Mr. Mitchell said that at the previous meeting he had seen 

no reason for making a change in policy and he saw none today, 

although he now regarded the economic situation and outlook as 

stronger than previously. The major factor underlying that view



8/10/65

was the recent rate of consumer spending, which was surprisingly 

high. A second important factor was the improvement in business 

psychology as a result of the escalation in the Vietnam situation, 

although that improvement might be based on an erroneous reading 

of the outlook--Federal expenditures in connection with Vietnam 

might not rise as much as many expected.  

With the uncertainties prevailing in securities markets, 

Mr. Mitchell said, the Committee should do what it could to 

reinstill confidence in the viability of the present pattern of 

interest rates. The differentials existing among rates on tax

exempt and corporate and Government securities at present perhaps 

were unstable, and that might lead to a decline in prices of 

Government bonds. In any event, he would not want to see any 

further rise in the levels of long-term rates.  

As to the balance of payments, it seemed to Mr, Mitchell 

that the results of the voluntary foreign credit restraint program 

were all that had been hoped for, if not more. The program was 

not intended to produce a permanent solution to the balance of 

payments problem, and no one should be surprised that it was not 

doing so. A permanent solution had to be sought through other 

policy measures. The last measure he would recommend for that 

purpose would be an increase in domestic long-term interest rates 

to levels equal to those in, say, Germany.

-63-



8/10/65

Mr. Mitchell favored alternative A for the directive with 

one change in wording that was consistent with the views Mr. Daane 

had expressed. In the second sentence of the first paragraph he 

would replace the words, "to help defend" (the international 

position of the dollar) with the words, "to help maintain." To 

his mind, "to help defend" was unduly dramatic language.  

Mr. Shepardson said that in preparing for this meeting 

he had tried to reconcile his own feelings with the staff's 

assessment of the conflicting factors weighing in the present 

situation. There were many uncertainties in the picture, and 

while he suspected that some of the concern; that Mr. Treiber had 

expressed today were warranted, he found it hard to document that 

belief. The nature of the steel settlement would, in his judgment, 

have important implications for the economy, Because the negotiations 

were still in process, and despite the fact that he shared Mr.  

Treiber's concerns, he had come to the conclusion that it 

probably was best to make no change in policy at present. He 

would not like to see any shading of market conditions to the 

easier side under a generally unchanged posture, as had been 

suggested; he would hope that there would be no relaxation of 

pressure.  

As to the wording of the directive, Mr. Shepardson thought 

there was merit in Mr. Daane's observations but he found alternative A

-64-



8/10/65

as drafted by the staff acceptable, with Mr. Mitchell's suggested 

change in wording.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

There are a number of powerful forces influencing 
economic trends at the moment--some pushing up and others 
pulling down. On balance I think they call for us to 
hold a steady course for monetary policy over the next 
few weeks, not turning consciously toward either tightness 
or ease.  

I would not want to ease policy right now, for a 
considerable degree of new fiscal stimulus lies immediately 
ahead of us. Some of this will come from the enlarged 
Social Security payments, but the more important impetus 
is probably the Vietnam buildup, and we have no dependable 
idea of how big that might turn out to be. Even before 
the new Vietnam action entered the picture, moreover, the 
economy was performing a bit better than expected, and 
it was being supported by a vigorous rate of monetary 
expansion.  

One final factor also weighs against easing today, 
in my view: steel contract talks are coming up against 
their previously agreed-upon deadline at the end of this 
month, ard (without trying to forecast the eventual 
settlement) I would not want to have eased policy at this 
meeting and then find a big steel wage advance and an 
associated round of price increases developing.  

But, on the other hand, I also see considerations 
that I think would make it unwise to tighten right now.  
I am sensitive to a few symptoms of "tired boom" that 
could be seen to be developing in the clearer atmosphere 
pre-Vietnam. Furthermore, we can expect that some short
run downward pressure from steel stock liquidation ought 
to occur whenever we get either a settlement or a strike.  

Perhaps our greatest risks of precipitating unhappy 
consequences, however, center in our financial markets.  
These markets--particularly the long Government bond 
market--are already nervous and weighted down by dealer 
inventories. I hate to think of how those markets might 
drop if the receipt of bad news from abroad (as some people 
apparently think may be forthcoming) caught them at a time 
when we had already pushed them off balance and strained 
their resiliency by an unexpected further tightening of 
monetary policy.

-65-



8/10/65

In the absence of domestic developments which would 
make a policy change imperative, I would prefer to move 
through the weeks ahead on a steady corse, with the 
Manager maintaining money market conditions about the 
same as in recent weeks. If investors in their nervous
ness, should shift toward liquid assets and depress bill 
rates in the process, I think we ought to let a bill 
rate decline occur. On the other hand, should bank 
deposit expansion continue unseasonally strong and boost 
required reserves more than expected, I would not object 
to some resultant revisions to deeper net borrowed reserve 
figures. But aside from such nuances, I would hold 
policy unchanged until the next meeting, or until and 
unless the international financial storm breaks over 
Britain, If that should occur, its reverberations in 
securities and foreign exchange markets are impossible 
fully to foresee, and I would want both the Special 
Manager for Foreign Operations and the System Open 
Market Account Manager to have all the power and flexi
bility it is feasible to give them to deal with the 
consequences, although that can be provided in a special 
meeting, if necessary. To that end, I would vote for 
the proposed alternative A for the current directive.  

Mr. Robertson added that like Mr. Shepardson he felt there 

was much to be said for Mr. Daane's position against changes in 

wording for the sake of change alone. Nevertheless, he found that 

he could accept the staff's draft language with the modification 

suggeste by Mr. Mitchell.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business conditions in the Fifth 

District continued to display basic strengh, much as in the nation 

as a whole. In the Richmond Bank's latest survey, however, the size 

of the minority anticipating a business downturn had increased.  

Among businessmen, 21 per cent now thought some decline was probable, 

compared with 7 per cent eight weeks ago. Among bankers, however,

-66-



8/10/65 -67

whose sentiments usually were more volatile there was not a 

single pessimist who foresaw a downturn in the near future.  

Except for textile producers, manufacturers in the survey 

indicated a lower average level of new and unfilled orders for 

the first time in eighteen months but continued to report rising 

shipments and small increases in wages and prices. Textile 

producers expected sizable Government orders soon as part of 

the defense buildup; that would come on top of an order backlog 

which already pre-empted almost a year's production in several 

major lines. In agriculture, tobacco acreage-poundage controls 

were expected to cut the District's output of flue-cured leaf 

by 17 per cent, but favorable prices would probably reduce the 

impact on income.  

At the present stage, Mr. Wayne continued, the precise 

scope of the current defense buildup was not clear and any 

assessment of its implication for business performance in the 

second half was probably premature. For the very short run, 

its principal impact was likely to be on business expectations 

patterns. He would expect some adjustment in business inventory 

planning in a direction that would work to offset the anticipated 

liquidation of steel stockpiles, and perhaps also some scattered 

price pressures. Considering a somewhat longer time span, 

consumer spending for durables might be stimulated, especially



8/10/65 -68

in view of prospective increases in social security payments 

and in military and civil service pay scales. Whatever the 

magnitude of the added stimulus, it would be superimposed upon 

a basically strong economic situation. Plant and equipment 

expenditures continued high, automobile sales remained at 

record levels, the consumer surveys showed that the public was 

still in a spending mood, and the latest construction figures 

were encouraging.  

Mr. Wayne went on to say that the recent relative increase 

of long-term rates abroad partially offset the advantages of the 

interest equalization tax and might well introduce some stress on 

the voluntary foreign credit restraint program. For the immediate 

future, however, he was more concerned over the tendency in some 

quarters to view the modest second-quarter surplus in the balance 

of payments as evidence that the problem had been solved. The 

current unfavorable prospect for the merchandise account struck 

him as more deserving of attention than improvements that were 

attributable to a program that could be viewed only as temporary.  

In surveying the international scene, however, he was most concerned 

with the position of the United Kingdom. It appeared to him that 

the sterling problem had moved into a new and critical phase and, 

while no one could predict the next development, he believed the



8/10/65 -69

System might well be confronted over the next few months with 

what could be the gravest international payments crisis since 

the 1930s.  

Bank credit behavior in June and July generally followed 

the usual seasonal pattern, Mr. Wayne said. Loan demand remained 

strong, and in view of the low level of corporate liquidity, 

rising business capital outlays, and the likelihood of increased 

inventory accumulation in many lines, business loans might be 

expected to continue at a high and perhaps rising level for the 

next few months. Consumer spending plans also indicated an 

increase in the demand for consumer loans.  

In view of the prospects for continued strong loan 

demand in the second half, Mr. Wayne remarked, the need for 

bank reserves was likely to increase, although perhaps not as 

rapidly as in the first half. Developing seasonal needs 

coupled with limited new bill offerings by the Treasury might 

make it difficult to supply necessary reserves through open 

market purchases without unduly depressing bill rates. That 

situation could change if rising defense expenditures became 

large enough to require substantial amounts of additional Treasury 

financing.



8/10/65 -70

Regarding policy, the current level of reserve availability 

appeared to Mr. Wayne to be altogether consistent with the rate of 

credit and money expansion required by the domestic economy. Aside 

from the problem of meeting seasonal reserve needs, he saw nothing 

in the domestic picture that called for any change in reserve 

availability. In particular, he would be reluctant to move in the 

direction of greater ease in view of the possibility that price 

pressures might develop from the impending step-ups in defense 

expenditures, from the increases in Social Security benefits and 

military pay scales beginning in September, and from possible in

creases in Civil Service pay scales. He believed that any 

substantial liquidation of steel inventories that might develop 

in the near future would be offset in large measure by those 

added fiscal stimuli and would not require any compensation from 

monetary and credit policy. On the international side, the 

deterioration in the U.S. trade balance cautioned against any 

move in the direction of more ease. In relation to sterling the 

Committee should not compound the problems of the British by any 

greater firmness of policy, but the heavily exposed position of the 

dollar in relation to the pound required serious consideration 

of the strength of this country's own situation. In brief, it 

seemed to Mr. Wayne that the considerations pro and con were quite 

evenly balanced, and he favored a continuation of the present 

policy and alternative A of the draft directives.



8/10/65

Mr. Clay commented that the domestic economy had performed 

quite well in recent weeks. As anticipated, the rate of expansion 

had been lower than during the bulge of the early months of the 

year. However, the performance probably had been somewhat better 

than generally anticipated.  

The recent military decisions concerning South Vietnam had 

injected a new factor into future economic developments, Mr. Clay 

said. The staff analysis under question 1 covered that situation 

very well. The immediate impact on the domestic economy was small, 

and the projected impact in the months ahead appeared to be readily 

absorbable. The fact was that the Committee did not really know 

what the military program would be in the months ahead, however, 

and accordingly the effect on the economy would have to be re

evaluated constantly.  

Substantial progress had been made in the fuller utilization 

of resources, Mr. Clay continued. The resource base was still 

growing and there appeared to be room for continuing orderly 

expansion in economic activity. If the military impact proved 

to be more pronounced than anticipated, however, the resource 

utilization situation would need to be observed very closely as 

a factor conditioning the formulation of policy.  

Loan expansion had moderated, Mr. Clay noted. Business 

loan expansion had moderated somewhat also, although business loan

-71-



8/10/65 -72

growth had continued large. While loan demand remained strong, the 

increased use of bank credit was taking place in an economic 

environment that remained orderly.  

To Mr. Clay, analysis of the domestic economy seemed to 

indicate the appropriateness of a continuation of the monetary 

policy of recent weeks, and the international balance of payments 

situation appeared to permit the pursuit of that policy. The 

staff analysis under question 5 included the necessary informatior.  

concerning the targets involved in the implementation of such a 

policy approach.  

Mr. Clay would not change the discount rate. In his judgment, 

alternative A of the draft directives would serve satisfactorily as 

the economic policy directive.  

Mr. Daane left the meeting followirg Mr. Clay's remarks.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that economic activity in the Seventh 

District had remained at high levels during recent weeks. Reductions 

in the rate of inventory accumulation, particularly in steel, were 

still considered a potential source of disruption to the pace of 

activity but no other weaknesses were evident. Prospects for a 

continuation of the expansion at or near current rates were good.  

A Chicago steel industry analyst reported that it was now 

apparent that the peak in the buildup of steel inventories had been 

reached in the early part of July, Mr. Scanlon said. Order backlogs



8/10/65 -73

in the industry were being "worked off" at a slow and orderly 

rate. Unemployment compensation claims continued to decline in 

all District states except Wisconsin.  

Mr. Scanlon observed that net farm income in the Midwest 

was expected to continue above the year-earlier level during the 

remainder of 1965, with gains in livestock, crops, and Government 

payments. Hog and cattle prices were expected to remain above 

those of a year ago and larger crops of wheat and feed grains 

were in prospect.  

A continued strong demand for agricultural loans was 

reported by the "agricultural" banks surveyed by the Chicago 

Reserve Bank in early July, Mr. Scanlon remarked. The demand for 

loans to finance feeder cattle was expected to be especially 

strong this fall because of the large corn crop in prospect, 

higher feeder cattle prices, and relatively favorable prices for 

slaughter cattle. Loan pay-offs at the agricultural banks had 

been favorable, reflecting the rise of farm income. Current 

developments in the Midwest seemed to indicate the continuation 

of a strong underlying business loan demand. Stepped-up issues 

of CDs by the major Chicago banks suggested that they expected 

substantial loan demand in coming months. Other types of loans 

also showed greater gains than a year ago. Real estate 

loans at District weekly reporting banks were 21 per cent above a



8/10/65 -74

year ago and loans to finance companies were up 25 per cent.  

The gain in consumer (other) loans had been somewhat less 

vigorous--17 per cent.  

Although the major Chicago banks showed continued tighten

ing in their basic reserve positions in July, Mr. Scanlon said, 

their position was still relatively comfortable. They had not 

increased borrowings at the discount window and had not liquidated 

Governments in significant amounts.  

Speaking specifically to question 4, Mr. Scanlon shared 

Mr. Treiber's view that in providing the substantial amount of 

reserves that the System would be required to inject in the period 

between September 1 and the end of the year consideration might 

be given to meeting some or all of this need by a reduction in 

reserve requicements on time deposits.  

Looking to the next three weeks, with the steel settlement 

and other uncertainties hanging over the economy, Mr. Scanlon 

thought the Committee should maintain about the current policy 

posture. On that basis, he would prefer alternative A for the 

directive, as amended by Mr. Mitchell.  

Mr. Galusha said that he would omit most of the remarks he 

had prepared on recent developments in the Ninth District to avoid 

reiterating statements already made in connection with other 

Districts. However, he would note one respect in which the District



8/10/65 -75

differed from some others--the major city banks had indicated 

in an informal survey that they did not expect a resumption of the 

heavy loan demand of a few weeks ago.  

On the basis of information now available, Mr. Galusha 

was inclined toward no change in policy at the present time and, 

accordingly, toward alternative A for the directive. He had some 

reservations about that judgment because he was not wholly 

confident about the near-term business outlook. On the other 

hand, it was possible that days to come would reveal evidence that 

the expanded military effort in connection with Vietnam would 

have greater economic effect than it seemed reasonable to expect 

at the moment. Were he to favor additional monetary restraint 

at this time it would be because long-term interest rates had 

been rising in other major countries and because of the balance 

of payments implications inherent in that shift. He was not sure 

of the significance of those current variations, however, and so 

was inclined to wait a bit until the impact of the changing 

differentials became clearer. Also, the effects of the Vietnam 

buildup might likewise be clearer in a few weeks.  

Mr. Galusha indicated that he agreed whole-heartedly with 

Mr. Daane's observation that a decision by the Committee to make 

no change in policy was a positive act. He thought, however, 

that Mr. Daane's further observation--that modifications in the



8/10/65 .. 76

language of the directive should be kept to a minimum when policy 

was unchanged--involved a non sequitur. The directive adopted at 

each meeting presumably should reveal the major factors on which 

the Committee based its decision at that meeting, and since those 

factors ordinarily would change over time it seemed appropriate 

to change the language of the directive even though policy was 

unchanged.  

Mr. Swan said that there had been some small recovery in 

the aerospace and defense industry in the Twelfth District in 

recent months, before the current Vietnam developments. To a 

considerable extent the recovery was related to an increase in 

orders for commercial aircraft. In light of recent developments, 

it certainly :.eemed that there would be sone further rise in 

activity in that industry. However, as far as the District was 

concerned, he would agree with the staff comments under the first 

question that in general there as yet had been little public 

concern over the possible impact of the defense buildup and no 

significant movement to date toward anticipatory buying.  

The District's lumber industry had been in somewhat 

better position in recent weeks, Mr. Swan continued, as a result 

of the combination of some increase in orders, some rise in 

prices, and vacation shutdowns. However, the position of the 

industry had not improved significantly over that of a year ago.



8/10/65

The question of the adequacy of the domestic agricultural 

labor supply probably would be rising agair soon, Mr. Swan said.  

The peak of the tomato harvest period lay ahead, and although 

acreage was down sharply from last year there was some question 

of whether the harvest could be handled without using Mexican 

labor.  

Mr. Swan remarked that the advertising compaign of 

District savings and loan associations that. he had mentioned at 

the previous meeting evidently was not proving to be very success

ful in attracting deposits. The associations were in a rather 

tight position as a consequence of that fact and of the current 

efforts of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board to dampen their 

borrowing. As a result, the supply of mortgage funds was likely 

to be less than had been anticipated and there might be some 

firming of mortgage terms, as had already been noted. The 

reserve positions of District banks continued to be under 

considerable pressure. The banks recently had stepped up their 

borrowing from the Reserve Bank and they continued to be net 

buyers of Federal funds on a substantial scale.  

Mr. Swan agreed with those who felt that in light of 

the uncertainties existing at present the Committee should not 

make a policy change. He was encouraged by the fact that non

borrowed reserves had increased by only about 2 per cent in

-77-



8/10/65 -78

July--much less than in June--without any additional upward 

pressure on member bank borrowings and net borrowed reserves.  

Mr. Swan noted that intra-monthly fluctuations in 

reserves were relatively small in August and that the need for 

supplying a substantial volume of reserves for seasonal reasons 

would not arise until later in the year. In view of those facts 

he wondered whether it might not be appropriate to put a little 

more emphasis on the figures for nonborrowed reserves in inter

preting a decision to make no change in policy, at the same time 

widening somewhat the target ranges for bo-rowings and net 

borrowed reserves in both directions. If a policy decision for 

"no change" was interpreted in terms of supplying about the same 

amount of norborrowed reserves in August as in July, a change 

toward either stronger or weaker credit demands would be reflected 

in the figures for borrowings and net borrowed reserves. Admittedly, 

the Desk might have difficulty in carrying out such an instruction, 

but in view of the many uncertainties existing at present it would 

be helpful if the Committee could get some better sense of the 

nature of market responses during the next few weeks.  

Mr. Swan found alternative A acceptable for the directive 

with Mr. Mitchell's proposed change. Perhaps the Committee would 

want to use the phrase "to help defend the international position 

of the dollar" at some future time, but he did not think it was



8/10/65 -79

appropriate now. It seemed to him, as it did to Mr. Galusha, 

that if the Committee decided to make no change in policy today 

it would be for a set of reasons somewhat different from those 

at the previous meeting. Accordingly, he did not object to the 

modifications of language proposed by the staff, although he 

agreed that changes should not be made in the directive for their 

own sake.  

Mr. Irons reported that there had been little change during 

the past month in most areas of business in the Eleventh District.  

Activity was at a high level, and as far as he could tell there 

was no evidence of developing softness at this time. There was 

strength in all major categories of employment; unemployment had 

declined; department store sales were strong; and both production 

and construction were about unchanged at very high levels. District 

businessmen and bankers were quite pleased with economic conditions, 

although they were concerned about the various uncertainties that 

had been mentioned at the meeting today.  

There had been a fractional decline in loans and invest

ments at District banks in the past month, Mr. Irons observed.  

The banks were facing strong loan demands, however, and they were 

expecting demands to increase in the months ahead. Several of 

the District's larger banks were in a rather tight liquidity 

position and had been heavy buyers of Federal funds. Borrowings



8/10/65 -80

from the Reserve Bank had not been large--the average was running 

at about $35 million--and mainly involved some of the smaller 

banks. However, the Reserve Bank was administering the discount 

window fairly strictly under the terms cf Regulation A, and if 

administration were relaxed borrowings undoubtedly would rise 

substantially. Some bankers had commented frankly that they 

would prefer to borrow from the Reserve Bank at a rate of 4 per 

cent rather than to buy Federal funds at. a 4-1/8 per cent rate.  

That situation might raise a question regarding the administration 

of the discount window. He would not pursue the matter at the 

meeting, except to note that he was expecting banks as a group 

to increase their borrowings and that, with city banks active, 

the problem of continuity of borrowing inevitably would arise.  

In Mr. Irons' judgment the national economic situation was 

strong. He was optimistic about the outlook, although he recognized 

that there would be problems in the months ahead of the kinds others 

had noted in connection with inventories, the balance of payments, 

and the position of sterling.  

Mr. Irons said that his position on policy for the next 

three weeks was close to that of Mr. Shepardson. In view of all 

the uncertainties existing he would not want to make an overt change 

toward firmness, nor would he move toward greater ease. As between 

no change and a slight shading toward firmness, he had found the 

choice to be a close one at the previous meeting and he thought it



8/10/65 -81

was even closer today. On balance, however, he would suggest 

continuing the posture of the past month during the next three 

weeks, maintaining reserve availability and conditions in the 

money market about unchanged. He would not be overly concerned 

if the bill rate drifted off; the bill rate had lost much of its 

significance recently, with Federal funds often trading at rates 

above the discount rate and with the various methods banks had 

developed for obtaining funds.  

Mr. Irons said he could accept alternative A for the 

directive. He was not particularly happy with the specific 

language of the draft, but he thought it would serve the purpose 

and did not propose to suggest revisions.  

Mr. Latham reported that recent eccnomic trends in the 

First District paralleled national trends fairly closely.  

Nonagricultural employment registered further gains during the 

month of June. Nonmanufacturing employment slightly exceeded 

the normal seasonal pattern, while manufacturing employment was 

about in line with seasonal expectations. Percentage-wise, the 

net rise from a year ago remained at 2.2 per cent compared with 

3.8 per cent for the country as a whole. Average weekly hours 

of manufacturing production workers rose to 41.4 hours from 41.1 

in May and 40.5 a year ago. There was a slight downward revision



8/10/65 -82

in the manufacturing production index for the District in June, 

bringing it to the lowest point since February, but the index 

still reflected a net rise of 7.7 per cent from a year ago.  

Construction contracts continued their erratic monthly 

course in June, Mr. Latham observed. As a result a cumulative 

lag of 5 per cent in nonresidential contracts and a cumulative 

gain of 1 per cent in the residential area was recorded for the 

first six months of the year in comparison with last year.  

Mixed trends were in evidence in consumer spending, 

Mr. Latham continued. Deposits at reporting savings banks showed 

a slightly less vigorous growth in June due to heavier with

drawals, which were 9.9 per cent larger than in June 1964 and 

compared with new deposit growth of 3.3 per cent. The 12 months' 

gain in the net balance was accordingly further narrowed, to 

8.2 per cent.  

First District bank experience had generally paralleled 

that in the nation, Mr. Latham said. Total loans, although down, 

were not down to the extent that might normally be expected 

following the substantial June rise. Real estate loans continued 

to expand. Government security holdings were further reduced and 

the upward trend of time deposits was still in evidence. The 

ratio of loans to deposits of District reporting banks was



8/10/65 -83

75 per cent on July 28 compared with 70.1 per cent for the 

country. Average daily borrowings at the discount window during 

the four weeks ended August 4 were relatively light.  

Bankers' expectations were that loan demand would continue 

its strength on a generally broad base, Mr. Latham observed. A 

steel strike, military needs, or an intensification of the sterling 

crisis were the imponderables. Eliminating extremes in those areas, 

it was anticipated that business would continue good and that loan 

demand would be on the high side of seasonal limits.  

Mr. Balderston said he shared the fears that had been 

expressed by some members of the Committee, including Mr. Treiber.  

The present season often had been referred to as that of "summer 

doldrums' in past years, with that term used to explain, or perhaps 

to rationalize, unsatisfactory figures for the domestic economy.  

This year, however, there was strength in business at home but 

worries abroac. In view of the complexities of the present 

situation he would continue current policy at least until the 

next meeting. At that time the Committee might need to consider 

adopting a different policy.  

Chairman Martin noted that at the previous meeting of the 

Committee he had observed that in his judgment the only important 

recent change had been in psychology. To a certain extent the 

same observation seemed warranted at today's meeting. There was



8/10/65 -84

one point, however, that he thought needed to be emphasized-

as President Johnson had said recently, the country was at war 

in Vietnam. Many might view the hostilities there as a small 

war, or a brush fire, but he did not. In his judgment it was 

necessary for the Committee to bear in mind that, while there 

had been no declaration of war, a war-time psychology might be 

developing more rapidly than was generally realized.  

The Chairman went on to say that most members seemed to 

agree today that no change should be made in policy. Those 

whose views differed favored so modest a change that it would 

be difficult, in his opinion, to spell it out in the directive.  

He proposed that the Committee vote on a directive consisting 

of the suggested alternative A, with the change Mr. Mitchell 

had suggested.  

Mr. Treiber commented that Mr. Mitchell had proposed 

substituting the words "to maintain" the international position 

of the dollar for the staff's suggested words, "to help defend." 

In preference to either, he would like to see the words "to 

strengthen" used. He noted that the previous directive had 

included the phrase "to reinforce the voluntary restraint 

program to strengthen the international positions of the dollar," 

and he thought it would be undesirable to drop the word "strengthen."



8/10/65

Mr. Mitchell said that Mr. Treiber's suggestion was agreeable 

to him.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy has 
expanded further, but at a slower pace than early in the 
year, and that the improvement in our international 
payments that occurred in the second quarter has been 
maintained for the time being, although gold outflows 
have continued and international developments are 
creating uncertainties in securities and foreign 
exchange markets. In this situation, it remains the 
Federal Open Market Committee's currer.t policy to 
strengthen the international position of the dollar, 
and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, 
while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve 
base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations over the next three weeks shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining about the same conditions in 
the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, 
while taking into account the Treasury financing about 
to be completed and the unsettled conditions in 
securities and foreign exchange markets.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, August 31, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

cretary

-85-



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 9, 1965 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by 
the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on August 10, 1965 

Note: Because of the divergent interpretations of recent economic and 
financial developments expressed at the July 13 meeting, three alternative 
drafts of the directive are given below.  

Alternative A (no change) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this meeting 
indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further, but at a slower 
pace than early in the year, and that the improvement in our international 
payments that occurred in the second quarter has been maintained for the 
time being, although gold outflows have continued and international 
developments are creating uncertanties in securities and foreign exchange 
markets. In this situation, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's 
current policy to help defend the international position of the dollar, 
and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about 
the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, 
while taking into account the Treasury financing about to be completed 
and the unsettled conditions in securities and foreign exchange markets.  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this meeting 
indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further, some prices 
have been under upward pressure, bank credit and money supply expansion 
has been vigorous over recent months, and prospects are that increased 
Federal expenditures as a result of hostilities in Vietnam will expand 
overall demand in the months ahead. Although U.S. capital outflow has 
been moderate, reflecting the large initial impact of the Administration's 
balance of payments program, the trade surplus has diminished, gold 
outflows have continued, and international developments are creating 
uncertainties in securities and foreign exchange markets. In this 

situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to 
help defend the international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, by moderating growth in the reserve 
base, bank credit, and the money supply.



CONFIDENTAL (FR) -2

To implement this policy, System open market operations over the 
next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to attaining somewhat 
firmer conditions in the money market, while taking into account tne 
Treasury financing about to be completed and the unsettled conditions 
in securities and foreign exchange markets.  

Alternative C (easing) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further, 
although at a slower pace than early in the year. Inventories have 
continued to accumulate, particularly of steel, and final demands 
appear to be rising more slowly than industrial productive capacity.  
Recent price movements have been mixed and noncumulative in nature.  
Some long-term interest rates are up moderately this year. The 
improved position of our international payments has been maintained, 
and gold takings by foreign central banks have been somewhat reduced, 
but international developments are causing uncertainties in securities 
and foreign exchange markets. In this situation, it is the Federal 
Open Market Committee's current policy to facilitate fuller utilization 
of resources while helping to defend the international position of the 
dollar and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, by accom
modating moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 

money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to attaining 
somewhat easier conditions in the money market, taking into account 
the Treasury financing about to be completed and the unsettled condi
tions in securities and foreign exchange markets.


