









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on 

Thursday, November 4, 1965, at 11:35 a.m. This was a telephone 

conference meeting, and each participant was in Washington except 

as otherwise indicated in parentheses:

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balderston 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Patterson 
Robertson 
Scanlon

(Philadelphia) 
(New York) 

(Boston) 
(Minneapolis) 

(Atlanta) 

(Chicago)

Mr. Bopp, Alternate Member of the Federal 
Open Market Committee (Philadelphia) 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Mr. Holland, Associate Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account (New York) 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Marsh, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York (New York) 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York (New York) 

Mr. Eastburn, Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Pniladelphia (Philadelphia)



11/4/65 -2

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting the 
members of the Committee had heard the morn
ing telephone conference call in which the 
Desk reviewed developments in the Government 
securities market against the background of 
the response to the Treasury's $9.7 billion 
offer of new 4-1/4 per cent notes of March 15, 
1967, on which a 48 per cent allotment ratio 
had been announced yesterday, this being con
siderably higher than anticipated. Today's 
meeting of the Committee had been called at 
the request of the Manager of the System 
Open Market Account.  

Chairman Martin called first upor. Mr. Holmes, who said that 

the poor reception of the Treasury financing had introduced a new 

note of uncertainty in the Government securities market. The 

initial market response had been mild, but it was necessary to be 

alert to the problems that could develop during an even keel period.  

In addition to the basic objective of maintaining steady money market 

conditions, a major objective guiding the Desk during this period 

would be to make sure that any further adjustment of interest rates 

that might take place remained an orderly one. This could involve 

purchases of coupon issues, and it might require paying even less 

attention to the net borrowed reserve figures than would ordinarily 

be the case.  

Obviously it was not possible to tell at this particular 

point what market pressures could develop or in what area they might 

center, Mr. Holmes continued. Without prejudging future action, he 

thought it advisable for the System to be in a position to purchase



11/4/65 -3

when-issued securities if market pressures should center on that 

area. The Treasury this morning had purchased about $150 million 

when-issued securities at about 3/64s below the issuing price.  

This had helped to stabilize that market, and at the moment there 

was no particular pressure there or it other areas. On the other 

hand, pressure could develop in that area beyond the Treasury's 

capacity--in view of its cash position--to handle. In such cir

cumstances, it could be advantageous for the System to buy when

issued securities at any fixed price, but would do so, if required 

to buy at all, only at declining prices.  

As the Committee knew, Mr. Holmes added, there was no 

standing instruction that would forbid the Manager from buying 

when-issued securities. But since this would represent a departure 

from normal practices, he had thought it best to put the matter 

before the Committee.  

Chairman Martin requested comments on the Manager's proposal, 

and Mr. Hayes said he felt the proposal was a reasonable one. It 

seemed possible, although one could not tell in advance, that in 

resisting disorderly pressures it might be more economical to operate 

in when-issued securities, if pressures centered in that area. It 

would seem wise to give the Manager the requested degree of leeway.  

Mr. Ellis said that he would approve the idea, with the hope, 

however, that it would not be necessary to deviate from normal



11/4/65 -4

practices because the System action, if it occurred, would be 

picked up in the market as evidence that the market needed help.  

It would be better if the Desk could get along without having to 

do this.  

Messrs. Galusha, Patterson, and Scanlon agreed with 

Mr. Ellis. Mr. Bopp, after noting that he was not a voting member 

of the Committee, also concurred.  

Mr. Mitchell said that, while he would approve the proposal, 

he rather hcped that the Manager would start taking steps that 

might help to obviate the necessity. While he did not know exactly 

what the proper steps would be, he would prefer to reassure the 

market by indirection rather than to be forced to assure the market 

by direct operations in when-issued securities.  

Messrs. Maisel and Robertson concurred with Mr. Mitchell's 

comments.  

Mr. Hayes said he thought it would be difficult to accomplish 

what Mr. Mitchell had in mind without creating a false impression 

about the direction of System policy. He felt it was necessary to 

strike a delicate balance between preventing disorderly conditions 

and misleading the market on basic System policy.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thought this was obvious 

and that he would question operating across the board in this 

situation. The Committee, he felt, had to leave this essentially



11/4/65 -5

to the judgment of the Account Manager. What the Committee was 

really doing was giving the Manager latitude to deal in when-issued 

securities if he thought it wise. Otherwise, the Manager's authority 

would remain just the same as it had been.  

Mr. Balderston said he felt it was important that the 

problem of the Treasury refinancing not change the direction of 

monetary policy. It was also important not to give the impression 

of pegging. What the Manager was proposing was to depart from the 

tradition against operating in when-issued securities if a disorderly 

market seemed in prospect. If a disorderly market was an actuality, 

the Manager had authority to act in any way required. The one 

difference was that the Manager was proposing to act in an anticipatory 

way if the threat of a disorderly market seemed serious.  

Mr. Mitchell said he would not dissent from giving the 

Manager the requested leeway. However, just as Mr. Hayes was con

cerned that some action the Manager might take could give an impres

sion of a change of System policy in the direction of greater ease, 

he (Mr. Mitchell) was equally concerned that the Manager's failure 

to take action could create an impression of a change toward a 

tighter policy. He had confidence that the Manager would attempt 

to carry out the Committee's directive to the best of his ability, 

but he wanted to be on record that there were operations at this 

stage that could give rise to anticipation cf a change in policy



11/4/65 -6

in either direction. He was prepared to place matters in the 

Manager's hands, but would not want it thought that he agreed that 

a change in the direction of policy could only be in one direction 

as a result of the Desk's operations.  

Mr. Hayes agreed that what the Manager should do was give, 

to the greatest extent possible, the impression that policy remained 

exactly as it had been.  

Chairman Martin said he thought all were in agreement on 

that point. The only thing this meeting was concerned with, he 

added, was the question of the Manager's dealing in when-issued 

securities within the framework of a potentially disorderly market.  

Mr. Galush said he wanted to be sure he understood correctly 

that the Manager could work in an anticipatory way as well as a 

responsive one, and Chairman Martin replied that the Manager had 

full authority with respect to the maintenance of an orderly market.  

Mr. Holmes said he had nothing to add. The purpose of his 

requesting this meeting had been to have the Committee consider the 

possibility of purchasing when-issued securities, if necessary, with 

all other prescriptions of policy remaining unchanged. He hoped he 

would not have to purchase when-issued securities, and he did not 

now anticipate having to do so, but it seemed well to be prepared 

if market forces required such action.



11/4/65 -7

Thereupon, it was agreed unanimously 
that the Manager of the System Open Market 
Account was authorized to purchase Treasury 
4-1/4 per cent notes of May 15, 1967, for 
the Account on a when-issued basis if in his 
judgment circumstances warranted such action.  

The meeting then adjourned.  Secretary


