









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 14, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Patterson 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Holland, Koch, Taylor, and 

Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Solomon, Adviser to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Partee, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



12/14/65

Messrs. Link, Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, 
Fossum, Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, 
St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting 
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 
November 23, 1965, were approved.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the action taken by members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
December 6, 1965, amending paragraph 1 (a) of 
the continuing authority directive to increase 
the aggregate amount by which System holdings 
of U.S. Government securities can be changed 
between meetings of the Committee by $500 million, 
from $1.5 to $2.0 billion, was ratified.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period November 23 through December 8, 1965, and a supplemental 

report for December 9 through 13, 1965. Copies of these reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said the Treasury gold stock probably would remain unchanged again 

this week. The French seemed likely to buy about $70 million in 

gold from the Stabilization Fund, reflecting their November surplus.



12/14/65 -3

That would just about exhaust the Stabilization Fund's gold holdings, 

and unless the Russians made sales in the market, it probably would 

be necessary to reduce the Treasury gold stock by $50 or $75 million 

before the year end. It was his impression that the heavy gold sales 

the Russians had made earlier in the fall--about $300 million--had 

left them in a relatively comfortable foreign exchange position.  

Thus, there might not be as much help from that source as had been 

hoped. The London gold market had been in reasonable balance 

recently, with the fixing price fluctuating in a $35.11-$35.13 

range. The basic supply and demand situation in that market was 

not good, however, and there was a possibility that it would get 

worse rather than better during the coming year.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, there was a 

minimum of disturbance on Monday, December 6, following the System's 

discount rate action. Sterling declined on the news but quickly 

bottomed out. The Bank of England intervened to a limited extent-

about $9 or $10 million--and the Federal Reserve put in a bid for 

sterling at the New York opening. Those actions were sufficient 

to stabilize the market. Since then sterling had moved up and the 

Bank of England had taken in dollars.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the British trade figures for November, 

released this morning, showed relatively small increases in both



12/14/65 -4

exports and imports and some minor narrowing of the trade gap.  

Those figures were likely to have little effect on market psychology.  

The total improvement in the British position since September now 

came to $1.4 billion, of which about $400 million had been added to 

reserves, $415 million used to repay short-term debt, and about $600 

million used to liquidate maturing forward contracts. The British 

were now moving into what in the past had been a seasonally strong 

period running from January into May, and the seasonal increase in 

their earnings could be greatly accentuated by reversals of leads 

and lags.  

As to the Euro-dollar market, Mr. Coombs continued, useful 

results were flowing from the Federal Reserve suggestion at the 

Basle meeting in October that central banks make a joint effort to 

control or offset window dressing operations by commercial banks.  

The Swiss commercial banks had already been doing a good deal of 

window dressing but, under an arrangement worked out by the Swiss 

National Bank and the Bank for International Settlements, money 

flowing to Zurich was being channeled back into the Euro-dollar market, 

thus limiting rate increases there. The Dutch and Germans also were 

being helpful in this connection, and he expected the Italians to 

take similar steps before the year end. As the Committee would recall, 

a number of the drawings the System had made on its swap lines last



12/14/65 -5

year were required because of commercial bank window dressing.  

Insofar as European central banks could cake care of the matter 

themselves it was all to the good.  

In response to Mr. Balderston's question about the outlook for 

the U.S. gold stock during the coming year, Mr. Coombs replied that 

much would depend on the size of the French surplus, which this year 

was running even larger than last year--it probably would come to 

over $1 billion in 1965--and their policy with respect to it. If 

the French continued their present policy, there would be a one

to-one relationship--every dollar the French took in during 1966 

would result in a drain on the U.S. gold stock. As far as the other 

European countries were concerned, there were not likely to be any 

serious drains, assuming that the U.S. balance of payments did not 

slip back into a heavy deficit. There would, of course, be shifts 

of dollars among the various countries, but if U.S. payments were 

close to balance the countries taking in dollars probably would feel 

under :ome obligation not to convert them into gold but rather to 

deal with the situation through such means as the swap network or 

the facilities of the International Monetary Fund. One other pos

sibility of large gold drains was through the London market; as the 

Committee knew, the U.S. was responsible for covering 50 per cent of 

any sales in that market, and if there were difficulties there it 

was conceivable that the operations could be costly. On balance,



12/14/65 -6

however, he would say that if the French did not run a large 

surplus or if they changed their policy the outlook for the U.S.  

gold stock for next year would be relatively good.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
November 23 through December 13, 1965, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Hayes had just returned from 

a BIS meeting in Basle, and invited him to comment.  

Mr. Hayes reported that solid and enthusiastic approbation 

of the System's recent rate actions had been expressed at the meeting.  

Several of the participating central bankers had assured him that 

despite serious inflationary pressures in their own countries they 

did not intend to increase their discount rates further in the near 

future. They thought the System's actions would lend support to the 

effort to achieve equilibrium in the U.S. balance of payments, and 

they recognized the danger that prompt offsetting rate increases 

abroad would seriously weaken the effects of those actions.  

Mr. Hayes said he might mention one other subject, of a 

highly confidential character, that had been discussed in Basle.  

For some months there had been a widespread view among central 

bankers that some effort should be made to analyze the problem 

posed for the United Kingdom by the existence of large sterling



12/14/65 -7

balances abroad. Possible shifts in those balances continued to 

pose a threat to the stability of international financial markets, 

apart from the difficulties arising from U.K. deficits. They 

recognized the danger that information to the effect that the subject 

was under study might encourage speculative movements of funds, and 

the Bank of England had asked that any study be confined to the group 

of central banks represented at the meeting and to as small a number 

of individuals as possible. There had been some discussion of the 

matter at the special meetings of technical experts in Basle in 

October and November, and at the meeting of the Governors in October.  

However, the discussions at the earlier meetings as well as at that 

held during the past weekend had been confined entirely to procedural 

questions regarding when and by whom suggestions should be made as to 

possible courses of action.  

Mr. Hayes was hopeful that if the matter was handled wisely 

some kind of British swap network, roughly comparable to the U.S.  

network, might be developed with the principal continental countries 

in due course. It was not clear at the moment how the U.S. would fit 

in. A British network of that kind was not imminent; presumably there 

would be further discussions at the monthly Basle meetings, and quite 

a few months might elapse before anything concrete was heard on the 

subject. Mr. Hayes concluded by stressing the confidentiality of the 

fact that such discussions were in progress.



12/14/65

Mr. Coombs then recommended renewal of the twelve-month, 

$250 million standby swap arrangement with the Bank of Canada, 

maturing on December 28, 1965, and three six-month, $150 million 

arrangements maturing on January 20, 1966. The latter included the 

standby arrangements with the Bank for International Settlements 

and the Swiss National Bank, under which the System could draw Swiss 

francs, and the standby arrangement with the BIS under which the 

System could draw other European currencies. At the moment there 

were no drawings outstanding on any of the four swap lines.  

Renewal of the four swap arrange
ments, as recommended by Mr. Coombs, 
was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that the Bank of England had $475 

million currently outstanding on its swap line with the System, in 

addition to a debt of $200 million to the BIS. On December 30, 1965, 

a $275 million drawing on the System, which had been renewed once, 

would again mature. The Bank of England probably would want to 

request a second renewal of that drawing in view of the desirability 

of showing a reasonably good reserve position at the end of the 

month, during which there had been a number of disturbances, including 

those resulting from developments in Rhodesia.  

On January 28, 1966, Mr. Coombs continued, the remaining 

$200 million of the $475 million outstanding would reach a six-month 

maturity, and the question would arise as to whether that drawing 

should be renewed. As he had mentioned earlier, the British were



12/14/65 -9

heading into what had been a seasonally strong period in the past.  

Conceivably, they could repay all of their debts to the U.S. and 

the BIS out of their reserve gains, although in view of all the 

uncertainties in the world today that expectation might be somewhat 

optimistic. The question was whether the British should not make 

a special effort to clear up their debts in January or February by 

using part of the portfolio of U.S. securities that they had been 

progressively liquefying. He personally was persuaded that that 

would be a useful thing for them to do--for the sake not only of 

their own credit rating but also from the point of view of the 

integrity of the whole swap system. Otherwise, it was possible that 

the drawings in question would run on through the spring and summer 

months. Among other disadvantages, such a development might harden 

the position of those central banks that saw serious dangers of 

abuse of international credit facilities. Moreover, by repaying 

the System and the BIS within the next month or two, the British 

would greatly improve the chances of negotiating swap arrangements 

with some other countries, along the lines that Mr. Hayes had 

mentioned.  

In sum, Mr. Coombs said, he saw many compelling arguments 

for the British to make a special effort to clear up the swaps in 

January or February of 1966. The question currently was being 

debated by the U.K. authorities. In accordance with his understanding



12/14/65 -10-

of the Committee's views he had taken the position that, while

the Committee had a one-year limit on drawings under its swap lines,

once any drawing extended beyond six months the Committee became

concerned and assumed that the other central bank involved did also.

Mr. Coombs said he was bringing the matter to the Committee's

attention in order to obtain guidance. In effect, he recommended

that the Committee approve second renewals of the $275 million

drawing maturing in December and of the $200 million drawing matur-

ing in January if requested by the Bank of England, but with the

hope expressed that the drawings would be cleared up as soon as

possible.

Mr. Mitchell commented that repayment of the drawings

appeared desirable not only for the reasons Mr. Coombs had mentioned

but also because window dressing of central bank accounts made their

true financial situation difficult to determine. There had been

many discussions within the System of the need to make its own

accounts fully reflect the true state of its affairs. Whether the

Bank of England should engage in window dressing was for that Bank

to decide, but the Committee should examine carefully any policy

of its own that accommodated such actions by other central banks.

Mr. Coombs remarked that he shared Mr. Mitchell's concern.

He would add, however, that the reasons for some of the British

window dressing operations, such as that at the end of August,



12/14/65 -11-

were related to the extreme nature of the emergency then existing.

If the British had revealed their true position at the end of

August the joint action taken by central banks in September probably

would have been unsuccessful. In effect, the window dressing of

August provided the opportunity to turn the situation in September.

Of course, that type of justification was one that could not be

used often.

Mr. Hayes expressed sympathy with the comments of both

Messrs. Mitchell and Coombs. While he assumed that there was no

need for formal action on the subject, he thought it would be

helpful to Mr. Coombs to know whether it was the general sense of

the Committee that the British should be encouraged to clear up

the swap lines soon.

Mr. Shepardson noted that he had raised questions on a

number of occasions concerning drawings that appeared to be running

on for extended periods. He concurred fully with Mr. Coombs'

recommendation.

Chairman Martin commented that the observations that had

been made should prove helpful to Mr. Coombs, and the latter concurred.

Possible renewal of the two swap
drawings by the Bank of England was noted
without objection.

Mr. Coombs' final recommendation related to the System's

swap with the BIS of German marks against Swiss francs, in the



12/14/65

amount of $40 million. He recommended renewal of this swap, 

which matured on January 10, 1966, for another three months.  

Renewal of the German mark-Swiss 
franc swap with the Bank for International 
Settlements for a further period of three 
months was noted without objection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

November 23 through December 8, 1965, and a supplemental report 

for December 9 through 13, 1965. Copies of both reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

The general reaction of the securities markets to 
the change in the discount rate announced on December 5 
was one of relief that the air had been cleared by a 
decisive move indicating that market forces of supply 
and demand had been taken into account by official action.  
There was some surprise at the timing, a measure of concern 

over the inevitable loss that dealers incurred in their 
portfolios, and some fear that competitive factors might 
tend to put continuing upward pressure on short rates.  

The initial rate reactions, which were swift and 
orderly, have been spelled out in the written reports.  

Government securities dealers marked prices 1/2 to 1 

point lower in intermediate- and long-term securities 

on Monday morning after the change had been announced, 
with some modest improvement in prices over the remainder 

of that week. A sizable bulge in the yield curve developed 

with issues in the 2-5 year area rising to about 4-3/4 per 

cent (up about 20 basis points), tailing off to about 4-1/2

-12-



12/14/65

per cent (up about 6 basis points) in the longer area.  
The greater yield rise in the shorter area of coupon 
issues reflected the market's knowledge that the 4-1/4 
per cent interest ceiling will force the Treasury to 
confine its financing within a maturity span of 5 years.  

Treasury bill rates also reacted sharply, with 
most issues rising by 15-20 basis points. The timing 
of the discount rate announcement gave the market a 
chance to make its initial adjustment before the auction 
on Monday, December 6, when average rates of 4.34 and 
4.47 per cent were established for 3- and 6-month bills, 
respectively. Subsequent trading was carried on close 
to these rates before the weekend, although some heavi
ness developed in the longer bill maturities.  

In the corporate and municipal markets, prices also 
declined by about a point, raising yields by 7-10 basis 
points. At the new levels, new issues coming into the 
market met with good reception and distribution of older 
issues improved, with a moderate price recovery in 
process towards the end of the week. Rates on bankers' 
acceptances, commercial and financial paper, and certif
icates of deposit also were adjusted upward. At this 
juncture, it appears that most commercial banks are using 
their new-found freedom under Regulation Q with restraint, 
although there has been much speculation about the future 
course of CD rates. Most banks in New York City were 
paying about 4.40 to 4-1/2 per cent on 30-day CDs, 4-5/8 
per cent on 3-month CDs and 4-3/4 per cent on 6-month or 
longer deposits. One large bank, however, has moved its 
3-month rate to 4-3/4 per cent.  

System operations after the discount rate change were 
directed first to the provision of ample reserves to 
facilitate the market adjustment and then to a cautious 
absorption of reserves in the general context of stable 
and orderly markets. At the opening of the market on 
Monday, December 6, the System bought $270 million 
Treasury bills in a market go-around, with purchases well 
distributed among the dealers. The reserves thus supplied 
subsequently led to a very comfortable tone in the money 
market; Federal funds, which initially traded at 4-1/2 per 
cent, moved to 1 per cent or below by Wednesday. With a 
steady atmosphere prevailing in the securities markets by 
then, and with a market scarcity of shorter-dated bills 
for which there was a good demand, the System sold $139

-13-



12/14/65 -14

million December and January bills in a modified market 

go-around. In a similar operation on Thursday, an 

additional $100 million short bills were sold. Last 

week's free reserve figure of $9 million was interpreted 

by the market, as we expected, as reflecting only a 

temporary extra supply of reserves to cushion the market 

adjustment.  

Thus, by last Friday the market seemed to have 

settled down substantially, and, based on our then current 

estimates, net borrowed reserves of over $100 million 

appeared likely for the statement week ending December 15.  

Yesterday, however, a further professional reassess

ment of the rate structure took place, stemming, as far 

as we can gather, from market letters stressing the 

potential inflationary tendencies in the economy and from 

reports that led some market participants to believe that 

a further U.S. buildup in Vietnam would be necessary before 

our objectives there could be achieved. Prices of Government 

notes and bonds fell by 1/4 to 3/8 points, with yields in 

the 2-5 year area reaching as high as 4.80 per cent; prices 

of corporate bonds also moved lower. Treasury bill rates 

also moved higher, and bidding in yesterday's auctions was 

extremely cautious, with the three- and six-month bills 

averaging 4.39 and 4.55 per cent, respectively. A tighter 

tone also prevailed in the Federal funds market, while 

dealer lending rates at New York banks moved higher, after 

demonstrating surprising stability before the weekend.  
Before the market reaction set in, wire reports had 

indicated that reserve availability on Friday had been some 

$300 million in excess of expectations, and that, as a 

consequence, about $50 million free reserves were now being 

projected for the current statement week. Despite this, 

we felt it desirable to supply the market with about $180 

million in reserves through over-night repurchase agreements 

as market tightness began to contribute to the deterioration 

in atmosphere before the Treasury bill auctions. In the 

auction itself System tenders were submitted, as noted in 

the supplementary report, at marginal prices to guard against 

an unusually sharp rate adjustment. In the event, the System 

was awarded $112 million Treasury bills, while $145 million 

were redeemed. I would hope that the new reserve figures 

that became available today, together with market developments 

as the day progresses, will permit a more satisfactory assess

ment of the situation than now seems possible. Further



12/14/65

adjustments may be necessary before market participants 
regain confidence in the tenability of rate levels. On 
the other hand, a technical reaction that would move 
rates lower cannot be ruled out.  

To leave an immediate perplexing period and return 
to an earlier one, I should confess that my colleagues and 
I at the Trading Desk were somewhat apprehensive on Sunday 
and Monday a week ago about the reserve absorption job 
that lay immediately ahead. At that time projections 
indicated that we would have to absorb about $600 million 
in reserves by the week ending December 22 in order to 
get back to a net borrowed reserve position of $100 million.  
With the extent of the market reaction still uncertain, we 
had some doubt about its ability to absorb outright sales 
of bills in that magnitude without producing substantial 
additional upward pressure on rates, and we did some 
intensive thinking about possible modification of operating 
techniques that might be useful in carrying out System 
objectives. In the event no innovation has yet proved 
necessary; the sales last week already noted, plus the 
runoff of $145 million bills in yesterday's auction, have 
accomplished much of the job to be done. Nevertheless, 
it seems worthwhile to give further study to possible changes 
in System operating techniques that could prove useful in 
such special situations. With this in mind we are preparing 
a paper to be discussed with the Committee staff and eventually 
submitted to the Open Market Committee if this appears desirable 
after further analysis.  

We are, of course, moving into a period of active 
Treasury cash financing. It appears likely that the Treasury 
will announce the broad outline of its plans to raise new 
money within a week to ten days, with the first stage-
probably an additional issue of June tax bills--under way 
before the year end. Market developments will determine 
whether there can be a note offering in addition to the tax 
bill offering and an increase in the regular Treasury bill 
cycle.  

In response to a question by Mr. Swan, Mr. Holmes said that 

the Treasury's tax bill offering probably would be in the neighborhood 

of $1 billion. The market had been on notice that there would be an

-15-



12/14/65 -16

additional offering of tax bills. The various offerings would 

probably be for payment in January, but the first stage would be 

announced before the end of the year.  

In reply to Mr. Mitchell's question as to what kind of 

directive might be appropriate in the current unsettled state of 

the market, Mr. Holmes remarked that it was necessary to recognize 

that the relations among the various money market measures were in 

a state of flux, and that further experience was necessary before 

patterns of consistent relations could be discovered. Mr. Mitchell 

then commented that he did not understand from Mr. Holmes' earlier 

statement how a directive could best be formulated. If he understood 

Mr. Holmes correctly, after the discount rate action the bill rate 

initially settled down at about 4.35 per cent, and that situation 

persisted for a week. Now, however, a new situation of an unclear 

nature was developing. Presumably a bill rate in, say, the 4.35

4.40 range would no longer be an appropriate guideline. At the same 

time he gathered that a net borrowed reserve target of, say, $100 

million also would not be reasonable now.  

Mr. Holmes said he hoped that some better clues as to where 

the market was going would be available before today was over. In 

his judgment the bill rate guideline that Mr. Mitchell had mentioned 

probably would be too narrow at present, while the market was still



12/14/65 -17

in process of finding its way. His personal view was that a 

combination of the factors used in measuring market conditions, 

including rates, should be taken into account. Thus, if bill rates 

were tending higher, there would be a move toward greater reserve 

availability; if bill rates were tending down, reserve availability 

would be reduced.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether a succession of net free reserve 

figures in the next few weeks might not confuse the market with 

respect to the Committee's intentions. Mr. Holmes replied that 

such a risk would exist unless there was continuing upward pressure 

on short-term rates. If bills continued to press higher the market 

probably would not be misled by free reserve figures.  

Mr. Maisel commented that in the study Mr. Holmes had 

mentioned he hoped there would be some consideration of the relations 

between money market variables and developments with respect to bank 

credit and money. He recognized that in its day-to-day operations 

the Desk had to concern itself with such variables as marginal reserves 

and bill rates, but it was important that the relations between these 

operating variables and the Committee's more fundamental objectives 

be clarified.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that such analyses were highly desirable, 

but as the Committee knew it was difficult to assess credit develop

ments on a month-to-month basis, and far more difficult on a shorter-

term basis.



12/14/65 -18

Mr. Hayes remarked it often might take several months to 

determine the existing relations between conditions in the money 

market and developments with respect to money and credit.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked how Mr. Holmes would interpret the 

second paragraph of the proposed directive drafted by the staff.1/ 

Specifically, would he view it as calling for operations to "moderate 

further adjustments" in either direction? Mr. Holmes replied in the 

affirmative, saying that he would interpret the draft as calling for 

reducing reserve availability if rates were going down and increasing 

reserve availability if rates were tending higher.  

In response to a question Mr. Holmes said that at the 

moment the Desk estimated free reserves of about $70 million for 

the statement week ending tomorrow(December 15), assuming no further 

operations. The figure, of course, was subject to revision.  

Mr. Hickman said he thought that publication of such a figure 

would be bound to have a psychological effect that might be viewed 

as unfortunate later on.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thought the situation 

would change after seasonal pressures ebbed later in the month. The 

period immediately ahead was the difficult one.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



12/14/65 -19

Mr. Hickman said he would be inclined to let rates move up 

during the period of seasonal pressures since free reserve figures 

were bound to cause comment. Mr. Hayes observed that excessive 

fluctuations in the bill rate might lead to exaggerated views of 

what the Committee was attempting to do 

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period November 23 through 
December 13, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement on economic 

conditions: 

The key business statistics becoming available since 
the last meeting of the Committee can be divided into two 
chief groups: (a) those historical numbers that indicate 
the economy has been growing more vigorously than previously 
thought this fall; and (b) projected numbers that also imply 
a more expansive course for the economy in the months ahead.  

The first group has to be called noninflationary, for 
they show mainly that, given the credit and price performance 
to date, a somewhat larger amount of real production, invest
ment, and employment was taking place than had previously been 
surmised. Three developments are particularly noteworthy.  
First is November's widely spread increase in nonfarm employ
ment, which amounted to the biggest net creation of jobs of 
any month in 1965. Second is the striking increase in the



12/14/65

industrial production index in November to a level of 145.5.  
This number, confidential until tomorrow, is more than a 
point higher than the revised October level, which has in 
turn been marked up nearly 1 point above the preliminary 
October estimate. Third is the upward revision in the 
extimated[sic] level of business plant and equipment expenditures, 
amounting to $1.5 billion in the third quarter just past 
and carrying through in somewhat larger dimension into the 
current quarter. Clearly we have managed to employ more 
resources, add more to our capacity, and turn out more 
product that we thought we were doing earlier.  

In the price arena, meanwhile, the most significant 
single index, that for wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities, has continued to edge up through November at 
about the rate prevailing since midyear. Small and 
selective increases continue to be the principal ingred
ients in the advance in this price index.  

The focus of concern has been shifting, however, from 
how prices have performed thus far to how they might perform 
in the future. This shift reflects the impact of the second 
grouping of business statistics released in recent weeks-
those showing strong business, consumer, and Federal Government 
spending intentions over the months ahead.  

The new Commerce-SEC survey shows business plant and 
equipment expenditures moving on up from current levels 
(that were themselves revised upward) at a 13.5 per cent 
annual rate in the first quarter of next year and a 15.2 
per cent rate in the second quarter. Even assuming no 
further increase after mid-1966, these numbers imply rates 
of expenditure significantly higher than the McGraw-Hill 
survey takkn one month earlier. The just-released commerce 
estimates for next year's construction outlays show plant 
construction figures that seem broadly consistent with these 
stronger expectations as to capital outlays.  

The other major area of spending prospects on which 
attention should be focused this morning is the Federal 
budget for the remainder of fiscal 1966. Spending, partic
ularly military spending, is headed higher, and the only 
question is how much. The Administration's release of a 
global estimate of budget expenditures in the $105-$107 
billion range galvanized analysts everywhere into agonizing 
reappraisals; for expenditures thus far this year seemed to 
be running so far below such a level that the implicit 
step-up in spending for the remainder of the year appeared 
incredible. Our own Government finance analysts dutifully

-20-



12/14/65

(but skeptically) built a $105 billion assumption into the 
table following page III-15 in your "green book,"1/ but 
we stubbornly held to an implicitly lower rate of increase 
in the GNP projections shown on page II-3.  

At the moment, the latter approach seems to run closest 
to what might be called the "maximum likelihood" estimate 
within the Government as to the level of Federal activity 
over the next two quarters. Such estimates currently 
might imply total budget expenditures for fiscal 1966 of 
just under $104 billion, a net cash deficit to be financed 
of $4 billion, and--perhaps most significantly from an 
expansionary point of view--a full employment surplus 
over the next half year of around $1 billion, little 
changed from the second half of calendar 1965 and $2.5 
billion more stimulative than that portrayed only three 
weeks ago in the green book and the chart show.  

Insofar as timing is concerned, higher Social Security 
taxes effective January 1 will introduce a transitory 
degree of fiscal restraint, but before the first quarter 
is over that effect will be more than counterbalanced by 
rising Federal purchases. Moreover, some further enhance
ment of this fiscal stimulus cannot be ruled out, either 
from further escalation in outlays for Viet Nam, or 
failure to realize some hoped-for slowdowns of the Great 
Society programs--all this despite possibly greater 
resort to financial asset sales that could serve to reduce 
the deficit on paper but in fact would only change the 
form of its financing.  

I have dwelled on the possible future shape of the 
Federal budget and business capital outlays this morning 
because of their special significance for the future.  
In our chart show three weeks ago, we concluded, ". .. new 
price pressures could develop if military activities 
increase substantially or investment spending rises much 
faster than is now indicated." The evidence received 
in the ensuing weeks would seem to suggest that, in both 
these crucial categories, projections are now straining 
and very possibly exceeding the tolerances of that earlier 
model. Avoidance of enhanced upward price pressures as 
1966 progresses would seem, from this viewpoint, to depend 
upon either or both of two factors: (1) more success 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared by the Board's staff for the Committee.

-21-



12/14/65 -22

by Administration deficit-cutters than I, for one, now 
expect, and/or (2) a gentle but pervasive moderating 
influence on spending growing out of the higher credit 
costs that have evolved this fall, capped by the reaction 
to the discount rate increase.  

Immediate spending patterns seem to me to be such 
as to give policymakers a little time co appraise the 
interaction of these two moderating influences; but only 
time can tell whether they will prove sufficient to the task.  

In the discussion following his statement, Mr. Holland 

said that the $104 billion figure for Federal budget expenditures 

for fiscal 1966, to which he had referred, was believed to be the 

current "maximum likelihood" estimate by technical experts within 

the Government. The Board's staff concurred in this estimate 

although, of couse, it contained a large element of conjecture.  

Mr. Brill noted that the figure of $105 billion implied an increase 

in the estimate of Federal spending for the second calendar quarter 

of 1966 of nearly $3 billion. In further discussion Mr. Holland 

indicated that the results of the recent Commerce-SEC plant and 

equipment survey would imply upward revisions in the GNP figures 

for the third and fourth quarters of 1965 of about $1 billion, but 

those revisions had not yet been made in the ofiicial figures.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The initial responses in financial markets to the 

discount rate and Regulation Q changes last week have bee 

ably described in the Manager's report to the Committee, 

and I have nothing to add. Further, it would seem prema 
ture to offer any predictions now as to what may ultimately 

be a more permanent equilibrium level for credit flows



12/14/65

and interest rates. Certainly we can't assume that we're 
over the hump of market reactions. Pa-ticipants are still 
exegetically examining our statements, particularly the 
commitment for ". . . the continued provision of additional 
reserves to the banking system in amounts sufficient to 
meet seasonal pressures as well as the credit needs of 
an expanding economy without promoting inflationary 
excesses . .  

The first week's rise in marginal reserves to a small 
net positive figure was apparently accepted for what it 
was--a partly accidental result of attempts to cushion the 
immediate impact of the official rate and ceiling actions.  
The market certainly doesn't expect a string of positive 
numbers for this variable. But what isn't clear to the 
market is how far back into the negative marginal reserves 
may slip or, for that matter, what any given marginal 
reserve measure will mean under the new rules of the game.  

The market is not alone in this confusion, because 
it's not evident to me that we're all in accord on how 
the usual policy variables ought to behave under a policy 
of higher ceiling rates and somewhat increased monetary 
restraint. Since I've nothing to add to the review of 
the recent past, and have little basis for predicting the 
near-term future, I thought it might be helpful to explore 
the general subject ofpolicy guides this morning.  

Let's begin with aggregate flows and, in particular, 
bank credit. I have argued often that bank credit changes 
are imperfect guides to, or targets of, policy under 
regulatory conditions which foster bank competition for 
savings flows. The Board's actions last week make the 
bank credit total more difficult than ever to interpret 
for policy assessment. If banks do take advantage of 
the flexibility under Regulation Q to bid more aggressively 
for corporate and consumer saving, some acceleration in 
bank crecit growth is likely, but this could well be en
tirely consistent with the System's effort to increase 
monetary restraint. A diversion of saving flows from 
other intermediaries into banks is not per se inflationary.  

In fact, depending upon the composition of credit demands 

and on System attitudes toward the provision of reserves, 

it can prove to be quite restrictive. Therefore, if one 

has to look at some credit flow measures as gauges of 

policy, one had better include total credit flows, not 

just the bank component. If we focus on slowing the 

expansion in bank credit, while at the same time encouraging 

banks to become more important credit intermediaries, we'll 

really see interest rates soar.

-23-



12/14/65

I must confess that, while I expect some acceleration 
in time deposit growth, I don't expect a rise on the order 
of that which followed earlier increases in Regulation Q 
ceilings, when banks responded fairly promptly and the 
public responded to the banks. For one thing, corporate 
liquidity is much lower, and business needs for funds to 
finance real investment are growing rapidly. Banks may 
find it rather expensive to add significantly to their 
negotiable CD totals. They may also be reluctant to push 
harder in the competition for consumer saving. Banks have 
been doing very well against their competitors, even under 
existing pass book ceiling rates which weren't raised last 
week. And the devices available to apply the new higher 
ceilings to consumer saving--savings bonds and savings 
certificates--usually carry long-term commitments to pay 
these higher rates, commitments which may cause more 
prudent bankers to reflect a bit before joining in the 
competition. But whether banks do or do not go after a 
larger share of the savings flow--or whether or not they 
are sucessful--is more a matter of supervisory concern 
than a test of the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Credit diverted through, rather than created by, the 
banking system is no cause for inflationary alarm.  

Turning to another of the commonly used policy ar
iables, I wouldn't expect that, in the short run, changes 
in the money supply would be useful in assessing the 
effectiveness of the recent policy moves. Previous 
experience with Regulation Q ceiling changes suggest that 
the initial reaction of savers bears on their holdings of 
demand deposits as well as on market instruments and on 
the obligations of other intermediaries. It would not be 
surprising to experience a sharply lower growth rate in 
money balances after the turn of the year, perhaps per
sisting for two or three months. This development alone 
would not signal to me an exceptional degree of restraint.  
Despite the rise in recent years in income and transactions 
velocity, I would hesitate to assume that the economy has 
already achieved maximum economization of cash balances 

and, therefore, some spurt in velocity would not surprise 
or alarm me. If it showed no sign of abating after two or 
three months, however, I'd get suspicious, but by then, 
market rates of interest would probably have given all 

the indication we'd need of the effectiveness of our 
restraint.  

The uncertainties that attach to interpretations of 
changes in the rate of aggregate bank credit and deposit

-24-



12/14/65 -25

flows also limit the usefulness of aggregate reserve 
targets in the months ahead, even abstracting from the 
effects of Treasury financing and cash management on 
reserve needs. Total reserve needs will be boosted by 
banks' success in capturing "outside" saving flows, but 
moderated to the extent that there is some switching or 
diversion from demand balances to CDs or other time 
accounts. Until we get a clearer picture of the response 
of banks and savers to the new Q ceilings, it will be 
difficult to interpret the changes in aggregate reserves.  

Nor can we assume that the marginal reserve measures 
have the same import now as they did three weeks ago.  
Because the discount rate has been raised relative to 
short-term market rates, we should expect to find bank 
reluctance to obtain reserves through the discount window 
reinforced; increased elbow room in the CD market should 
also reduce the needs for borrowing. At the same time, 
the cost of carrying excess reserves has been raised.  
All in all, therefore, it would seem that a given level 
of net borrowed reserves may carry a more restrictive 
connotation now than before the recent policy action.  

The question is how much more, and the answer is 
we really don't know. In the "blue book"1/ distributed 
Friday, the staff presented a guess that over the next 
several weeks a target of $100 million net borrowed 
reserves--not far from the average of the previous five 
weeks--would likely be associated with some further 
upward adjustment in bill rates, but not much change in 
longer rates. Yesterday, the whole rate structure moved 
up significantly even though projected marginal reserves 
were still net positive, and even though the Desk put in 
a substantial volume of RPs.  

The point is that during periods of peak seasonal 
pressure, and when a new structure of rate relationships 
and new market attitudes are evolving, marginal reserve 
measures are exceptionally difficult to predict. It may 
be that a target of $100 million net borrowed reserves 
will prove too restrictive for Committee aims. Given 
all the uncertainties extant--as to how banks are going 
to respond to both the new Q ceilings and the new 
discount rate, as to whether the higher prime rate will 
tend to force some bank borrowers into the capital 
market, and as to the likely longer-term outlook for 
Treasury financing needs--it would probably be most 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 
by the Board's staff for the Committee.



12/14/65

appropriate at this juncture for the Committee to stipulate 
how large and how rapid an adjustment in money market 
rates it is willing to tolerate, and let the marginal 
reserve measures fall out of this decision.  

Mr. Hersey presented the following statement on the balance 

of payments: 

It occurs to me that it might be useful to stage a 
minor rebellion against the tyranny of the calendar, 
throw away the score card for the calendar year 1965, 
half of which is by now pretty ancient history, and 
take a look this morning at the record and prospects 
of the balance of payments in the July-to-June year.  

The first full statement for the July-to-September 
quarter will be published two weeks from now. You may 
recall my saying six weeks ago that no one knew yet 
whether the direct investment outflow in that 3-month 
period would be nearer a billion dollars, as it had 
averaged in the first half of 1965, or half a billion 
as in most of 1964. We have now been informed that 
the returns are in, and that the figure is encouragingly 
low: only $515 million, after seasonal adjustment.  
(I must ask that this figure be treated as confidential 
until published.) 

The July-to-September deficit on regular trans
actions, seasonally adjusted, was about $650 million.  
Without the U.K. security liquidations it would 
apparently have been around $450 million. Six weeks 
ago it was difficult to explain so large a deficit 
unless the direct investment outflow had been large.  
As it turns out, the mystery of the large deficit has 
an entirely different explanation, which is that U.S.  
imports were a great deal larger than the monthly 
statistics were telling us. What had seemed an 
encouraging leveling off of imports was not really 
happening--at least not yet then.  

The story is a complicated one. It starts with 
an effort to speed up the compilation of accurate 
import statistics from last June onwards. But there 
seem to have been some monumental failures in carrying 
out the new prccedures. Trouble was suspected when 
unexplainably low figures came out fo; coffee imports 
in August and September. The Census Bureau then made

-26-



12/14/65

a special tabulation of all documents processed for 
the October statistics that referred to shipments 
that actually came in at any time before October.  
The upshot now is that the balance of payments 
statistics for the third quarter to be published in 
a fortnight will show imports much larger than the 
monthly Census Bureau figures indicated--larger by 
more than $300 million, or 6 per cent. Compared 
with the third quarter a year ago, the corrected 
figure is up 17 per cent, a very large rise.  

The import figure for October recently published 
by Census shows what looks like an alarming jump over 
the preceding months, but the true October import 
figure, excluding pre-October imports, was probably 
below the true third-quarter level; we will not know 
for sure until another special tabulation is made to 
see how many October imports will have been included 
in the forthcoming statistics for November. Ironically, 
the speed-up effort has only delayed our getting an 
accurate knowledge of the facts.  

Thus far in the fourth quarter the balance of 
payments seems to have remained in deficit, despite 
some improvement. On the "official settlements" 
basis, weekly indicators suggest a repetition in 
November of the October deficit of about $100 million.  
On the "liquidity" basis, the October deficitof about 
$300 million may have been followed by a surplus in 
November--or if not, by a quite small deficit, and the 
weekly figures would then imply that December got off 
to a good start. But these figures are all seasonally 
unadjusted, and experience in past years suggests 
that within the fourth quarter October is usually a 
poor month, November a good one. Moreover, it is 
worth noting that $75 million of the November improve
ment this year was due to a special transaction: an 
Italian prepayment for military equipment. Evidently, 
taking October and November together, regular transactions 
have been more favorable than in the third quarter, but 
it is too soon to speak of surpluses on any but the 
very shortest time scale of a couple of weeks.  

Now, if we look ahead a few months, can anything 
be said as to whether the average level of the deficit 
for December through next June will be appreciably 
lower than it was in July through November?

-27-



12/14/65

I believe we can discern three or four adverse 
factors, and on the other hand at least three favorable 
factors. But I am unable to weigh these against each 
other quantitatively.  

On the unfavorable side, at the year-end the 
seasonally adjusted accounts will be adversely affected 
if the U.K. defers its debt payment. Second, bank 
credit outflows may begin to resume, since the banks 
are well below their aggregate ceiling, and since 
they now know what the program is for 1966. Third, 
we can hardly hope that direct investment outflows 
next year will hold to the relatively Low $2 billion 
annual rate recorded for the July-to-September quarter.  

Despite all efforts of persuasion by the Government, 
capital expenditures by foreign affiliates in 1966 will 
be far above the 1964 level. Their capital expenditures 
in 1964 were accompanied by financing outflows that 
year of $2.4 billion from parent companies in the 
United States, and in the absence of the voluntary 
program the 1966 figure would tend to be much higher 
than that. What a sizable number of companies are now 
doing to comply with the Government's request for 
cooperation is to set up special subsidiaries to 
borrow at long term in Europe, often with the parent 
corporation's guaranty. It may be that several 
hundred million dollars can be raised n this way 
over and above the very considerable amounts that 
would be borrowed for working capital in the usual 
course of events. But the greater the demands made 
in this way on European capital markets, the longer 
the present high interest rates in Europe will stay 
high, and the stronger the forces making for leakage 
of capital from the United States will be For 
example, foreign investors holding U.S. domestic 
bonds may switch to high-rate U.S. bonds newly issued 

in Europe; they may sell the domestic bonds to U.S.  
residents, since the I.E.T. would not apply on these.  

These are some of the adverse factors one can 

foresee. Another is likely to be a rise in military 
expenditures abroad. On the favorable side, we may 
assume that the U.K. Treasury has now stopped 
liquefying its security holdings. Secondly, U.S.  
investment income receipts will undoubtedly continue 
to rise. Thirdly, it seems reasonable to count on 
some increase in the U.S. trade surplus from its

-28-



12/14/65 -29

recent level of $5-1/2 billion a year. It is hardly 
necessary to say to this Committee that the lower 
U.S. prices remain, the better the chances of an 
upward trend in the trade surplus.  

Finally, some encouragement may be drawn from 
the prospect that U.S. interest rates will be higher 
rather than lower. However, as we have already seen 
last week, rates in closely related markets, as in 
Canada or in the Euro-dollar market, are quick to 
change when rates change here. Any net impact of 
Federal Reserve actions on private capital movements 
of various sorts may well depend more on what happens 
to the growth of U.S. bank credit in the aggregate, 
domestic and foreign, and on the basic ease or tightness 
of U.S. financial markets in general, than on interest 
rate changes per se.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, Mr. Hayes, 

who began the go-around, made the following statement: 

The rise in discount rates and the revision of 
Regulation Q ceilings have demonstrated that the 
Federal Reserve can still act when the situation 
warrants action, and should have a salutary effect in 
removing some of the uncertainties which have hung 
over financial markets in recent months. I have no 
doubt that these measures will prove valuable both in 
extending the duration of the present business upswing 
and in bolstering the international position of the 
dollar. Today I think we must explore the extent to 
which open market policy should be used to back up 
recent official rate action. In an economy as 
buoyant as this one, the influence of higher interest 
rates alone could turn out to be entirely inadequate, 
if availability considerations were neglected.  

The domestic economy is, I think, stronger both 
currently and prospectively than when we net last.  
First, the apparent strong rise in industrial 
production in November should remove any lurking 
worries concerning the short-term adverse effect of 
steel inventory liquidation on the economy. Second, 
the sharp upgrading in both actual and planned capital



12/14/65

spending leads me to feel that next year this sector 
of the economy may turn out to be even stronger than 
in 1965; nor do I believe that the interest rate 
advances that have already occurred will in themselves 
significantly change the implications of the most 
recent capital spending survey. Third, it seems to 
me that developments in Vietnam, and the guesses 
concerning the budget estimates publicized since 
our last meeting, have added to the already buoyant 
psychology of the business community. Residential 
construction is the one questionable area. But 
consumer spending generally continues to look as 
strong, or stronger, than earlier. All of this 
adds up to a prospective rise in total output that 
is likely to equal, and may even exceed, the advance 
of the past year.  

Such an outlook--in the context of both the rapid 
rise in resource utilization and the current high level 
of resource use--suggests that further pressures on 
prices are likely and might well lead to price 
increases exceeding those of the past year.  

So far at least, unit labor costs in manufacturing 
have been relatively stable. But the outlook suggests 
that a continuation of such stability is now very 
questionable. It is hard to see how productivity can, 
at best, do more than maintain its recent rate of 
growth. Yet it seems clear that wage increases have 
been larger so far this year than earlier. Add to 
this the upward push that will be exerted by the 
increase in social security taxes, and the prospects 
for continued cost stability seem doubtful--especially 
in an environment where unemployment is declining and 
the over-all unemployment rate is approaching 4 per 
cent.  

Any threat to reasonable price stability also 
has serious implications for our balance of payments 
deficit. For the past, as against the future, the 
latest balance of payments figures appear to show a 

sizable surplus in November. The liquidity deficit for 

the fourth quarter may turn out to be at an annual 
rate of about $1.1 billion, down from $1.9 billion in 
the third quarter. However, this apparent improvement 

is more than accounted for by the deferral of payment 
dates into 1966 on a substantial volume of new 
Canadian bond issues and by the issue of a $75 million

-30-



12/14/65

nonmarketable, nonconvertible bond to Italy. For 
the year as a whole, this would imply a deficit on 
the old regular transactions basis of $1.6 billion, 
or a liquidity deficit of about $1.2 billion--with 
each figure $0.5 billion less if the influence of the 
liquidations of official British long-term portfolio 
holdings is removed. This is progress as compared 
with 1964, but it reflects primarily the short-term 
effectiveness of the restraint program, and could 
easily be wiped out if the prospects for a rising 
export surplus were erased by acceleraced price 
increases in this country.  

It is in the context of a very strong domestic 
economy and a continuing need to achieve balance in 
our payments position that I turn to the policy 
questions before us.  

In analyzing the question of where we go from 
here, I think it is useful to draw a distinction 
between underlying policy objectives and the temporary 
posture that may be necessary in the weeks immediately 
ahead.  

Let me start by considering the question of 
underlying policy objectives. (Parenthetically, I 
should note that we are presumably all against sin: 
that is, in favor of a growing economy that will 
absorb a growing labor force into active employment, 
without price increases that would make such progress 
unsustainable. Rather, when I speak of underlying 
policy objectives, I am referring to what are some
times called "intermediate" objectives.) It seems 
to me that we have at least three choices before us.  
First, we might continue a policy of providing 
sufficient reserves to support a continued growth 
in credit at the same rapid pace as in the recent 
past. Second, we might adopt a policy that would 
attempt to moderate whatever demands for credit do 
develop, which would in effect leave open the 
question as to what change in pace, if any, as 
compared with the recent past was being sought.  
Finally, we could deliberately attempt to reduce the 
rate of growth of credit from what it has been in 
the recent past.  

As to the first of these possible policies, it 
seems to me that, once the inflationary potential

-31-



12/14/65

in the economic outlook is recognized, it is necessary 
to back up recent rate adjustments with a more positive 
open market policy. If we continue to permit credit 
to grow at the rapid rate so far chalked up this year, 
we would be doing less than is necessary. We could 
also be subject to the criticism that the System has 
acted only to raise interest rates and has done nothing 
to affect the availability of credit.  

The second possible policy, that of merely moderating 
the pace of credit advances from what would otherwise 
have been the case, runs up against the difficulty that 
the objective is unclear. We would in fact never find 
out whether anything at all had been done to back up 
the rate changes already made. On the one hand, the 
rise in interest rates that has already occurred might 
be expected to reduce somewhat the demands for credit.  
On the other hand, the apparent growing strength in 
the economy could more than offset this effect. Merely 
moderating the demands that might otherwise occur could 
actually result in a stepped-up rate of growth of credit.  

As you can see, I am in favor of third alternative 
policy objective--that which would deliberately attempt 
to reduce the rate of growth of credit from the rapid 
pace of the past year. For several years I have been 
critical of a rate of growth of bank credit that was 
running around 8 per cent. This year, however, the 
pace has mounted to almost 10 per cent. I would not 
want to set any precise figure on the magnitude of 
growth that is warranted and sustainable in the present 
economic situation. But I would argue strongly that 
recent growth rates have been excessive, particularly 
in the context of cumulatively large increases in 
previous years. Parenthetically, I might add that in 
making these comments I have fully taken into account 
data with respect to total credit flows.  

If the forthcoming weeks had no special and unusual 
characteristics, an underlying objective of reducing the 
rate of growth of credit could be implemented in a 
straightforward manner by putting the banking system 
under somewhat greater pressure. This might mean a 
movement in net borrowed reserves to over $200 million 
as a definite signal that open market policy was not 
out of step with discount rate policy My only caveat 
would be that such a move should be undertaken in a 
cautious and flexible fashion. It would be undesirable,

-32-



12/14/65

for example, to see the Treasury bill rate move so close 
to the 4-1/2 per cent discount rate as to set off 
speculation as to a further hike in the discount rate.  

In fact, however, the forthcoming weeks will see 
a convergence of a number of factors that may make it 
difficult to achieve the underlying objective that I 
favor. In particular, it is still uncertain to what 
extent financial markets have fully adjusted to discount 
rate changes and the revision of Regulation Q ceilings.  
There is still considerable uncertainty as to what may 
happen in the CD area, where there is a risk that 
competitive pressures may push up CD rates to an 
inordinate degree and, as a consequence, exert undue 
upward pressures on other rates. Moreover, there are 
the usual end-of-the-year money market pressures and 
uncertainties to contend with; and, in addition, a 
forthcoming Treasury financing which will reintroduce 
even keel considerations.  

In view of these factors, it seems to me important 
that the Account Manager have more than usual latitude 
over the next few weeks. In particular, net borrowed 
reserve figures will be difficult to interpret, but I 
would hope that we would not show positive free reserves.  
I believe that our chief focus should be on money market 
tone ard short-term rates. A three-month bill rate 
ranging between 4.30 per cent and 4.45 per cent, combined 
with a firm money market tone, would seem to be about 
right. If, in this context, it is possible to move net 
borrowed reserves to over $200 million, I would consider 
it highly desirable as a means of achieving the under
lying objective that I favor. The suggested directive 
is acceptable.  

Mr. Shuford reported that in the Eighth District economic 

activity had continued to expand at a rapid pace since early summer.  

During the past five months, payroll employment in the District had 

risen at a 4 per cent annual rate, slightly faster than for the 

nation as a whole. District manufacturing activity had been very 

strong in the last half of the year. Since June, employment by

-33-



12/14/65 -34

manufacturing firms had risen at a 5.4 per cent rate, markedly 

higher than in the first half. Manufacturing output in the 

District's metropolitan areas had increased 6 per cent over the 

past twelve months, the same as for the nation. Unemployment 

as a per cent of the labor force had decreased significantly 

since the end of last year in all of the District's States and 

in mo;t of its major labor markets.  

Business loans at District banks had continued to rise 

at a rapid rate, Mr. Shuford said. Deposit growth had been strong, 

with virtually all of the growth centering in time deposits.  

While only a few days had passed since the discount rate 

and Regulation Q maximums were raised, Mr. Shuford continued, it 

was evident that the economy had taken those developments in 

stride. Sentiment appeared optimistic, the stock market had 

remained strong, and money market movements had been reasonable.  

Interest rates had risen, but when viewed within the context of 

the past five months the rise was not unusual in lignt of both 

seasonal and cyclical pressures.  

New data since the Committee's last meeting indicated 

continuing growth in economic activity, with some stengthening, 

Mr. Shuford remarked. Total civilian employment rose at a 5.6 

per cent annual rate from September to November, twice as fast 

as over the past twelve months. Weekly data for November indicated



12/14/65 -35

that industrial production was continuing to expand. Retail sales 

also appeared to have been strong in November. Labor resources 

had come under added pressure since September. The unemployment 

rate was below the level recorded at the peak of the previous 

business expansion and was near the level reached in the 1957 

expansion. Further price rises had accompanied the expansion 

in business activity since the Committee's last meeting, as weekly 

wholesale industrial prices had continued to advance.  

With respect to policy, Mr. Shuford said, money market 

conditions had firmed over the last week but not more than might 

have been expected. On the other hand, for the next four weeks 

he would not like to see any additional firming, especially in 

view of the prospective Treasury financing. That would call for 

maintaining essentially the same conditions in the money market 

as had come to prevail during the last several days but moderating 

any further upward adjustments for the time being.  

Mr. Shuford felt the Desk had to have considerable 

latitude during the coming period. He was glad that Mr. Brill's 

remarks and Mr. Mitchell's questions had pointed up the difficulty 

in trying to establish guidelines under present circumstances. He 

had never been satisfied with attempts to quantify the Committee's 

directive and the problems of doing so would be particularly 

great at present. For purposes of general guidance, however, he



12/14/65 -36

was inclined to agree with Mr. Brill that in the main the 

Committee should think in terms of rates rather than free 

reserves or other measures. He also concurred with the 

suggestions by the staff and Mr. Hayes of a 4.30-4.45 per cent 

range for the 90-day bill rate. He would not like to see the 

bill rate go over 4.45 per cent, and he certainly would not 

want it to go above the discount rate. He would hope and 

expect that the Federal funds rate would be around the discount 

rate and, to the extent possible, he would like to see it under 

the discount rate--although he was aware that in one or two 

instances it had already moved above that rate. He was not 

sure what such objectives would imply for marginal reserves 

but he did not believe that the latter could be relied on for 

target purposes during the next few weeks.  

Mr. Patterson reported that in the Sixth District, as 

he was sure had been the case in other Districts, the changes 

in the discount rate and Regulation Q had generated a tremendous 

amount of interest and comment. Many persons outside the financial 

community seemed to be bewildered, possibly because of the news

paper stories that came out prior to the official Board release.  

The question he most often got from laymen was, "What effect 

will the Federal Reserve 'order' raising interest rates have on 

the cost of buying an ice box or TV set?"



12/14/65 -37

Among the more informed, Mr. Patterson commented, there 

had been a mixed reaction to the Federal Reserve's action.  

Most of the large banks had endorsed the move, and an informal 

survey of a group of about 25 officers of the largest business 

firms in Alabama, made by the Chairman of the Board of the 

Birmingham Branch, indicated that all of them also approved 

the move and many thought it long overdue. Last Wednesday the 

large city banks in Atlanta announced an increase in their prime 

rate, and the large banks in the District's other cities had 

made similar moves. Although one of the larger banks in 

Atlanta had announced a slight upward adjustment in its CD rate, 

he did not as yet have information about what the banks in general 

expected to do. Some officers of the smaller banks, however, 

feared that, as the result of the increase in the Regulation Q 

ceiling, it might become more difficult for them to retain their 

time deposits without raising the rates paid, a step they were 

reluctant to take. As to contemplating changes, the smaller 

banks and the savings and loan associations apparently were 

postponing any action until they saw what happened.  

It was even more difficult to determine whether or not 

the general economic conditions had been or would be affected, 

Mr. Patterson said. Certainly, the most recent statistics for 

the District indicated an expansion strong enough to weather a



12/14/65 -38

slightly higher cost of credit. In practically every category, 

the record for the District during 1965 would be better than 

that of the nation generally.  

Until the dust had settled, Mr. Patterson continued, the 

Committee could not tell very well to what extent the new interest 

rate structure reflected expectational factors. The problem of 

judgment would be compounded as the economy entered the period 

when pressures on bank reserves were reduced because of seasonal 

factors. Meanwhile, the Committee might be hemmed in by having 

to maintain an even keel because of Treasury financing.  

Under those conditions, it seemed best to Mr. Patterson 

to allow the Desk to be guided chiefly by the behavior of rates 

even if, because of expectational and other forces, the Committee 

ended up with a somewhat lower net borrowed reserve position 

than prevailed prior to the discount rate increase. He would not 

like to see the rate structure move upward but neither did he 

think the Committee should attempt to offset all tendencies 

toward softening that might develop because of seasonal influences.  

By the next meeting the Committee might be able to determine more 

precisely the level of reserves needed to support the appropriate 

rate of credit expansion. The staff draft directive was satisfac

tory to Mr. Patterson.



12/14/65 -39

Mr. Bopp remarked that now that the discount rate action 

had been taken, additional reserves should be supplied to the 

banking system, as the Board phrased it in its December 5 press 

release, "in amounts sufficient to meet seasonal pressures as 

well as the credit needs of an expanding economy. . . ." Looking 

further ahead, the rate at which money and bank credit would be 

allowed to grow should depend on the degree to which the economy 

became subject to the stresses and strains accompanying near 

full-employment levels of activity. One measure of those would 

be the extent of pressure in the labor market. As noted in the 

green book, prospective increases in real GNP early in 1966 and 

expansion in the armed forces rendered further tightening in the 

labor market very likely, despite gains from the anti-poverty 

program.  

During the past week, Mr. Bopp continued, the Philadelphia 

Bank had looked into the data to get a better feel of pressures 

in the labor market and had discussed the situation with personnel 

departments of several large industrial and governmental units 

in the Third District and with some of the larger employment 

agencies. From the data, he got the impression that some 

cushion existed over-all, but that pressures were considerable 

in certain skills and areas, especially durable manufacturing.  

On an over-all basis he found that, compared with the similar



12/14/65 -40

phase of most other postwar business upturns, the labor force 

presently was expanding at a relatively rapid rate, which should 

help offset pressures to some extent. In addition, participation 

rates were lower than in other postwar expansions, suggesting 

that there was more leeway for a further rise in the labor 

force. Finally, the over-all unemployment rate and that in most 

subgroupings by age, sex, and so on, now provided a greater cushion 

than in the Korean War period and about the same leeway as in the 

similar phase of the 1953-1957 business upswing.  

Focusing on the manufacturing sector, Mr. Bopp remarked, 

pressures or the labor force became more evident. The average 

workweek in manufacturing had now exceeded the highs of 1953-1957 

and 1958-1960 and was near the highest level of the Korean War 

period. Overtime in manufacturing was much higher than in 1956-1957 

or 1958-1960 (there were no data for the Korean War period) with 

pressure particularly severe in durable goods manufacturing.  

The Reserve Bank's survey of the third District labor 

market bore out what was found in the national data, Mr. Bopp said.  

In durable manufacturing industries, most firms were feeling 

definite shortages of skilled machinists and technical and 

professional help. Several firms in Philadelphia and Wilmington 

had had to send out recruiting teams or advertise elsewhere for 

engineers, machinists, and technicians. Nondurable and non

manufacturing industries were split about half and half between



12/14/65 -41

those reporting conditions no tighter than usual for this time 

of the year and those saying that definite shortages existed in 

most occupat ons.  

Labor pressures in the manufacturing sector had particular 

implications for the behavior of unit labor costs, Mr. Bopp 

observed. Not only was there likely to be some upward pressure 

on wage rates next year, but the kinds of pressures now being 

felt--reaching near the bottom of the skilled labor barrel for 

generally less efficient workers and extending overtime hours 

and the workweek--had an important bearing on efficiency, tending 

to raise unit labor costs. Meanwhile, if public policy was 

successful in holding down prices, any rise in unit labor costs 

would tend to eat into profits. Past behavior would suggest in 

turn, that when unit labor costs rose faster than prices, the 

economy was entering a cyclical danger period.  

What all that added up to was pressure building in specific 

areas, Mr. Bopp said, particularly durable goods manufacturing, 

but some cushion in the over-all labor market.  

As to monetary policy, Mr. Bopp thought the draft 

directive was appropriate.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that a basic justification for the 

recent discount rate action was to prevent excessive additions to 

the money supply and to moderate demands for bank credit, thus



12/14/65 -42

reducing the risk of inflation. On the basis of information now 

available, continuation of the recent rate of increase in bank 

credit would not appear to be consistent with that aim, assuming 

that the response of savings flows to the change in Regulation Q 

was not great. Following that line of reasoning, the Committee 

should supply less, not more, reserve availability. Looking 

ahead a bit, it should validate the discount rate change by 

forcing the banks to the discount window, thus making the new 

rate effective.  

Since a Treasury financing was imminent, and since the 

markets were in the midst of the heavy tax and dividend period, 

even-keel considerations seemed to Mr. Hickman to be dominant at 

the moment. There was, of course, some problem of defining just 

what "even keel" meant in view of the recent gyrations of the 

reserve figures. He suggested net borrowed reserves of about 

$100 million as a rough target during the period of Treasury 

financing, shifting to a somewhat deeper level--say, $200 to 

$250 millior--when the financial markets settled down after the 

turn of the year. To avoid misleading the market he would try 

to avoid, if at all possible, positive free reserve figures 

during the next few weeks.  

Mr. Maisel said that the concluding statement of the 

draft directive, calling for operations with a view to "moderating



12/14/65 -43

further adjustments of money and credit market conditions in a 

period of widely fluctuating seasonal pressures," seemed proper 

to him. He felt that as a result of the statements in the Board's 

press release at the time of the discount rate change it was 

evident to the market that an objective of letting things settle 

down would dominate the Committee's thoughts. As a result the 

level of the marginal reserve figures was comparatively unimportant.  

Between now and the next meeting the question of market conditions 

should be dominant; at the next meeting the Committee would have 

a better picture of the nature of underlying supply and demand 

forces and would be able to work out its longer run objectives.  

He favored adoption of the directive as drafted by the staff.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that having been in the minority 

position on the discount rate question, he found it difficult 

to adjust his thinking to the present situation. He would say, 

however, that he thought there was a tendency to underestimate the 

amount of restraint that had come about in the past several months, 

not only in terms of interest rates but also in terms of credit 

availability. Also, the weekly money supply figures had shown 

little growth in the past two months, which meant that something 

had happened; he was more inclined to agree with Mr. Shuford's 

general position on that subject than with that of Mr. Brill.  

Total bank credit had expanded at a 12 per :ent annual rate



12/14/65 -44

in the first quarter, but at only a 5 per cent rate in the third 

quarter. The growth rate so far in the fourth quarter was above 

the third, but as far as loan demand in October and November was 

concerned, to quote from Mr. Eckert's remarks at the Board briefing 

last Friday, "Excluding security loans, total loans increased only 

a little over half the average monthly rate for the first three 

quarters. Recent slackening from earlier growth rates occurred 

in business, real estate, and nonbank financial loans. Business 

loans rose somewhat more in November ;han the small October 

advance. But for the two months combined, the annual rate of 

growth was about 11 per cent, a little less than the much reduced 

third quarter rate." 

The figures indicated that there had been evidence of 

restraint in the money supply, interest rates, and credit 

availability, Mr. Mitchell said, and now there also had been a 

direct signal in the form of the discount rate increase. In 

his judgment that was enough for the time being. He knew the 

Desk would face difficulties in getting through the rest of 

December. As to the directive, he found that he could not 

improve on the staff's draft and would accept it.  

Mr. Shuford commented that he agreed the money supply 

had shown little change in the recent period. That probably 

was a short-run development, and he would hope the money supply



12/14/65 -45

would soon begin to rise again, preferably at an annual rate 

in the 2-4 per cent range.  

Mr. Shepardson said he did not think it was necessary 

to make extensive comments on the economic situation; apparently 

all of the indicators pointed to continued rising activity. At 

this season of the year the situation in financial markets usually 

was a difficult one, and this year the problems were compounded 

by the recent discount rate action. For that reason it would 

seem :o him that the proposed directive, as he understood it, 

would be appropriate for the coming period. He hoped that in 

implementing the directive there would be no attempt to roll 

back the rate changes that had deve'oped. The general guides 

that had been suggested appeared appropriate to him, and he 

shared the hope that free reserve figures would not result.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

With all the events that have been jammed into the 
three weeks since this Committee last met, I expect it 
will be some time before we can see either the recent 
developments or their future implications in clear and 
dispassionate perspective.  

I think it is a good idea at this juncture to 
distinguish between what actually has happened and 
what is projected. The latest statistics on what 
has happened (mostly in November) are gratifying. They 
show a further small reduction in unemployment, a 
vigorous increase in production, a price performance 
still confined to small and selective advances, and a 
balance of payments position that is appreciably 
improved, even if part of that improvement may prove 
temporary. No pressing call for a tighter policy 
emerges from these facts concerning developments to 
date.



12/14/65

Future prospects, however, must now be regarded 
as stronger, in view of the latest surveys of business 
capital expenditures and the announcements as to the 
future rates of Government spending. Were they to be 
taken at face value, these spending rates could seem 
high enough so that they might be expected to begin 
generating some real inflationary pressures in the 
country. But there are two big uncertainties as to 
these prospects. First, the Federal Government is 
now trying to hold spending well below the tentative 
estimates for 1966 first released. Second, the 
climate of significantly higher costs of credit 
resulting from the discount rate increase may very 
well serve to dampen some of the more optimistic 
spending intentions.  

As these uncertainties begin to be resolved, 
we should be able to decide with some greater degree 
of assurance whether the next turn of open market 
policy should be toward further tightness or toward 
some relaxation of pressures. In the meantime, a 
policy of maintaining relatively steady money market 
conditions seems to me to be in order.  

A steady course for policy is also desirable 
for two technical reasons--the onset of peak seasonal 
pressures in the money market and the schedule of 
Treasury financing activity between now and the next 
meetin, of this Committee. Recognizing that some 
churning in the markets is probably inevitable over 
this period, I would be satisfied if the Manager 
could maintain money market rates within the ranges 
mentioned in the blue book (4.30-4.45 per cent three
month bill rate, Federal funds around 4-1/2 per cent).  
I assume this may necessitate a somewhat lower level 
of member bank borrowing, and if the result is a few 
fairly small net borrowed reserve figures--or even 
small net free reserves for some individual weeks- I 
would not object. I would vote in favor of the draft 
directive distributed by the staff.  

Mr. Wayne reported that the orderly advance of Fifth District 

business continued. In manufacturing generally, backlogs remained 

heavy and the volume of new orders was still rising. The textile 

industry had been operating close to capacity all year in an

-46-



12/14/65 -47

effort to keep pace with expanding demand, and now new defense 

orders were putting even more pressure on production facilities.  

Reports from all around the area indicated that the already tight 

labor markets were becoming tighter and that wages had risen in 

a number of industries. In the agricultural sector, less over-all 

strength was evident, although livestock was experiencing strong 

demand and rising prices.  

In the national economy, Mr. Wayne said, there was not 

much news except more of the same as business activity moved 

ahead with sustained momentum. New and revised data which had 

become available in recent weeks showed a continuing buildup of 

inflationary pressures as reflected in higher consumer and 

wholesale prices, increasing labor shortages, higher wage rates 

and hourly earnings, a faster growth in personal income, 

accelerated capital spending, sharp increases in new and unfilled 

orders for durable goods, and a considerable increase in the 

deficit in the cash budget. The expected extension of the 

budget deficit into the early part of next year despite a sharp 

increase in payroll taxes meant that it would not be possible 

to use fiscal policy to counter inflationary pressures.  

The System had now made a decisive and perhaps historic 

move, Mr. Wayne said, and there should be no turning back at 

this point. The question now was how to implement the new policy



12/14/65 -48

and what pattern of money market rates would be consistent with 

the new level of the discount rate. The Committee was committed 

to supply sufficient reserves to meet seasonal pressures and the 

needs of an expanding economy. The generous supply of reserves 

made available in the past week was probably necessary and 

desirable in facilitating the transition to the new level of 

rates. But the peak of seasonal pressures would pass within 

the next two weeks and immediately thereafter open market policy 

should change to validate the change in the discount rate.  

Otherwise, the move which had been made would be nullified. As 

yet very little was known about the relationship that would 

prevail between the level of free or net borrowed reserves and 

money market rates under the higher discount rate. In those 

circumstances, Mr. Wayne suggested that for the period ahead the 

Committee place primary emphasis on the bill rate and attempt 

to hold it within a range of 4.25 to 4.40 per cent. In view of 

the great uncertainty which prevailed and the large seasonal 

movements which would occur, the Manager should have som what 

more discretion than usual. The draft directive was acceptable 

to him.  

Mr. Clay commented that both the current and the prospective 

performance of the domestic economy were strongly expansionary.  

With the national economy functioning at high levels and at



12/14/65 -49

substantially reduced margins of unutilizd resources, it 

became increasingly evident that Federal Government expenditures, 

notably defense outlays, were the key to the forthcoming pattern 

of economic events. Those Federal outlays carried not only a 

direct impact upon economic activity but also indirectly 

influenced private demand sectors such as the stepped-up rate 

of business capital investment. Thus, that growth in aggregate 

demand relative to the expansion in the resource base also was 

the key to future price developments and would determine whether 

the recent pattern of selective price increases became more 

general. Despite budget data recently released it appeared, 

however, that there was not a clear picture yet of the magnitude 

and time pattern of those expenditures.  

The monetary policy decision to be made today, Mr. Clay 

said, was one of planning the accommodation of open market 

operations to the actions already taken in raising the discount 

rate and modifying Regulation Q. The initial adjustment of the 

money and capital markets had taken place in an environment of 

substantial cushioning action through open market operations.  

There was no way of knowing how much additional adjustment 

would take place in the weeks ahead. There were so many 

uncertainties in the financial picture over the next several 

weeks that it was difficult to foresee the various financial



12/14/65 -50

relationships that would develop an to determine System policy 

targets. It would appear appropriate to provide sufficient 

reserves to meet the credit needs for orderly economic growth, 

to stand ready to avoid any credit stringencies that might 

develop, such as in connection with the runoff of CD's, and to 

temper further adjustments in the money and credit markets. The 

draft economic policy directive appeared satisfactory to him.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that conditions in the Seventh 

Federal Reserve District remained excellent with indications 

that both consumers and businessmen were very optimistic. Labor 

markets were exceptionally tight--in part, of course, because of 

the seasonal demand for labor. One automobile manufacturer had 

recently announced a cutback in production to balance dealer 

inventories. But that development had been expected and did 

not appear to indicate any weakening of over-all demand for 

automobiles.  

Recent conditions in the money and capital markets had 

been dominated by the increase in discount rates, Mr. Scanlon 

commented. The rate increase unleashed a host of expectational 

and other forces and the immediate impact might prove to be an 

over-adjustment. Because of the uncertain relation between money 

market conditions and aggregate supply measures at the present 

time, and the evidence of the slowing in growth of total reserves



12/14/65 -51

and money in the past few months, care .hould be exercised to 

assure that total reserves did not fail to increase at least 

seasonally.  

It seemed to Mr. Scanlon that it was imperative that 

the Committee follow a policy that would reinforce the language 

in the release made by the Board at the time of the announcement 

of the discount rate change. He believed a 4.25-4.40 per cent 

range for short-term bill rates ws consistent with that policy.  

If the draft directive accomplished that, he favored it. Like 

others, he believed the Manager should have ample latitude to 

moderate any market adjustments during the coming period.  

Mr. Galusha reported that all indications were that the 

Ninth District had continued to enjoy a remarkable prosperity 

in recent weeks, and the outlook for coming months was bright.  

There were signs of some slow-down in the pace of economic 

advance. Thus, retail sales increased at a lower rate in the 

third quarter than over the first half of the year; and District 

measures of real output for October, while still well above 

year-ago levels, suggested a slight decline from those for the 

third quarter. Despite this objective evidence, business 

sentiment by all accounts remained bullish. The optimism might 

be due in part to the outlook for agriculture, which was quite 

rosy, and to the visible impact the Vietnam escalation was having



12/14/65 -52

on the District economy. Certain depressed areas in the 

District were now getting military contracts and only a few 

days ago plans were announced for re-opening a Twin Cities 

area arsenal and putting on 1,000 employees.  

Mr. Galusha said that District bank credit growth 

was considerable in November, far greater than seasonal. Non

weekly reporting banks showed the usual increase, but weekly 

reporting banks showed a much larger than seasonal gain--which 

could be traced to an increase in business loans beyond anything 

past Novembers would have led one to expect. The reason for 

that large increase in business loans was not altogether clear.  

The heads of the largest District banks were reporting-

on the basis of their own experience and conversations with 

colleagues in other areas--that CD money was getting hard to 

come by, Mr. Galusha continued. Evidently corporations, and 

particularly those with ambitious investment programs under 

way, were finding less and less cash to lend out. Rates were 

generally 4.5 per cent for 30 days, 4.6 per cent for 60 days, 

and 4.7 per cent plus for 90 days. One major savings and loan 

association had moved to 4-1/2 per cent on passbook savings.  

Mr. Galusha remarked that he had nothing to add to what 

had already been said on the issue of monetary policy. He did 

not understand the draft directive. Perhaps the best the Committee



12/14/65 -53

could do today would be to give the Desk a vote of confidence 

and let it go at that until there had been a re-establishment 

of a pattern of relationship among customary target variables.  

He thought the Committee was faced with the necessity of framing 

an objective in qualitative terms of tone, color, and feel.  

Mr. Galusha added that he would like to compliment the 

authors of the green book again; he had found the explicit 

discussion of likely future developments most helpful. He 

hoped that the Board's staff could now be coaxed into sticking 

its collective neck out not one but two quarters into the 

future.  

Mr. Swan said he had no significant changes in recent 

business trends in the Twelfth District to report. Loan demand 

at banks continued strong and bank credit expanded sharply in 

the Last three weeks of November. However, banks had not been 

substantial borrowers from the Reserve Bank, even during the 

four days when the San Francisco discount rate was lower than 

in some other Districts. Last Thursday, however, some major 

banks with which he had checked indicated that in the current 

week they expected to be quite heavy borrowers in the Federal 

funds market, and he understood that that had developed.  

As to responses to the change in Regulation Q, Mr. Swan 

continued, major banks in the San Francisco and Los Angeles



12/14/65 -54

areas had indicated that they were planning some upward 

adjustment in CD rates. They all emphasized that the new 

rates--which were 4-1/4 per cent for 30 day money, 4-1/2 per 

cent for 90 day money, and 4-5/8 per cent for deposits of 

6 months, or more--were still tentative; they had not been 

announced publicly, and were subject to modification. In 

the other three reserve cities of the District--Seattle, 

Portland, and Salt Lake--none of the banks reported plans to 

raise rates but they had not made final decisions on the 

subject.  

The savings and loan associations had, of course, 

expressed concern about the effects of the Regulation Q change 

on their situation, Mr. Swan said. However, the District's 

major banks had not been pushing savings certificates for 

individuals and it seemed to him unlikely that they would 

change their attitude in that regard. Mr. Brill's point that 

commercial banks generally were doing well this year ii 

attracting ordinary savings deposits certainly applied in the 

Twelfth District. Despite the rather wide margin between 

their rates and those of around 4.85 per cent paid by savings 

and loan associations, savings accounts at weekly reporting 

banks increased 8 per cent in the first ten months of 1965, as 

compared with a 6.4 per cent rise at savings and loan associations.



12/14/65 -55

In the same period in 1964 the rise was 4-1/2 per cent at banks 

and 13-1/2 per cent at savings and loan associations.  

In terms of policy, Mr. Swan agreed generally with the 

comments that had already been made. He was not inclined to 

argue with what had been said regarding the relationships that 

were likely to prevail, but he would come back to what he thought 

was the Manager's original point, that adjustments in market 

conditions should be moderated so that they did not feed on 

themselves. He favored a bill rate in the 4.25-4.40 per cent 

range, with possible swings in the net reserve figures. He felt, 

however, that the first and second paragraphs of the directive 

were somewhat inconsistent. In his judgment the directive could 

be made a little more straightforward by deleting the word "current" 

in the last sentence of the first paragraph, and by replacing the 

second paragraph with language along the following lines: 

However, taking into account the forthcoming Treasury 
financing activity and widely fluctuating seasonal pressures 
at this time of the year in addition to the recent increase 
in Reserve Bank discount rates, System open market operations 
shall be directed to moderating any further adjustments in 
money and credit markets that may develop.  

In response to Mr. Robertson's question as to whether the 

import of Mr. Swan's suggestion was any different from that of the 

staff's draft, Mr. Swan said he thought the two came out at the same 

point but that the language he proposed was somewhat clearer; it made 

more evident the nature of the problem in the period immediately



12/14/65 -56

ahead. The Committee's underlying policy was to "complement other 

recent measures," as the first paragraph said, but the instruction 

given in the second paragraph to "moderate further adjustments" 

was not intended to implement that underlying policy. Rather, it 

was related to the forthcoming Treasury financing, year-end seasonal 

pressures, and the fact that the discount rate had just been changed.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that if yesterday's market deterioration 

had not occurred one would have assumed that it was developments of 

that type that were to be "moderated." He asked Mr. Holmes whether 

he would interpret yesterday's events as "further adjustments" to 

be moderated, or whether he would start with the situation as of 

the close cf business yesterday.  

Mr. Holmes said that he assumed the Committee would intend 

the latter interpretation, and Mr. Swan commented that he had 

proposed the words, "any further adjustments . . . that may develop" 

to clarify that point.  

Chairman Martin commented that perhaps Mr. Swan's proposal 

involved some grammatical improvemcnt over the staff's draft, but 

to his mind it did not differ in substance.  

The go-around then resumed with remarks by Mr. Irons.  

Mr. Irons reported that business activity in the Eleventh 

District was very strong and seemed to be gaining in strength. There 

was a marked undertone of confidence, and there were references at



12/14/65 -57

times to elements of speculative activity in the picture. The 

outlook w.s viewed bullishly, especially with the Vietnam war 

and the likelihood of further increases in Government spending.  

Practically all of the District's major indexes were showing 

increases and the probability Of further increases. Employment 

had grown further; the District was almost in a state of full 

employment, with the unemployment rate a little over 3 per cent 

in the District as a whole and at 2-1/2 per cent in some of the 

larger cities. Auto sales, and retail trade generally, were 

strong, and retailers were expecting heavy seasonal buying.  

Despite some concern earlier, it looked as though agricultural 

conditions this year, with respect to both volume and prices, 

would be the most favorable in some time. Also, the crude oil 

outlook was good.  

Mr. Irons remarked that the System's recent actions on 

the discount rate and Regulation Q appeared to have been well taken 

in the District. The comments he had received generally reflected 

favorable reactions except, perhaps, on the part of savings and 

loan associations. He hoped that banks would not let competitive 

considerations cause them to increase rates on CD's and other time 

deposits unduly. There were no reports so far of such developments 

in the Eleventh District, although two small country banks were 

raising the question of the need to raise their rates on grounds of 

competition.



12/14/65

Bank credit had increased further, Mr. Irons continued, 

and District banks were fairly fully loaned up. Demand deposits 

had risen quite sharply. On the other hand, there had been some 

slipping off of time deposits and CD's. Larger banks in the District 

were net buyers of Federal funds, averaging about $200 million.  

There had been little borrowing from the Reserve Bank.  

It was not necessary to comment in detail on the pattern 

of national developments, Mr. Irons said He noted that the 

Commerce-SEC survey of capital spending and other recent data had 

led to higher estimates of activity in the period ahead.  

Mr. Irons remarked that he recognized the framework within 

which policy would have to be carried out in the coming month.  

The adjustments so far to the recent rate actions had been satis

factory, but further adjustments probably lay ahead. With strong 

seasonal demands and with the need to provide for normal growth, 

and with the Treasury also in the picture, market conditions would 

be uncertain and difficult to deal with. In general, he would like 

to have the discount rate viewed as a ceiling for the bill rate and 

the Federal funds rate for the time being. It might be necessary 

later to take steps to validate the new discount rate, but he would 

not favor them in the next month. He would be satisfied to see the 

Federal funds rate around 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 per cent, and the Treasury 

bill rate ranging from a low of 4.25-4.30 per cent to a high of 

4.45 per cent.

-58-



12/14/65 -59

Certainly, Mr. Irons said, the Manager had to be given 

considerable latitude during a period such as lay ahead. He 

would not favor setting a target in terms of net borrowed or 

free reserves; he would accept the marginal reserve figure that 

developed from an effort to keep the rate structure in line with 

the discount rate. And he would not wart to see any reluctance 

in meeting seasonal and other needs for reserves. He did not 

advocate a policy of ease, but as the Board had implied in its 

recert press release, reserve availability should be adequate to 

meet requirements. He would accept the draft directive as written.  

Mr Ellis said that business in New England continued to 

warrant the "ebullient" label. Manufacturing production and 

employment were rising and upward trends in new orders continued.  

Construction contracting had paused in total but was feeling the 

impact of sharp surges in highway building. Unemployment declines 

continued and evidence of labor shortage had widened. Consumer 

spending slowed its increase in November but department store 

sales were running 3 per cent better than in the pre-Christmas 

season last year.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that he had been watching the District's 

weekly reporting member banks for signs of any trouble in meeting 

their needs in December, when 30 per cent of their CD's matured-

as compared with 21 per cent for the U.S. So far, the evidence 

suggested they were making the switch smoothly. To be specific,



12/14/65 -60

they had rot had to reach out and match the rates announced by 

Chase Manhattan last Friday (December 10). Nor had they resorted 

to expansion of negotiable notes. As of last Friday rates 

quoted on negotiable notes matched CD rates up to 90-day maturity 

and then shaded below the CD rates by 5 and 10 basis points out 

to one-year maturity.  

Mr. Ellis welcomed Mr. Brill's discussion of guideline 

interpretation, and agreed that it was necessary to start with 

consideration of total credit flows. He therefore expected the 

next green book to reflect the results of such analysis. The 

green book was good but could be better.  

Since the last meeting of the Committee, Mr. Ellis said, 

the weight of evidence seemed to have supported the judgments 

reached then. The Federal budget outlook had turned toward 

deeper deficits and stepped-up outlays; the balance of payments 

news emphasized the need for further action to achieve a solution; 

manufacturing output had increased vigorously and defense orders 

were helping to bolster it; capital sperding and its outlook had 

strengthened; the labor supply had tightened; and price trends 

continued to show an upward tilt.  

As expected, Mr. Ellis continued, the discount rate action 

had drawn out many vocal reactions. In Boston the Reserve Bank 

kept a finger to the academic pulse as a matter of practice. He



12/14/65 -61

was a little surprised by the intensity of disapproval voiced by 

some academicians. The sting of their lashes was tempered somewhat 

by the more balanced views of others, who concluded that it was 

a close decision that could be tipped either way by personal 

judgment. The latter offered the view tat one salutory result 

of the action would be to force public attention to the problem 

of financing the expected added costs of the Vietnam conflict and 

the Great Society program without simple and automatic resort to 

higher deficits.  

In his basic position on policy, Mr. Ellis found himself 

in agreement with the statement by Mr. Hickman that the Committee 

should establish and preserve an even keel through the year end.  

Since the discount rate increase the markets had been so influenced 

by the ease in reserve availability that it was hazardous to attempt 

an identification of compatible intermediate goals of policy.  

Perhaps because he had been participating in the daily telephone 

conference call since the Committee's previous meeting, he believed 

that the Manager should be provided with some goals of policy in 

addition to an indication to preserve orderly conditions in the 

market as it adjusted to new rates. He would recommend dealing 

with the difficult alternatives by picking a likely combination 

of intermediate goals--one that had some prospect of being compat

ible--and then suggesting to the Manager some priorities within 

that package to be followed if choice was forced upon him.



12/14/65 -62

To be specific, Mr. Ellis said, he was prepared to accept 

the staff estimates as a starting pcint. He believed that a bill 

rate in the range of 4.30-4.45 per cent might well prove compatible 

with net borrowed reserves averaging around $100 million, borrowings 

holding around $550 million, and a Federal funds rate generally at 

4-1/2 per cent. It struck him that such a pattern would be 

acceptable to the market as not being a further turn of the reserve 

availability screw, recognizing the positive free reserve figure 

of last week as temporary. He would direct the Manager to seek 

such intermediate targets unless short-term bill rates unexpectedly 

tended to move above 4,45 per cent, in which case he would want 

him to abandon temporarily the reserve target in favor of holding 

rates below 4.45 per cent. On the other hand, he would not expect 

the Manager to seek higher levels of net borrowed reserves in 

order to hold bill rates up to any level the Committee might 

establish today. The underlying objective, of course, was to 

allow markets to find their own new level.  

In view of the Committee's disposition not to specify 

intermediate goals of policy, Mr. Ellis continued, he wa prepared 

to accept the staff's draft directive with the understanding that 

the Committee was not establishing a single rate objective as the 

principal goal of policy. However, he liked Mr. Swan's proposed 

rewording of that draft; he shared the view that there was some 

inconsistency in the staff draft.



12/14/65 -63

Mr. Balderston said he would divide the four weeks 

between this meeting and the next into two parts. As the 

Committee knew, bill rates tended to be seasonally high during 

the Christmas period and then to decline. He would hope the 

Desk would dampen any bill rate increases during the first two 

weeks and then, if necessary, support bill rates in the two weeks 

remaining before the Committee met again. For both intervals he 

would use the 4.30-4.45 per cent range suggested by the staff as 

a guide. The staff had indicated that a net borrowed reserve 

figure of $100 million might be consistent with such a bill rate 

objective over the next four weeks as a whole, and he was merely 

suggesting that the Desk might need to treat the two parts of 

the period separately. In any case, it now appeared that there 

would be net free reserves for a second successive week, and he 

would hope that such figures could be avoided in the future.  

Otherwise the public might well be confused with respect to the 

System's intentions in raising the discount rate.  

Chairman Martin said he had little to add to what already 

had been said. He thought the discussion today provided good 

evidence of the futility of trying to project developments under 

the circumstances of the moment. In due course the storm was 

likely to be followed by a calm in which the Committee could 

remold its policy. He had always found the year end a partic

ularly difficult time to assess conditions.



12/14/65 -64

The Chairman said he thought that the members of both 

the majority and minority had conducted themselves well through 

the recent period, and that the System had played a constructive 

role in 1965. Of course, no one could be absolutely certain that 

his judgments were correct in every detail.  

Chairman Martin then turned to the question of the 

directive. As he had indicated earlier, to him Mr. Swan's proposal 

did not differ in substance from the staff's draft, but that was 

a matter of judgment. In any case, he saw no objection to the 

proposal and he suggested that the Committee vote on it.  

Mr. Galusha asked whether the Manager thought the proposed 

directive gave him room to deal with all of the changes that could 

occur in the period until the next meeting, including the possible 

shift in the direction of seasonal pressues. Mr. Holmes replied 

that seasonal pressures might well ebb during the interval and 

the Desk would certainly have that possibility in mind. The period 

ahead was a highly uncertain one, however, and he did not think 

that all possible developments could be articipated. Mr. Galusha 

then noted that as he understood the general consensus there 

would be no attempt through open market operation to reverse the 

impact of the discount rate change, and Mr. Holmes replied that 

was clear in the proposed directive.



12/14/65

In the course of further discussion the Committee agreed 

to some language revisions in the directive proposed by Mr. Swan.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions ir. the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy d.rective: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that domestic economic expansion is 
gaining in strength in a climate of optimistic business 
sentiment, with continuing active demands for credit and 
some further upward creep in prices. Although there appears 
to have been some recent improvement in our international 
payments, the need for further progress remains. In this 
situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy 
to complement other recent measures taken to resist the 
emergence of inflationary pressures and to help restore 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, 
while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply.  

Until the next meeting of the Committee, and taking 
into account the forthcoming Treasury financing activity 
and widely fluctuating seasonal pressures at this time 
of year in addition to the recent increase in Reserve Bank 
discount rates, System open market operations shall be 
directed to moderating any further adjustments in money 
and credit markets that may develop.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, January 11, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-65-



Attachment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 13, 1965 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on December 14, 1965 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that domestic economic expansion is gaining in 
strength in a climate of optimistic business sentiment, with con
tinuing active demands for credit and some further upward creep in 
prices. Although there appears to have been some recent improvement 
in our international payments, the need for further progress remains.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current 
policy to complement other recent measures taken to resist the 
emergence of inflationary pressures and to help restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 
supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the recent 
increases in Federal Reserve Bank discount rates and forthcoming 
Treasury financing activity, System open market operations until the 
next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 
moderating further adjustments of noney and credit market conditions 
in a period of widely fluctuating seasonal pressures.


