









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 2, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balderston 
Bryan 
Daane 
Ellis 
Mitchell 
Robertson 1/ 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Clay, Alternate for President of Minneapolis Bank

Messrs. Bopp, Hichman, and Irons, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shufcrd, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Garvy, Holland, Koch, 

and Taylor, Associate Economists 
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Farrell, Director, Division of Bank Operations, 

Board of Governors 2/ 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 

Entered the meeting at the point indicated.  
Left the meeting at the point indicated.



3/2/65

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Roberts, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Strothman, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, 
Parsons, Tow, Doll, and Green, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Minneapolis, 
Kansas City, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Bowsher, Assistant Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, the Secretary reported that 

advices had been received of the election by the Federal Reserve Banks 

of members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

for the term of one year beginning March 1, 1965, and it appeared that 

such persons would be legally qualified to serve after they had executed 

their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

George H. Ellis, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 
with Karl R. Bopp, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, as alternate; 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
with William F. Treiber, First Vice President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Malcolm Bryan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 
with Watrous H. Irons, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Dallas, as alternate;



3/2/65

Charles J. Scanlon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with W. Braddock Hickman, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

The person who is on March 1, 1965, or who shall thereafter 
become, the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis, with George H. Clay, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate.  

At the time of this meeting no person had as yet been named 

President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. All other elected 

members and alternates had now executed their oaths of office.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the following of
ficers of the Federal Open Market Committee 
were elected to serve until the election of 
their successors at the first meeting of the 
Committee after February 28, 1966, with the 
understanding that in the event of the dis
continuance of their official connection with 
the Board of Governors or with a Federal 
Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they 
would cease to have any official connection 
with the Federal Open Market Committee:

Wm. McC. Martin, Jr.  
Alfred Hayes 
Ralph A. Young 
Merritt Sherman 
Kenneth A. Kenyon 
Arthur L. Broida 
Howard H. Hackley 
David B. Hexter 
Guy E. Noyes 
Ernest T. Baughman, Daniel H. Brill, 

George Garvy, Robert C. Holland, 
Albert R. Koch, Charles T. Taylor, 
and Parker B. Willis

Chairman 
Vice Chairman 
Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Economist 
Associate Economists

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York was selected to execute 
transactions for the System Open Market 
Account until the adjournment of the first 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
after February 28, 1966.



3/2/65

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, Robert W. Stone and Charles 
A. Coombs were selected to serve at the pleasure 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as Manager 
of the System Open Market Account and as Special 
Manager for foreign currency operations for such 
Account, respectively, it being understood that 
their selection was subject to their being 
satisfactory to the Board of Directors of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice subsequently 
was received that Messrs. Stone and Coombs 
were satisfactory to the Board of Directors 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for 
service in the respective capacities indicated.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting 
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 
February 2, 1965, were approved 

Consideration then was given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, according to the customary practice of reviewing such 

matters at the first meeting in March of each year, and the actions 

set forth hereinafter were taken.  

Chairman Martin noted that a memorandum from Mr. Stone had 

been distributed to the Committee proposing certain revisions in the 

continuing authority directive regarding transactions in U.S. Govern

ment securities and bankers' acceptances, and he invited Mr. Stone 

to comment. (A copy of this memorandum, dated February 17, 1965, and 

entitled "Maturity limitation on repurchase agreements during Treasury 

refundings," has been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

Mr. Stone said that his memorandum outlined a technical problem 

the Account Management often encountered during Treasury financing 

operations, particularly advance refundings, because of the 24-month

-4-



3/2/65 -5

maturity limit on Government securities that might be held under repur

chase agreements specified in Section 1(c) of the continuing authority 

directive. As indicated in the memorandum, this limit at times had 

caused the Management to terminate repurchase agreements against "rights" 

in refundings the day after the subscription books closed and several days 

before settlement. The rights in question were those that dealers had 

committed for exchange for new securities of longer than two years to 

maturity. These terminations often were burdensome to the market and 

inconvenient to the System. He recommended a revision of the directive 

that would make them unnecessary, in order to maximize the effectiveness 

of operations during periods when Treasury refundings were in process.  

From the dealers' standpoint, the change would mean that the "rights" 

turned in for exchange could be carried to the settlement date of the 

financing if the Desk chose to make agreements running that long. The 

simplest procedure would be to eliminate the maturity limit on Govern

ment securities held under repurchase agreements altogether. Alternatively, 

the limit coulc be waived during Treasury refundings and retained at other 

times. In either case repurchase agreements would continue to be made for 

a maximum of 15 days.  

Mr. Mitchell said he had no objection to the alternative procedure 

Mr. Stone had mentioned but he would not favor removing the maturity limit 

entirely. In his judgment the latter action might encourage dealers to 

hold larger amounts of longer-term securities and to speculate in them, 

thereby hampering operations of the Committee.



3/2/65 -6

Mr. Stone said that there might be occasions when a considerable 

part of the dealers' financing needs were concentrated in longer-term 

securities. But whether the Desk would help finance those holdings 

would depend strictly on the reserve situation at the time; the Desk 

would not make repurchase agreements against the securities in question 

if there was no need to provide reserves.  

Mr. Daane agreed that it was desirable to avoid recurrences 

of the situation in which it was necessary to terminate repurchase 

agreements at inconvenient times. But he shared Mr. Mitchell's 

reluctance co remove the maturity limit entirely, even though the 

Desk would retain discretion with respect to whether to enter into 

particular agreements. He asked whether it would be feasible to take 

the more limited step of authorizing repurchase agreements only against 

rights turned in for longer-term securities which dealers had already 

sold on a when-issued basis.  

Mr. Stone replied that such a procedure was a possibility.  

He would not recommend it, however, because it would require policing 

operations by the Account Management of a kind that he would not consider 

desirable.  

Mr. Bryan said he also favored the alternative Mr. Stone had 

mentioned of removing the maturity limit only during the periods of 

Treasury refunding operations.  

In response to Mr. Hayes' request that the Manager clarify his 

recommendation, Mr. Stone said that in the memorandum he had recommended 

removal of the maturity limit entirely. But he had never found the



3/2/65 -7

limit to disadvantage operations except at times of Treasury financings.  

Accordingly, he thought the alternative to which Mr. Bryan had referred 

would solve the problem.  

Mr. Hayes said he would register a mild dissent. As a practical 

matter he agreed that the alternative would meet the problem Mr. Stone 

had described, but he did not think any purpose would be served by 

retaining the maturity limit for periods when refundings were not in 

process. He could not believe that removing the limit entirely would 

have any significant effect on dealers' willingness to hold longer-term 

securities in their portfolios. Thus, he would prefer the broader 

authority.  

Chairman Martin commented that, in view of the questions that 

had been raised about the desirability of removing completely the 

maturity limit on Government securities held under repurchase agreements, 

it might be desirable for the Committee to vote on a continuing authority 

directive amended in line with the alternative suggestion of removing 

this limit only during periods in which a Treasury refunding was in process.  

Mr. Mitchell then said he would like to raise another question 

with respect to the directive under discussion, concerning Section 1(b) 

which authorized transactions in bankers' acceptances. His question 

was whether it would be appropriate to let the System's inventory run 

down by reducing holdings of the types of acceptances that the System 

was trying to discourage under the voluntary foreign credit restraint 

program. He had heard that as much as one-third of all U.S. bankers' 

acceptances financed third-country trade. In this connection he thought



3/2/65 -8

it would be desirable at some point for Mr. Stone to report to the 

Committee on the nature of the bankers' acceptances held by the 

System Account.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he was not sure about the present 

status of the draft guidelines for the voluntary credit restraint 

program, but he did not think there would be a general ban on financing 

third-country trade. By far the largest part of such trade financed by 

U.S. bank acceptances involved Japan, and as he understood the arrange

ments worked out on a Governmental level, it was agreed that the total 

amount of U.S. bank credit to Japan would be kept roughly at present 

levels. In his judgment it would be unwise for the System to begin 

making distinctions in its acceptance operations that would not be 

reflected in the guidelines.  

Mr. Mitchell said that he did not think the System should take 

acceptances off the hands of banks if that would free funds for the 

banks to use in extending other foreign credits. The System's portfolio 

of acceptances should be going down; it should be buying a minimum 

number, reducing its purchases of those given a low priority under the 

program. Having launched a voluntary restraint program, the System 

should make sure its own actions were consistent with what it was asking 

others to do.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that the amounts involved were quite small; 

the dollar maximum of System holdings of acceptances specified in the 

directive was $125 million, and actual holdings usually were less than



3/2/65 -9

that. While the principle Mr. Mitchell had expressed was a good one, 

he questioned whether it was workable.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that it should be workable if detailed 

information was available on the make-up of the System's portfolio of 

bankers' acceptances. Mr. Stone observed that he could arrange to have 

an inventory of the portfolio prepared.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that when the Committee had authorized an 

increase in the dollar limit on System holdings of acceptances on 

November 10, 1964, it had agreed that it would reassess its participa

tion in the bankers' acceptance market at the time of this annual 

organization meeting.  

Chairman Martin indicated that the annual meeting was an 

appropriate time to discuss this matter.  

Mr. Shepardson said that in the earlier discussion, as he 

recalled it, it had been noted that the Committee originally had 

authorized operations in acceptances to help re-establish the market 

for this type of instrument. But there had been a significant expansion 

of the acceptance market in recent years. This raised the questions of 

whether the Committee's objectives had been accomplished, and, if so, 

whether any purpose would be served by its continued participation in 

the acceptance market.  

Chairman Martin said he questioned whether the Committee's goals 

had been fully accomplished. He asked whether Mr. Stone would like to 

comment on this general subject.



3/2/65

Mr. Stone observed that this market was capable of still 

further growth. The Committee's efforts to encourage its development 

had been eminently successful; it had grown to a point at which it was 

contributing significantly to U.S. foreign trade. Moreover, the market 

now could provide a highly useful supplement to the Government securities 

market in open market operations. As a result of the balance of payments 

problem the System now was operating in ways that no one had contemplated 

seven or eight years ago, and it was drawing on all available resources.  

The acceptance market had now become such a resource; by buying accept

ances it was possible to supply substantial amounts of reserves at times 

without putting downward pressure on short-term bill rates.  

Furthermore, Mr. Stone said, under the terms of the Federal 

Reserve Act and several Board regulations, the System was concerned 

with the field of bankers' acceptances. By dealing in acceptances and 

holding them in portfolio, the Account Management kept continuously 

before it a view of what was going on in the field. This continuing 

surveillance of the market was important in determining whether acceptance 

financing was in accordance with the statute and with Board regulations.  

In his judgment it was highly desirable for the Committee to continue 

to participate in the acceptance market.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that the Committee's policy with respect 

to the acceptance market had been developed at a time when the United 

States had a large surplus in its international payments. But now 

that the nation had a deficit he doubted whether it was desirable to

-10-



3/2/65

continue to encourage the development of the market if such actions 

contributed to the volume of capital outflows. What was necessary, 

he thought, was an analysis of the characteristics of the System's 

portfolio of acceptances.  

Mr. Daane observed that such an analysis would be useful. On 

the whole, however, he was inclined to agree with Mr. Stone; he thought 

the acceptance market promoted U.S. foreign trade, and that one should 

not consider it simply in terms of its effects on capital flows.  

Mr. Hayes thought that Mr. Mitchell's argument was based on 

an overly short-run view of the acceptance market. In his (Mr. Hayes') 

opinion, its development was highly desirable from a longer-run stand

point. The market would be affected by the voluntary restraint program, 

but he did not think the Committee should stop participating in it 

and thereby diminish the vitality of an instrument that had proved to 

be generally useful over the years.  

Chairman Martin said he doubted whether the Committee should 

act today to change the nature of its operations in the bankers' accept

ance market; further study was required. He suggested that Mr. Stone be 

asked to prepare a memorandum on the System's portfolio of acceptances, 

and that the Committee plan to discuss the matter further at its next 

meeting. There were no objections to this suggestion.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Open Market Account in accordance with

-11-



3/2/65

the following continuing authority 
directive relating to transactions in 
U.S. Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances: 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the most recent current economic 
policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities in 
the open market, from or to Government securities 
dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U.S. Government securities 
with the Treasury or allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of such 
securities held in such Account at the close of business 
on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a current economic policy 
directive shall not be increased or decreased by more 
than $1.5 billion during the period commencing with the 
opening of business on the day following such meeting 
and ending with the close of business on the day of 
the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' acceptances of 
the kinds designated in the Regulation of the Federal 
Open Market Committee in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the account 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market 
discount rates; provided that the aggregate amount 
of bankers' acceptances held at any one time shall 
not exceed $125 million or 10 per cent of the total 
of bankers' acceptances outstanding as shown in the 
most recent acceptance survey conducted by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York; 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities with 
maturities as indicated below, and prime bankers' 
acceptances with maturities of 6 months or less at 
the time of purchase, from nonbank dealers for the 
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under 
agreements for repurchase of such securities or

-12-



3/2/65

acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates not 
less than (1) the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York at the time such agreement is entered 
into, or (2) the average issuing rate on the most 
recent issue of 3-month Treasury tills, whichever is 
the lower; provided that in the event Government 
securities covered by any such agreement are not 
repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market 
or transferred to the System Open Market Account; and 
prov:ded further that in the event bankers' acceptances 
covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by 
the seller, they shall continue to be held by the 
Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open 
market. U.S. Government securities bought under the 
provisions of this section shall have maturities of 
24 months or less at the time of purchase, except that, 
during any period beginning with the day after the 
Treasury has announced a refunding operation and 
ending on the day designated as the settlement date 
for the exchange, the U.S. Government securities bought 
may be of any maturity.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase 
directly from the Treasury for the account of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in cases where 
it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more 
Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term 
certificates or indebtedness as may be necessary from time 
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; 
provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the d.scount rate of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, 
and provided further that the total amount of such certificates 
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not 
exceed $500 million.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the Authorization 
Regarding Open Market Transactions in 
Foreign Currencies, as reaffirmed March 3, 
1964, was reaffirmed:

-13-



3/2/65

AUTHORIZATION REGARDING OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS IN 
FOREIGN CURRENCIES 

Pursuant to Section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act 
and in accordance with Section 214.5 of Regulation N (as 
amended) of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, the Federal Open Market Committee takes the following 
action governing open market operations incident to the 
opening and maintenance by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York (hereafter sometimes referred to as the New York Bank) 
of accounts with foreign central banks.  

I. Role of Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

The New York Bank shall execute all transactions 
pursuant to this authorization (hereafter sometimes referred 
to as transactions in foreign currencies) for the System Open 
Market Account, as defined in the Regulation of the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  

II. Basic Purposes of Operations 

The basic purposes of System operations in and 
holdings of foreign currencies are: 

(1) To help safeguard the velue of the dollar in 
international exchange markets; 

(2) To aid in making the existing system of inter
national payments more efficient and in 
avoiding disorderly conditions in exchange 
markets; 

(3) To further monetary cooperation with central 
banks of other countries maintaining convertible 
currencies, with the International Monetary 
Fund, and with other international payments 
institutions; 

(4) Together with these banks and institutions, to 
help moderate temporary imbalances in inter
national payments that may adversely affect 
monetary reserve positions; and 

(5) In the long run, to make possible growth in the 
liquid assets available to international money 
markets in accordance with the needs of an 
expanding world economy.

-14-



3/2/65

III. Specific Aims of Operations 

Within the basic purposes set forth in Section II, 

the transactions shall be conducted with a view to the following 

specific aims: 

(1) To offset or compensate, when appropriate, the 

effects on U.S. gold reserves or dollar liabil
ities of disequilibrating fluctuations in the 
international flow of payments to or from the 
United States, and especially those that are 
deemed to reflect temporary forces or transi
tional market unsettlement: 

(2) To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in 
spot exchange rates and moderate forward 
premiums and discounts judged to be dis
equilibrating; 

(3) To supplement international exchange arrange
ments such as those made through the Inter
national Monetary Fund; and 

(4) In the long run, to provide a means whereby 
reciprocal holdings of foreign currencies may 
contribute to meeting needs for international 
liquidity as required in terms of an expanding 
world economy.  

IV. Arrangements with Foreign Central Banks 

In making operating arrangements with foreign central 
banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the New York 
Bank shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, 
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  

The Bank shall instruct foreign central banks regarding 
the investment of such holdings in excess of minimum working 
balances in accordance with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve 
Act.  

The Bank shall consult with foreign central banks on 
coordination of exchange operations.  

Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the New York Bank 
with the central banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N (as amended) are to be 
referred for review and approval to the Committee, subject to 

the provision of Section VIII, paragraph 1, below.

-15-



3/2/65

V. Authorized Currencies 

The New York Bank is authorized to conduct trans
actions for System Account in such currencies and within the 
limits that the Federal Open Market Committee may from time 
to time specify.  

VI. Methods of Acquiring and Selling Foreign Currencies 

The New York Bank is authorized to purchase and sell 
foreign currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot 
or forward transactions on the open market at home and abroad, 
including transactions with the Stabilization Fund of the 
Secretary of the Treasury established by Section 10 of the 
Gold Reserve Act of 1934 and with foreign monetary authorities.  

Unless the Bank is otherwise authorized, all trans
actions shall be at prevailing market rates.  

VII. Participation of Federal Reserve Banks 

All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in accordance 
with paragraph 3 G (1) of the Board of Governors' Statement 
of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships of Federal 
Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

VIII. Administrative Procedures 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes a Sub
committee consisting of the Chairman and the Vice Chairman of 
the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors 
(or in the absence of the Chairman or cf the Vice Chairman of 
the Board of Governors the members of the Board designated by 
the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee his alternate) to give instructions 
to the Special Manager, within the guidelines issued by the 
Committee, in cases in which it is necessary to reach a 
decision on operations before the Committee can be consulted.  

All actions authorized under the preceding paragraph 
shall be promptly reported to the Committee.  

The Committee authorizes the Chairman, and in his 
absence the Vice Chairman of the Committee, and in the absence 
of both, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors:

-16-



3/2/65 -17

(1) With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with 
the Secretary of the Treasury about the division 
of responsibility for foreign currency opera
tions between the System and the Secretary; 

(2) To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary 
on such policy matters as may relate to the 
Secretary's responsibilities; 

(3) From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National 
Advisory Council on International Monetary and 
Financial Problems.  

IX. Special Manager of the System Open Market Account 

A Special Manager of the Open Market Account for 
foreign currency operations shall be selected in accordance 
with the established procedures of the Federal Open Market 
Committee for the selection of the Manager of the System Open 
Market Account.  

The Special Manager shall direct that all transactions 
in foreign currencies and the amounts of all holdings in each 
authorized foreign currency be reported daily to designated 
staff officials of the Committee. and shall regularly consult 
with the designated staff officials of the Committee on current 
tendencies in the flow of international payments and on current 
developments in foreign exchange markets.  

The Special Manager and the designated staff officials 
of the Committee shall arrange for the prompt transmittal to the 
Committee of all statistical and other information relating to 
the transactions in and the amounts of holdings of foreign 
currencies for review by the Committee as to conformity with 
its instructions.  

The Special Manager shall include in his reports to 
the Committee a statement of bank balances and investments 
payable in foreign currencies, a statement of net profit or 
loss on transactions to date, and a summary of outstanding 
unmatured contracts in foreign currencies.  

X. Transmittal of Information to Treasury Department 

The staff officials of the Federal Open Market 
Committee shall transmit all pertinent information on System 
foreign currency transactions to designated officials of the 
Treasury Department.



3/2/65 -18

XI. Amendment of Authorization 

The Federal Open Market Committee may at any time 
amend or rescind this authorization.  

Chairman Martin then noted that Mr. Coombs had proposed 

certain revisions in the guidelines for System foreign currency 

operations in a memorandum to the Committee dated February 25, 1965, 

and he invited Mr. Coombs to comment. (A copy of the memorandum 

referred to has been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

Mr. Coombs observed that the changes he proposed were 

primarily matters of form rather than substance. As indicated in 

his memorandum, they involved deletions of certain language relating 

to the original launching of operations, consolidation of certain 

material, and other clarifying revisions.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he had no objection to the proposed 

changes, but would like to raise a question. It was his recollection 

that when the Committee began operations in foreign currencies it was 

concerned with the position of the dollar as such rather than in its 

role as a reserve currency. However, in Mr. Coombs' annual report, as 

submitted for publication in the Board's Annual Report for 1964, the 

dollar was discussed primarily from the reserve-currency standpoint.  

Unless this was appreciated, the purposes for which the Account 

Management had intervened in foreign exchange markets on many occasions 

during the year were rather obscure. His question was whether the 

proposed revised guidelines adequately reflected consideration of the 

dollar as such, as opposed to its reserve-currency status.



3/2/65 -19

Mr. Coombs replied that he thought the U.S. gold stock was 

under two kinds of pressure--that of direct flows from the United 

States to other countries, and that of third-country flows arising 

because the dollar was a reserve currency. This distinction was 

not spelled out in the guidelines; rather, it was taken for granted 

that the dollar was a reserve currency and the Account Management 

had operated in that context.  

Mr. Mitchell suggested that thought might be given to making 

this distinction explicit. It seemed to him that many of the Account 

Management's operations were concerned with the dollar in its reserve

currency role.  

Mr. Coombs said he would find it difficult to make the distinc

tion in practice, although he agreed with Mr. Mitchell that many opera

tions actually undertaken would be unnecessary if the dollar was not a 

reserve currency.  

Mr. Daane remarked that in talking about safeguarding the dollar 

one necessarily had both of its roles in view. He thought it would be 

unwise to attempt to make explicit the distinction to which Mr. Mitchell 

had referred. Messrs. Hayes and Bryan concurred in this view.  

Mr. Ellis noted that in Section 4 of the proposed new guide

lines it was said that transactions in forward exchange "may prove 

desirable" under certain described circumstances. This was a rather 

indefinite statement; in his judgment it would be better to indicate that 

forward operations were specifically authorized in the circumstances 

described, consistently with the construction in other passages of the 

guidelines.



3/2/65

After discussion, in the course of which the relationship 

between the guidelines and the continuing authority directive for 

foreign currency operations was touched on, Chairman Martin suggested 

that the Committee vote on the guidelines as proposed in Mr. Coombs' 

memorandum, with the understanding that revisions to deal with the 

problem Mr. Ellis had noted might be considered at the next meeting.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Guidelines for System Foreign Cur
rency Operations were amended to read 
as follows: 

GUIDELINES FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. Holdings of Foreign Currencies 

Until otherwise authorized, the System will limit 
its holdings of foreign currencies to that amount necessary 
to enable its operations to exert a market influence.  
Holdings of larger amounts will be authorized only when the 
U.S. balance of international payments attains a sufficient 
surplus to permit the ready accumulation of holdings of major 
convertible currencies.  

Foreign currency holdings shall be invested as far 
as practicable in conformity with Section 14(e) of the Federal 
Reserve Act.  

2. Exchange Transactions 

System exchange transactions shall be geared to 
pressures of payments flows so as to cushion or moderate 
disequilibrating movements of funds and their destablizing 
effects on U.S. and foreign official reserves and on exchange 
markets.  

In general, these transactions shall be geared to 
pressures connected with movements that are expected to be 
reversed in the foreseeable future; when expressly authorized 
by the Federal Open Market Committee, they may also be geared 
on a short-term basis to pressures connected with other 
movements.

-20-



3/2/65

Subject to express authorization of the Committee, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York may enter into reciprocal 
arrangements with foreign central banks on exchange trans
actions ("swap" arrangements), which arrangements may be wholly 
or in part on a standby basis.  

Drawings made by either party under a reciprocal 
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after 
any amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless 
the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, specif
ically authorizes a delay.  

The New York Bank shall, as a usual practice, 
purchase and sell authorized currencies at prevailing market 
rates without trying to establish rates that appear to be 
out of line with underlying market forces.  

If market offers to sell or buy intensify as System 
holdings increase or decline, this shall be regarded as a 
clear signal for a review of the System's evaluation of inter
national payments flows.  

It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency trans
actions in order that System transactions do not conflict with 
those being undertaken by foreign monetary authorities.  

3. Transactions in Spot Exchange 

The guiding principle for transactions in spot exchange 
shall be that, in general, market movements in exchange rates, 
within the limits established in the International Monetary Fund 
Agreement or by central bank practices, index affirmatively the 
interaction of underlying economic forc.s and thus serve as 
efficient guides to current financial decisions, private and 
public.  

Temporary or transitional fluctuations in payments 
flows may be cushioned or moderated whenever they occasion 
market anxieties, or undesirable speculative activity in 
foreign exchange transactions, or excessive leads and lags in 
international payments.  

Special factors making for exchange market instabilities 
include (i) responses to short-run increases in international 
political tension, (ii) differences in phasing of international 
economic activity that give rise to unusually large interest 
rate differentials between major markets, or (iii) market 
rumors of a character likely to stimulate speculative trans

actions.

-21-



3/2/65

Whenever exchange market instability threatens to 
produce disorderly conditions, System transactions are appro
priate if the Special Manager, in consultation with the Federal 
Open Market Committee, or in an emergercy with the members of 
the Committee designated for that purpose, reaches a judgment 
that they may help to re-establish supply and demand balance 
at a level more consistent with the prevailing flow of under
lying payments. Whenever supply or demand persists in in
fluencing exchange rates in one direction, System transactions 
should be modified, curtailed, or eventually discontinued 
pending a reassessment by the Committee of supply and demand 
forces.  

Insofar as is practicable, the New York Bank shall 
purchase a currency through spot transactions at or below 
its par value, and sell a currency through spot transactions 
at rates at or above its par value.  

Spot transactions at rates other than those set 
forth in the preceding paragraph shall be specially authorized 
by the Committee or by the members of the Committee designated 
in Section VIII of the Authorization for Open Market Trans
actions in Foreign Currencies, except that purchases of exchange 
to meet System commitments may be executed without special 
authorization at rates above par when necessary.  

4. Transactions in Forward Exchange 

Transactions in forward exchange, either outright or 
in conjunction with spot transactions, may prove desirable: 

(1) When forward premiums or discounts are incon
sistent with interest race differentials and 
are giving rise to disequilibrating movements 
of short-term funds; 

(2) When it is deemed appropriate to supplement 
existing market supplies of forward cover, 
as a means of encouraging the retention or 
accumulation of dollar holdings by private 
foreign holders; 

(3) To allow greater flexibility in covering System 
commitments, including those under swap arrange
ments; 

(4) To facilitate the use of holdings of one 
currency for the settlement of commitments 
denominated in other currencies.

-22-



3/2/65

Forward sales of authorized currencies to the U.S.  
Stabilization Fund out of existing System holdings or in con
junction with spot purchases of such currencies may also prove 
desirable in order to allow greater flexibility in covering 
commitments of the U.S. Treasury.  

In all other cases, proposals of the Special Manager 
to initiate forward operations shall be submitted to the Com
mittee for advance approval.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the following con
tinuing authority directive to the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York with respect to 
foreign currency operations was approved: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized 
and directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions 
any or all of the following currencies in accordance with the 
Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations as amended 
March 2, 1965; provided that the aggregate amount of foreign 
currencies held under reciprocal currency arrangements shall 
not exceed $2.35 billion equivalent at any one time, and 
provided further that the aggregate amount of foreign currencies 
held as a result of outright purchases shall not exceed $150 
million equivalent at any one time: 

Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Netherlands guilders 
Swiss francs 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Austrian schillings 
Swedish kronor 
Japanese yen 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to operate in any or all of the foregoing currencies 
in accordance with the Guidelines and up to a combined total of $275 
million equivalent, by means of: 

(a) purchases through forward transactions, for the 
purpose of allowing greater flexibility in 
covering commitments under reciprocal currency 
agreements;

-23-



3/2/65

(b) purchases and sales through forward as well as 
spot transactions, for the purpose of utilizing 
its holdings of one currency for the settlement 
of commitments denominated in other currencies; 

(c) purchases through spot transactions and concurrent 
sales through forward transactions, for the purpose 
of restraining short-term outflows of funds induced 
by arbitrage considerations; and 

(d) sales through forward transactions, for the purpose 
of influencing interest arbitrate flows of funds 
and of minimizing speculative disturbances.  

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to make purchases through spot transactions, in
cluding purchases from the U.S. Stabilization Fund, and con
current sales through forward transactions to the U.S. Stabi
lization Fund, of any of the foregoing currencies in which the 
U.S. Treasury has outstanding indebtedness, in accordance with 
the Guidelines and up to a total of $100 million equivalent.  
Purchases may be at rates above par, and both purchases and 
sales are to be made at the same rates.  

Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Stone to comment on proposed 

revisions in the procedures for allocations of the System Open Market 

Account.  

Mr. Stone noted that a bill to remove the gold certificate 

reserve requirement against deposits at Federal Reserve Banks had 

passed both houses of Congress and presumably would be signed by the 

President shortly. Mr. Farrell and he recommended that the Committee 

make certain deletions in the existing statement of procedures to 

become effective when the bill was signed. This would be a temporary 

measure, pending a general review of the procedures. First, they 

would suggest deleting the word "combined" as a qualifier of the term 

"reserve ratios" in the first and second paragraphs. Secondly, since

-24-



3/2/65

the Account now would need to be reallocated only once a month, they 

proposed deleting the words in the first paragraph calling for weekly 

reallocations. Finally, they would delete the words "or to such 

higher level as may be necessary to eliminate the deficiency in note 

or deposit reserves" at the end of the second sentence of the second 

paragraph. The resulting statement then would be applicable to a 

situation in which gold certificate reserves were required only against 

Federal Reserve notes.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee vote on the 

revised procedures with the understanding that they would be employed 

temporarily while the general study to which Mr. Stone had referred 

was in process. He thought it would be desirable for this study to 

be undertaken immediately.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the following 
procedures with respect to allocations of the 
System Open Market Account were approved, 
effective upon the date at which the bill 
removing gold certificate requirements against 
deposits at Federal Reserve Banks became law: 

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account shall 
be reallocated on the last business day of each month by means 
of adjustments proportionate to the adjustments that would 
have been required to equalize approximately the average 
reserve ratios of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks based on the 
most recent available five business days' reserve ratio 
figures.  

2. The Board's staff shall calculate, in the morning 
of each business day, the reserve ratios of each Bank after 
allowing for the indicated effects of the settlement of the 

Interdistrict Settlement Fund for the preceding day. If 
these calculations should disclose a deficiency in the reserve 

NOTE: The bill referred to was signed by the President on March 3, 1965.

-25-



3/2/65

ratio of any Bank, the Board's staff shall inform the Manager 
of the System Open Market Account, who shall make a special 
adjustment as of the previous day to restore the reserve ratio 
of that Bank to the average of all the Banks. However, such 
adjustments shall not be made beyond the point where a defi
ciency would be created at any other Bank. Such adjustments 
shall be offset against the participation of the Bank or Banks 
best able to absorb the additional amount or, at the discretion 
of the Manager, against the participation of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York. The Board's staff and the Bank or Banks con
cerned shall then be notified of the amounts involved and the 
Interdistrict Settlement Fund shall be closed after giving 
effect to the adjustments as of the preceding business day.  

3. Until the next reallocation the Account shall be 
apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in para
graph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as provided for 
in paragraph 2.  

4. Profits and losses on the sale of securities from 
the Account shall be allocated on the day of delivery of the 
securities sold on the basis of each Bank's current holdings 
at the opening of business on that day.  

Mr. Farrell left the meeting at this point.  

A proposed list for distribution of periodic reports pre

pared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the Federal Open 

Market Committee was presented for consideration and approval.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
authorization was given for the follow
ing distribution: 

1. The Members of the Board of Governors 
2. The Presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks.  
3. Officers of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

*4. The Secretary of the Treasury.  
*5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs 

and the Deputy Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs.  
*6. The Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury working on 

debt management problems.  
*7. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.

reports of open market operations only.

-26-

* Weekly



3/2/65 -27

8. The Director of the Division of Bank Operations of the 
Board of Governors.  

9. The officer in charge of research at each of the Federal 
Reserve Banks not represented by its President on the 
Federal Open Market Committee.  

10. The alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee 
from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the Assist
ant Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York working under the Manager of the System Accout; 
the Managers of the Securities Department of the New 
York Bank; the Vice President of the Foreign Function 
having supervisory responsibility for operations; the 
Senior Foreign Exchange Officer of the Foreign Function; 
the Managers of the Foreign Department; the officer in 
charge, the Assistant Vice President, and the Advisor of 
the Research Department of the New York Bank; and the 
confidential files of the New York Bank as the Bank 
selected to execute transactions for the Federal Open 
Market Committee.  

11. With the approval of a member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or any other President of a Federal Reserve 
Bank, with notice to the Secretary, any other employee 
of the Board of Governors or a Federal Reserve Bank.  

The Committee reaffirmed by unanimous 
vote the authorization, first given on 
March 1, 1951, for the Chairman to appoint 
a Federal Reserve Bank to operate the System 
Open Market Account temporarily in case the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York is unable 
to function.  

The following resolution to provide for 
the continued operation of the Federal Open 
Market Committee during an emergency was 
reaffirmed by unanimous vote: 

In the event of war or defense emergency, if the Secretary 
or Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee (or 
in the event of the unavailability of both of them, the Secretary 
or Acting Secretary of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System) certifies that as a result of the emergency the 
available number of regular members and regular alternates of 
the Federal Open Market Committee is less than seven, all powers 
and functions of the said Committee shall be performed and 
exercised by, and authority to exercise such powers and functions 
is hereby delegated to, an Interim Committee, subject to the 
following terms and conditions:



3/2/65 -28

Such Interim Committee shall consist of seven members, 
comprising each regular member and regular alternate of the 
Federal Open Market Committee then available, together with 
an additional number, sufficient to make a total of seven, 
which shall be made up in the following order of priority 
from those available: (1) each alternate at large (as 
defined below); (2) each President of a Federal Reserve Bank 
not then either a regular member or an alternate; (3) each 
First Vice President of a Federal Reserve Bank; provided 
that (a) within each of the groups referred to in clauses 
(1), (2), and (3) priority of selection shall be in numerical 
order according to the numbers of Federal Reserve Districts, 
(b) the President and the First Vice President of the same 
Federal Reserve Bank shall not serve at the same time as 
members of the Interim Committee, and (c) whenever a regular 
member or regular alternate of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee or a person having a higher priority as indicated in 
clauses (1), (2), and (3) becomes available he shall become 
a member of the Interim Committee in the place of the person 
then on the Interim Committee having the lowest priority.  
The Interim Committee is hereby authorized to take action 
by majority vote of those present whenever one or more 
members thereof are present, provided that an affirmative 
vote for the action taken is cast by at least one regular 
member, regular alternate, or President of a Federal Reserve 
Bank. The delegation of authority and other procedures set 
forth above shall be effective only during such period or 
periods as there are available less than a total of seven 
regular members and regular alternates of the Federal Open 
Market Committee.  

As used herein the term "regular member" refers to a 
member of the Federal Open Market Committee duly appointed 
or elected in accordance with existing law; the term 
"regular alternate" refers to an alternate of the Committee 
duly elected in accordance with existing law and serving in the 
absence of the regular member for whom he was elected; and the 
term "alternate at large" refers to any other duly elected 
alternate of the Committee at a time when the member in whose 
absence he was elected to serve is available.  

The following resolution authorizing 
certain actions by the Federal Reserve 
Banks during an emergency was reaffirmed 
by unanimous vote: 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes each 
Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions set 
forth below during war or defense emergency when such Federal 
Reserve Bark finds itself unable after reasonable efforts to



3/2/65

be in communication with the Federal Open Market Committee 
(or with the Interim Committee acting in lieu of the Federal 
Open Market Committee) or when the Federal Open Market Com
mittee (or such Interim Committee) is unable to function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of 
economic conditions and the general credit situation then 
prevailing (after taking into account the possibility of 
providing necessary credit through advances secured by 
direct obligations of the United States under the last para
graph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such Federal 
Reserve Bank may purchase and sell obligations of the United 
States for its own account, either outright or under repur
chase agreement, from and to banks, dealers, or other holders 
of such obligations.  

(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations of 
the United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable to 
tender the actual securities representing such obligations 
because of conditions resulting from the emergency, such 
Federal Reserve Bank may, in its discretion and subject to 
such safeguards as it deems necessary, accept from such seller, 
in lieu of the actual securities, a "due bill" executed by 
the seller in form acceptable to such Federal Reserve Bank 
stating in substantial effect that the seller is the owner 
of the obligations which are the subject of the purchase, 
that ownership of such obligations is thereby transferred 
to the Federal Reserve Bank, and that the obligations them
selves will be delivered to the Federal Reserve Bank as 
soon as possible.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretion 
purchase special certificates of indebtedness directly from 
the United States in such amounts as may be needed to cover 
overdrafts in the general account of the Treasurer of the 
United States on the books of such Bank or for the temporary 
accommodation of the Treasury, but such Bank shall take all 
steps practicable at the time to insure as far as possible 
that the amount of obligations acquired directly from the 
United States and held by it, together with the amount of 
such obligations so acquired and held by all other Federal 
Reserve Banks, does not exceed $5 billion at any one time.  

Authority to take the actions above set forth shall be 
effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve Bank is 
able again to establish communications with the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or the Interim Committee), and such Committee 
is then functioning.

-29-



3/2/65 -30

By unanimous vote the Committee re
affirmed the authorization, first given at 
the meeting on December 16, 1958, providing 
for System personnel assigned to the Office 
of Emergency Planning, Special Facilities 
Branch (formerly, Office of Civil and Defense 
Mobilization--Classified Location) on a 
rotating basis to have access to the resolu
tions (1) providing for continued operation 
of the Committee during an emergency and 
(2) authorizing certain actions by the 
Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency.  

There was unanimous agreement that no 
action should be taken to change the existing 
procedure, as called for by resolution adopted 
June 21, 1939, requesting the Board of Governors 
to cause its examining force to furnish the 
Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee 
a report of each examination of the System Open 
Market Account.  

Reference was made to the procedure authorized at the meeting 

of the Committee on March 2, 1955, and most recently reaffirmed on 

March 3, 1964, whereby, in addition to membe:s and officers of th Com

mittee and Reserve Bank Presidents not currently members of the Committee 

minutes and other records could be made available to any other employee 

of the Board of Governors or of a Federal Reserve Bank with the approval 

of a member of the Committee or another Reserve Bank President, with 

notice to the Secretary.  

It was stated that lists of currently authorized persons at 

the Board and at each Federal Reserve Bank (excluding secretaries and 

records and duplicating personnel) had recently been confirmed by the 

Secretary of the Committee. The current lists were reported to be in 

the custody of the Secretary, and it was noted that revisions could be 

sent to the Secretary at any time.



3/2/65 -31

It was agreed unanimously that no 
action should be taken at this time to 
amend the procedure authorized on 
March 2, 1955.  

This concluded the consideration of the continuing authoriza

tions of the Open Market Committee, and the Committee turned to a 

review of operations during the period since the meeting of the Com

mittee held on February 2, 1965.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

February 2 through February 24, 1965, and a supplemental report for 

February 25 through March 1, 1965. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that the 

gold stock might be reduced this week by $125 million in order to 

replenish the Stabilization Fund, which ended the month of February 

with a balance of $56 million. Scheduled sales of gold during March 

already amounted to $270 million and the French would probably request-

either in March or April--an additional $150 million, which would lift 

the total to $420 million. This would increase gold losses since the 

beginning of the year to nearly $900 million. Meanwhile, pressure was 

continuing on the London gold market. The cost of intervention in 

February was $86 million, and the U.S. share of Gold Pool sales came 

to $43 million. The drain on the Gold Pool had now reached the figure



3/2/65 -32-

of $160 million out of the $270 million available. Most of the pres-

sure on the market was attributable to continuing French attacks on

the dollar and sterling; as far as he could tell only a minor part

originated in the Viet Nam situation. In recent weeks, the Chinese

Communist Government had also exerted further pressure on the market

by regular purchases of gold, which now totaled more than $30 million.

He was not sure how much the Chinese had in the way of funds to continue

such purchases, but he suspected their resources were meager and soon

would run out.

Mr. Coombs reported that at Basle this coming weekend (March 6-7)

there would be discussions of the future of the Gold Pool if the $270

million should be exhausted. He thought it would be highly advisable

in the present atmosphere to prevent the London price from going over

$35.20 even if this country's Gold Pool partners were unwilling to con-

tinue to share with the U.S. the cost of intervention in the London gold

market, so that the full cost of intervention had to be absorbed by this

country.

Thus, Mr. Coombs remarked, the immediate outlook in general

was for very heavy pressure on the U.S. gold stock, further aggravated

by speculative pressure on the London gold market. Confidence in the

dollar, which had become rather shaky in the past two or three weeks,

could be undermined still further, and in the next few weeks the U.S.

could be brought dangerously close to another crisis such as was ex-

perienced in the fall of 1960.



3/2/65 -33-

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, the Bank of

England had taken in about $145 million in February but it was now

faced with the first maturities of a huge volume of forward contracts

initiated early last December. In view of the lagging recovery of

confidence in sterling, Mr. Coombs thought it was problematical whether

it would be possible for the British to pay off these forwards from

current receipts, and further rollovers might be necessary. Much

would depend upon the tax measures to be announced in the new budget,

due in early April; the importance of the effect of the budget on the

factor of confidence could hardly be overestimated.

In other exchange markets, the dollar had remained on or close

to the floor against the French franc, the Dutch guilder, and the Belgian

franc, and all three countries had continued to take in dollars which

from now on probably would be entirely converted into gold. The U.S.

had about used up its credit facilities in the Netherlands and Belgium,

and, of course, the French were continuing to convert dollar accruals

into gold. The only encouraging feature in the present situation had

been the strength of the dollar against the Swiss franc. This reflected

seasonal factors as well as the underlying deficit in the Swiss balance

of payments which reappeared whenever short-term capital inflows tapered

off. Here again, however, very little scope remained for financing any

renewed flow of money to Switzerland through swap arrangements or other

credits; outstanding commitments in Swiss francs now amounted to $250

million out of the $300 million available under the Swiss swap arrange-

ments. On the exchange markets generally, as in the gold market, the



3/2/65 -34

U.S. might have to pass through a fairly dangerous period before the 

new balance of payments measures became fully effective.  

Chairman Martin asked whether the identity of the purchasers 

on the London gold market was known. Mr. Coombs replied that it gen

erally was possible to learn of any purchases by central banks. As 

far as he knew, the only sizable central bank purchases recently were 

by the Chinese. In general, the demand appeared to be world-wide, and 

there were indications that cash balances were being accumulated by 

people who feared trouble and were ready to come into the market. Any

one could buy gold through the agency of, say, a Swiss or Dutch bank.  

There was no indication that any American buyers were involved.  

Mr. Swan asked about the significance of the $35.20 price for 

gold which Mr. Coombs had suggested should not be exceeded. Mr. Coombs 

replied that that was a fairly arbitrary ceiling. The gold price had 

risen close to $35.20 on at least two previous occasions, one of which 

was at the time of the Cuban crisis, and in recent years the market and 

the financial press had tended to view this figure as an informal ceiling.  

The figure also had some significance in that the New York gold price of 

$35.0875 plus costs of shipping gold by a routine method added up to a 

London price of about $35.18. It was possible, of course, to ship gold 

to London by cheaper means. But if the London price went much over 

$35.20, expectational factors such as those seen in 1960 would be 

triggered off, and events probably would move much faster than in 1960 

because of that earlier experience.



3/2/65 -35

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said that 

the total of System drawings under the swap arrangements would come to 

$535 million after a drawing planned for next week of $50 million 

equivalent on the swap with the Bank of Italy. Mr. Mitchell then 

asked whether Mr. Coombs thought these drawings, other than that on 

the Bank of Italy, ought to be paid off in gold. Mr. Coombs replied in 

the negative. He was hopeful that if the new balance of payments meas

ures proved effective much of the total would prove reversible. The 

main significance he saw in the $535 million figure was that the U.S.  

gold stock would have been that much lower if the System had not made 

the swap drawings.  

In reply to other questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs noted 

that all earlier System drawings had been completely paid off in June 

1964. Subsequently, except for a September drawing of guilders to deal 

with a special situation, there were no substantial drawings by the 

System until November and December. No drawings had been renewed more 

than once, although he planned to recommend certain second renewals 

today. In general, System drawings had been repaid within the time 

span the Committee had in mind although some small part of them had been 

funded by issuance of Treasury bonds denominated in foreign currencies.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
February 2 through March 1, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that the System's $100 million standby swap 

arrangement with the Netherlands Bank would reach the end of its term on



3/2/65 -36

March 15, 1965, and he requested approval of its renewal for another 

three months.  

Renewal of the $100 million standby 
swap arrangement with the Netherlands 
Bank for a further period of 3 months, 
as recommended by Mr. Coombs, was approved.  

During March, Mr. Coombs said, a number of drawings matured 

which should be renewed if the U.S. was to avoid paying them off in 

gold. These included a $100 million drawing on the Bank for Inter

national Settlements and two drawings totaling $45 million on the 

National Bank of Belgium. Each of these would be a first renewal.  

Renewal of the drawings on the BIS 
and the National Bank of Belgium was 
noted without objection.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that three drawings upon the Netherlands 

Bank, totaling $65 million, matured in March. These already had been 

renewed once, but he thought they should be renewed again. There was 

some prospect, however, that the Dutch government might make a debt re

payment to the U.S. of roughly $60 million some time in April which 

would provide the funds to liquidate these drawings in advance of their 

next maturity. Thus, even though these drawings were renewed a second 

time he would hope that they would not be outstanding for a full nine 

months but would be paid off about seven months after they initially 

were made.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether Mr. Coombs would plan to liquidate 

these drawings if the Dutch debt repayment was not made, and Mr. Coombs 

replied affirmatively. It was a basic principle, he thought, not to



3/2/65 -37

let drawings run on; the integrity of the whole swap network rested on 

this principle. If it proved necessary to liquidate these drawings with 

gold after this renewal, he would want to consult with the Treasury on 

specific timing in the interests of orderly procedure, but the basic 

decision on liquidation would be the System's. To his mind the principle 

was quite clear that the drawings should be liquidated at the earliest 

possible moment, and he certainly would not anticipate coming back to 

the Committee to propose a third renewal.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that in his judgment the Committee should 

plan on paying off the drawings even if the potential Netherlands debt 

repayment was not made. He thought it would be undesirable to get into 

a position in which swap drawings were used to finance basic positions 

that should be covered by other means.  

Mr. Coombs replied he agreed completely with this view, and that 

it was shared by all other countries in the swap network.  

Renewal of the three drawings 
totaling $65 million on the Netherlands 
Bank was noted without objection.  

Mr. Coombs then reported that a $10 million swap of sterling 

against Dutch guilders matured for the second time at the end of the 

month, and he felt that in this case also he must recommend renewal for 

another three months. However, this was a type of arrangement that in 

the past had been allowed to run on somewhat longer than drawings on 

the regular swap lines. A greater degree of flexibility seemed appropriate 

for such third-currency swaps than for regular swap transactions because 

they permitted the System to shift its holdings among currencies.



3/2/65

Renewal of the $10 million swap of 
sterling against Dutch guilders was noted 
without objection.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs said, he expected to send a memorandum 

to the Committee before the next meeting suggesting the desirability 

of increases in the swap lines with the Bank of Italy and the Bank 

of Japan.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period February 2 through February 24, 

1965, and a supplemental report for February 25 through March 1, 1965.  

Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the writter. reports, Mr. Stone commented 

as follows: 

Financial markets have come to understand that monetary 
policy has undergone a modest but distinct shift toward less 
ease. The change has been interpreted as a step aimed at 
supporting the more general program undertaken to deal with 
the balance of payments. The shift in policy was widely 
expected. Indeed, as I indicated at the last meeting, the 
market had already, by the beginning of February, undergone 
a good part of its adjustment to a somewhat less easy policy 
stance.  

Marginal reserve availability has now moved down to a 
range surrounding zero free reserves, Federal funds have been 
trading most often at or above the 4 per cent discount rate, 
and member bank borrowing has increased. Bill rates have 
risen about 10 basis points, putting the 3-month rate in the 
neighborhood of 4 per cent, while other short-term rates have 
moved up about 1/8 per cent. Yields on short-term coupon 
issues, maturing within a year or two, also have moved up 
about 10 basis points, but throughout the rest of the Treasury 
list there have been yield increases of only a basis point or 
two for the most part.

-38-



3/2/65 -39

While the market's adjustment to the policy shift has been 
very smooth, there remains an undertone of caution, based partly 
on uneasiness over the situation in the Far East and over recent 
and prospective gold losses. Furthermore, there is a feeling 
that unless the payments deficit is reduced substantially, and 
soon, further monetary policy action may be needed. On the other 
hand, the market continues to see large amounts of savings seeking 
employment, and it retains the view that, barring some kind of 
crisis, longer term rates are not likely to change much and might 
even edge down as the year goes on.  

Wnatever the longer-range view about rates, there is a feeling 
in the market that the next few weeks may see some intensification 
of money market pressures, and possible rate increases, for seasonal 
reasons. Corporate cash needs over the dividend and tax dates this 
month may be at least as great as in other recent quarterly months, 
and there may be somewhat less of a cushion of liquid holdings to 
fall back on, given the build-.p in other demands on corporate 
liquid resources. Issuing rates on time certificates of deposit 
have edged into new high ground as banks have sought to replace 
actual and anticipated maturities of outstanding CDs. With major 
banks paying 4-1/4 per cent or more for 3-month money, and corpora
tions in a period of net cash drain, it is possible that short 
rates might press a bit higher during the period of seasonal pres
sures ahead. On the other hand, there has been a tendency during 
several recent tax and dividend periods for a number of large money 
market banks to move gradually to surplus basic reserve positions 
to enable them to accommodate without strain the pressures that 
converge upon them on the tax and dividend dates. If this advance 
preparation happens again, the upward rate pressures could well turn 
out to be both mild and brief.  

Recent price declines have been somewhat more pronounced in 
corporate and tax-exempt bond markets than in the Treasury bond 
area. Tax-exempt bonds have been in large supply and a reaction 
seemed overdue after the price rise in this market which followed 
the raising of Regulation Q ceilings last November. Recent price 
cuts seem to have been successful in stimulating demand, but the 
calendar remains substantial. Public offerings of corporate bonds 
have not been heavy, but private bond placements and stock or 
convertible debt offerings have competed for investible funds and 
produced some rise in rates.  

The Treasury financing calendar is clear of all but routine 
bill roll-overs for the next three weeks, and indeed the next 
significant debt operation is not likely to come until late April, 
when the Treasury will announce plans for refunding its May 15 
maturities.  

Mr. Ellis asked whether his understanding was correct that Mr.  

Stone thought the market had completed its adjustment to the recent shift

in monetary policy, and Mr. Stone replied affirmatively.



3/2/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period February 2 through 
March 1, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financial 

reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed prior 

to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files of the Com

mittee.  

Mr. Noyes made the following statement on economic conditions: 

After four years of almost incredibly stable expansion, 
there is growing concern that our economy may be developing 
a classic form of instability--the boom-bust inventory whipsaw 
that so often frustrated our efforts to maintain stable growth.  
The fact that some observers are inclined to focus their 
attention on the boom side of this cycle and its inflationary 
potential, while others are preoccupied with the subsequent 
bust and its impact on our employment and growth objectives, 
should not trap us into the comforting but erroneous conclu
sion that these concerns can be offset against one another.  

It is impossible to establish with any precision the size 
of the inventory build-up that has already occurred. The most 
recent comprehensive data presently available are for December.  
These were just revised upward by a substantial amount and there 
are indications that before they are final they will be revised 
still further. Taken at their face value, they would indicate 
that inventories were being accumulated on a GNP basis at a 
$9 billion annual rate in November and December. The staff 
reply to the first question 1/ suggests that the annual rate of 
accumulation in January and February may be about $10 billion, 
and that over $6 billion of this is in lines other than steel 
and autos. These are high rates, by any standards--about equal, 
for example, to the second quarter of 1959, when inventory policy 
was influenced by both widespread inflationary expectations and 
the prospect of a prolonged steel strike.  

1/ The staff's prepared comments on certain questions considered 
by the Committee at this meeting are given at a later point 
in these minutes.

-40-



3/2/65 -41

I do not wish to leave you with the impression that all of 
the strength we see in our economy should be associated with 
inventory accumulation, or that the absorption of the inventories 
thus far accumulated would necessarily produce a recession in 
economic activity. The staff answer I referred to earlier 
estimates that we might see "an initial downdrag of some $8 
billion annual rate," but the staff has, wisely in my judgment, 
declined to specify at this stage the period over which such a 
downdrag might be felt. Similarly, they omit any consideration 
of the immediate or ultimate consequences of a further accelera
tion in the rate of inventory accumulation.  

Obviously, I have no better basis for projecting these 
magnitudes than they had. Nevercheless, it seems quite possible 
that we may shortly find ourselves in a situation in which aggre
gate demand is being inflated by inventory accumulation at an 
annual rate of as much as $15 billion. If this should continue 
for a period of several months, it would almost certainly have 
current inflationary consequences, and if it were rapidly reversed, 
it would produce at best a short recession.  

What can monetary policy do to forestall such a misfortune? 
It is difficult to conclude that it can do much. At the heart 
of one's conclusion lies a judgment as to whether a more restric
tive monetary policy now would (a) moderate somewhat the rate of 
inventory accumulation, or (b) effectively defer some other demands 
to be released when inventory demand disappears, or both.  

There is very little evidence to suggest that changes in the 
overall cost and availability of credit exert much influence on 
inventory policy in the short run. While judgments differ as to 
the extent of the influence, if any, I doubt that anyone would 
wish to argue that inventory accumulation can be effectively 
regulated by general credit policy.  

Whether other types of expenditures can be deferred and later 
released by a tightening and subsequent easing of credit is a 
much more controversial question. It seems to me that the ques
tion cannot be answered dogmatically in the negative. To deny that 
some deferral could be accomplished by alternating the posture of 
policy would be to deny any anticyclical role to monetary action.  
But the risks involved in attempting to push some part of the demand 
pressures that are present and in immediate prospect ahead for 
several months are formidable. We know very little about the so
called lags in the impact of monetary policy, but we have every 
reason to believe that they vary considerably among the components 
of aggregate demand. The studies that have been made suggest 
that the lags may be longest in the very areas in which we might 
hope to accomplish some deferral, creating a danger that the major 
impact of a policy change intended to push demands ahead might 
come at the very time the additional demand was needed.



3/2/65 -42

There is also the danger that a policy change 
sufficient to accomplish any significant deferral of 
demand would itself cause the expansion to lose momen
tum and thus precipitate the downturn it was intended 
to prevent.  

These dangers must be weighed against the strong 
possibility that in the absence of restraint and subsequent 
stimulation from public policy, the process of inventory 
accumulation and decumulation will again upset the smooth 
course of economic progress.  

I have no answer to suggest to you today and any 
attempt to deal with the problem now would probably be 
premature. It may be that this threat to stability will 
be wiped out, as others have, by some fortuitious event 
that cannot be foreseen at this stage. I am afraid, however, 
that the more likely possibility is that it will loom much 
larger three weeks from now than it does today.  

Mr. Robertson entered the meeting during the course of Mr. Noyes' 

remarks.  

Mr. Swan asked if Mr. Noyes would clarify the basis on which 

he estimate that inventory accumulation might rise to a $15 billion 

annual rate. Mr. Noyes replied that the latest inventory figures 

available related to November and December, and the Board's staff had 

estimated that the accumulation rate had risen from $9 billion in this 

period to $10 billion in January and February. However, there was some 

evidence to suggest that inventory investment in the first two months 

of 1965 was higher than that estimate. The evidence did not consist 

of hard figures, but rather of comparisons of current rates of produc

tion and final takings. He personally had suggested that there might 

be a gradual snowballing, with the rate rising to something on the 

order of $15 billion in March.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that most analysts expected the rate of 

inventory accumulation to peak out in March and April, and then to turn



3/2/65 -43

down of its own weight. Evidently it was Mr. Noyes' view that the 

current high rate would continue for a longer period.  

Mr. Noyes said he thought there was some danger that it would.  

The staff's answer to the first question was in accord with the expecta

tion that Mr. Mitchell had described and on that basis they had con

cluded that there might be a downdrag on GNP of about $8 billion, at 

an annual rate, in late spring and early summer. What he suggested was 

that the problem would be more serious if the high rate of accumulation 

continued or accelerated. Whether it would or not depended on many 

factors which he could not forecast with confidence, including the 

nature of developments in the steel industry labor negotiations. But 

he had several reasons for fearing that a snowballing might be in process.  

First was the evidence to which he had referred suggesting that current 

accumulation rates might be even higher than the high staff estimates.  

Second was the apparent fact that inventory investment outside of steel 

and autos was going forward at the high rate of $6 billion. It was 

necessary to assume that this was voluntary accumulation not directly 

associated with anticipations of a steel strike, and there was no reason 

to suppose that it would not continue, as it had in past inventory cycles.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that there were no suggestions of such a 

development in the most recent surveys of expectations or in data on 

final sales, and Mr. Noyes agreed.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that if the rate of inventory investment in 

February was $10 billion it was quite reasonable to expect it to be on 

the order of $15 billion in March, considering both the auto-steel



3/2/65 -44

situations and the accumulation in other lines. This was the sort of 

situation that. had been foreshadowed by developments over the past six 

months and about which the Committee had been concerned.  

Mr. Koch then made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Open market operations over the past few weeks have 
achieved the slight firming in money market conditions 
sought at the last meeting of the Committee. Three-month 
Treasury bill rates have edged up near the 4 per cent 
discount rate, and free reserves have fluctuated around 
the zero level. Most other money market rates of interest 
have also risen between an eighth and a quarter of a per cent.  

The effect of this slight firming in money market con
ditions on interest rates on longer-term Government securities 
has thus far been moderate. The average yield on U.S. Govern
ment bonds with maturities of over 10 years, for example, is 
up only about 3 basis points from its late-January low. In
vestors and dealers apparently became convinced that the Govern
ment bond market had found a viable level when official purchases 
of the 4-1/4 per cent bonds offered in the January advance re
funding were undertaken when they hit par.  

Corporate and municipal bond yields have experienced a 
somewhat larger upward yield adjustment in recent weeks, due 
in large part to factors other than the recent adjustment in 
policy. Sluggishness has developed in the distribution of 
some recent new issues, particularly in the municipal area 
where dealer inventories are at a record level.  

It is still too early to tell whether the recent policy 
adjustment has had the effect of ;oderating the pace of 
expansion in the complex of variables that make up the other 
basic financial objectives of policy, namely, the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply. Over the 3 months ending 
with February, total reserves and total bank credit expanded 
at high annual rates, 6 per cent in the case of reserves and 
10-1/2 per cent in the case of bank credit. Demand for bank 
loans by businesses was especially strong. The sharp contra
seasonal rise in business loans was no doubt sparked chiefly by 
heavier inventory accumulation, due in part to the dock strike 
and the strike threat in the steel industry, and by accelerated 
foreign lending in anticipation of Governmental curbs. Some of 
these temporary factors that have strengthened business loan 
demand are either abating or will probably do so in the not-too
distant future, but other factors, reflecting the stepped-up 
over-all economic expansion, are likely to be more long-lived.



3/2/65 -45

In contrast to the sharp growth in reserves and bank 
credit, there has been no net growth in the money supply 
over the past 3 months, as compared with over a 4-1/2 per cent 
annual rate of increase in the preceding 3 months. Indeed, 
in February the money supply actually declined. This recent 
behavior in the money stock was no doubt accompanied by some 
further increase in income velocity although the bank debit 
and deposit turnover figures do not show it.  

The explanation for the leveling off in the money stock 
despite the higher rates of growth in bank reserves and bank 
credit lies mainly in the sharply higher rate of increase in 
time and savings deposits at commercial banks induced by the 
impact of rising rates of return. The annual rate of growth 
of these deposits amounted to 20 per cent over the past 3 months.  

One's judgment as to the likely inflationary effects of 
recent Federal Reserve policy must rest in large part on his 
interpretation of these divergent developments in the course 
of bank reserves, bank credit, the money supply, and savings.  
That is to say, it must rest mainly on one's judgment as to 
the differential effects on the cost and availability of 
credit and on spending of the leveling off in the money stock, 
on the one hand, and of the rapid increase in time and savings 
deposits, on the other.  

In evaluating the characteristics of the recent growth 
in time and savings deposits of commercial banks, it is of 
relevance to note that the turnover of savings deposits of 
commercial banks in the Chicago Federal Reserve District, 
the only data of this kind that are available on a current 
basis, has shown no rise and is still only about 1/70 as 
rapid as that in demand deposits. Of course, time certif
icates of deposit, particularly negotiable certificates, 
turn over more rapidly than savings deposits, but even these 
deposits have fixed maturities that are much longer than the 
average life of a demand deposit. Mcreover, negotiable 
certificates of deposit, although now totaling almost $14 
billion, still make up only a little more than 10 per cent 
of total outstanding time and savings deposits.  

Thus,not only are consumers and businesses saving more 
in depository type assets, but commercial banks are playing 
a much more important role now than earlier as savings 
intermediaries. In other words, the recent increase in 
the rate of bank credit expansion represents mainly the 
investment of savings that would otherwise have been invested 
directly by savers or by nonbank financial institutions.  

The existence of a large outstanding volume of time 
and savings deposits at commercial banks does pose a 
potential inflationary threat if the holders of such deposits 
decided to spend them in large volume. But the continuing 
low turnover rate of savings deposits as well as recent



3/2/65 -46

reduced rates of growth in savings at other depository
type institutions suggest that most commercial bank 
savings deposits probably represent funds that would 
more likely flow to competitive savings institutions or 
directly into purchases of securities rather than into the 
spending stream if they suddenly left the banks. At least 
there is no reason for assuming that most savings deposits 
at commercial banks are potentially more inflationary than 
shareholdings at savings and loan associations, deposits at 
mutual savings banks, or savings bonds.  

If one accepts this interpretation of recent develop
ments in the course of the reserve base, bank credit, money, 
and savings, they do not appear to pose as much of a destabi
lizing and inflationary threat to the continuance of sustain
able over-all economic expansion as the high rates of expan
sion in bank credit and time deposits in and of themselves 
might suggest.  

Mr. Hickman commented that aggregate savings, ex post, equaled 

aggregate investment, and any increase in bank deposits contributed to 

the funds available for investment whether it was in the form of time 

and savings or demand deposits. In his judgment the recent 20 per cent 

growth rate in time and savings deposits and the concurrent rapid increase 

in total assets held by banks were an inflationary development.  

Mr. Koch said he would agree that the time and savings deposit 

growth would have expansionary implications to the extent that they 

were not held idle but, as he had noted, the limited data available 

suggested that their turnover had not increased recently. It was true 

that the increases in savings deposits were financing investment. However, 

they did not involve money creation but rather abstention from spending 

by the savers, and thus, in his judgment, were no different from increases 

in flows of funds through other financial intermediaries.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the banks were buying these deposits 

from the public; with higher ceiling rates on time and savings deposits



3/2/65 -47

banks were able to participate in intermediating the flows of funds 

to a greater extent than before. He agreed with Mr. Koch that the 

basic question was whether the recent rise in deposits primarily 

reflected money creation; if he thought it did he would favor a much 

tighter monetary policy. But since the turnover of these deposits 

evidently was stable he concluded that they represented savings which 

the depositors were not inclined to spend.  

Mr. Hickman said he would agree that one could not push on a 

string; the situation would be different if there was no outlet for 

these funds. But they were flowing into domestic business investment, 

into mortgages, to outlets abroad, and so forth. He added that the 

ratio of aggregate liquid assets to GNP was rising in this expansion 

period, for the first time in any expansion on record.  

Mr. Hayes commented that even if the accelerated rise in time 

and savings deposits merely represented a greater degree of intermedia

tion by banks it resulted in some increase in the liquidity of the 

nonbank public. At some point this could have inflationary consequences; 

it apparently had not thus far, but one could not be sure how long this 

situation would continue. Mr. Mitchell concurred in this statement.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

The unadjusted payments deficit on "regular" trans
actions in January-February now appears to have totaled 
$600-$700 million. This is much larger than a year earlier, 
during the period when the deficit was temporarily very 
small, and about the same as in January-February of 1963, 
when things were going rather badly.



3/2/65 -48

The deficit was swollen by a rush of long-term bank 
lending to beat the Gore Amendment. New commitments were 
enormous, $575 million through about February 10th, and 
much of this was probably disbursed. The deficit may also 
have been swollen by other anticipatory outflows, and by 
the port strikes, which always delay more exports than 
imports. These adverse influences may have been partly 
offset by some favorable developments, including a return 
flow early in January of very short-term capital that went 
out over the year-end, receipt of dividends earlier post
poned to take advantage of U.S. tax cuts, and a pause, at 
least, in capital outflows during the latter part of 
February after the new balance of payments program was 
announced.  

As is usual early in the year, net "official settle
ments" were small in January-February; but within this 
category there were very large transactions. The U.S.  
gold stock declined by about $480 million, more than in 
any other two-month period since late 1960, and U.S.  
official holdings of convertible foreign currencies 
(mainly sterling) were reduced by about $200 million.  
This drop of nearly $700 million in reserve assets was 
more than matched by a reduction in U.S. liabilities to 
foreign monetary authorities.  

The behavior of the gold stock will continue to 
attract much attention in coming months, and it may be 
helpful to review the recent and prospective reserve 
behavior of those countries that are in a position to 
make substantial gold purchases.  

France has sought and achieved the limelight in this 
area. Its announced policy is to take all reserve gains 
in gold this year, and in addition to reduce its official 
dollar holdings. In January-February, France bought $250 
million of gold from the United States; the likely purchase 
of an additional $250 million in March would bring French 
dollar balances down to about the desired level of $1 
billion. Thereafter, France would buy gold to the extent 
of its reserve gains, which could well amount to an 
additional $300 million or so.  

Canada has larger official dollar holdings than any 
other country--$1.6 billion that are counted as reserves 
plus $200 million of additional U.S.-dollar Roosa bonds.  
Canada is not expected to continue adding to its total 
reserves this year, but will probably build up its gold 
stock slowly out of current domestic production.  

After Canada, the three countries with the largest 
official dollar holdings are Italy, Germany, and Japan, 
each holding about $1-1/2 billion. Total Italian reserves



3/2/65

are rising rapidly, and Italy has not repurchased either
the $200 million of gold that it sold last spring or the
$200 million of Roosa bonds that it then redeemed. Its
gold stock is lower, both absolutely and relative to total
reserves, than at any time since 1960, and its dollar
holdings are larger. With the best will in the world,
Italy may be sorely tempted to take some of its reserve
gains in gold this year, even though the renewed expansion
of Italian economic activity--when it comes--seems likely
to eliminate the payments surplus.

Unlike Italy, Germany has not been gaining reserves,
and it reduced its official dollar holdings during 1964
by more than $1 billion, while adding about $400 million
each to its gold stock, its holdings of deutschemark
Roosa bonds, and its IMF position. Germany is unlikely
to have new dollar gains to convert into gold this year,
and the internal argument will be whether to convert ex-
isting holdings, as the French are urging.

Japan also seems unlikely to add much to total reserves
this year. Its ratio of gold to total reserves is smaller
than that of any other leading country--only 15 per cent--
but in view of its special dependence on U.S. markets, it
seems likely to continue to eschew gold purchases.

To summarize for these five countries, which account
for about half of foreign official dollar holdings, I think
we may expect that France will buy roughly $800 million of
gold this year, that Italy may buy at least the $200 million
it sold last year, and that Canada will absorb domestic gold
production of about $150 million, while it may be hoped that
Germany and Japan will sit tight.

Among a second group of foreign countries--those that
hold large reserves almost entirely in gold--the United
Kingdom will probably not be selling gold as it did last
year, but will have to use any reserve accruals this year
to repay debts. Other countries in this gold-holding group--
Switzerland, the Netherlands, and Belgium--added some $500
million to their total reserves last year, largely during
the sterling crisis, but took less than $100 million of it
in gold. This year, their reserve gains may be smaller,
but they may still make sizable gold purchases. They pur-
chased $85 million from us in January-February.

A third group of countries have more modest total reserves
but relatively large dollar holdings. Of these, Spain has the
largest holdings; it is not expected to add greatly further
to its total reserves this year, but is buying $180 million of
gold during the first half. Sweden and Denmark have taken
reserve increases largely in dollars, and each holds less than

-49-



3/2/65 -50

one-fifth of its total reserves in gold, but they have given 
no recent indication of being restive about their dollar 
holdings. Austria took reserve gains of $90 million in 
1964 mainly in gold, but is currently purchasing another 
$50 million of Roosa bonds instead of gold. In Venezuela, 
officials are encountering local pressures to add to the 
gold stock and may do so.  

Adding up these rough impressions, and making some 
allowance for gains and losses by other countries, I con
cluded that foreign monetary authorities may well buy as 
much as $2 billion of gold, net, this year (including gold 
to be subscribed to the IMF). Free world production plus 
Russian sales will probably be about $1-3/4 billion, but 
industrial uses and hoarding typically take about half of 
the new supply in good years and three-fourths of it in 
years of market disturbance, which 1965 has certainly 
started out to be, so that less than $1/2 billion may be 
available for central banks. Thus, the U.S. gold stock could 
well decline by more than $1-1/2 billion this year, even 
allowing for the fact that our gold subscription to the IMF 
will be offset by a gold deposit here by the Fund.  

Most of this projected $1-1/2 billion decline in our 
gold stock seems to me already in the cards, even if no one 
else follows French advice, and even if the U.S. payments 
situation develops favorably. The importance of making sure 
that it does develop favorably lies in the imperative need 
to avoid further foreign official dollar gains and gold 
conversions next year.  

Chairman Martin noted that at the joint meeting of the Board and 

the Reserve Bank Presidents on February 18 Mr. Young had reported on the 

recent meeting of Working Party 3 in Paris. There had been a subsequent 

Paris meeting, on February 17 and 18, of the Economic Policy Committee, 

which Mr. Daane had attended. He invited Mr. Daane to comment on that 

meeting.  

Mr. Daane said that he would summarize briefly the flavor of the 

discussion at the E.P.C. meeting, which covered some of the same ground 

as the meeting Mr. Young had reported on. First, some dissatisfaction 

was expressed with the short-term measures the British had taken to deal



3/2/65 -51

with their balance of payments problem. The feeling was quite general 

that they had not done enough. The focus of attention was on the U.K.  

budget; there were repeated admonitions to the effect that a tougher 

budget was necessary and that it should be redesigned to release resources 

for production of exports.  

With respect to the U.S. situation, Mr. Daane said, the attitude 

seemed to be one of welcoming the program the President had outlined and 

hoping that it would prove successful. At tne same time, there seemed to 

be general skepticism regarding the effectiveness of moral suasion, partic

ularly with respect to its probable impact on U.S. direct investments 

abroad. The view was expressed that the U.S. should have included monetary 

policy in the program and should definitely resort to monetary policy 

measures if evidence appeared that the President's program was not having 

sufficient effect.  

A final highlight, Mr. Daane remarked, were the signs, particularly 

with respect to the Germans, of real sensitivity to continued direct invest

ment by U.S. corporations.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed cer

tain questions and responses for consideration by the Committee. These 

materials were as follows: 

(1) Business activity--To what extent does the present pace of 
economic activity depend on production for inventories, and what 
are the prospects for the economy when the rate of inventory 
accumulation is reduced? 

Accumulation of inventories, particularly of steel in 
anticipation of a strike, has been and continues to be an 
important element sustaining the advanced level of industrial 
production, but it is important to note that the rise in out

put over the past six months has been widespread among major



3/2/65

industries. Steel's principal contribution to rising output 
came early in 1964. Since July further increases in steel 
output have been limited by capacity considerations, while 
the production of consumer durable goods, apparel, and business 
equipment has accelerated. It therefore is an oversimplification 
to assume that the current rapid pace of expansion in industrial 
activity is primarily dependent on inventory adjustments to 
past (auto) and prospective (steel) strikes.  

Nevertheless, the substantial accumulation of inventories 
now going on is distorting the structure of production suff 
ciently to pose a potential problem for coming months. Staff 
estimates based on detailed study of production trends by 
industry and by stage of fabrication suggest that industrial 
output currently is exceeding consumption by a margin equal 
to about 4 per cent of output as against a more usual margin 
of about 1 per cent. The annual rate of inventory accumula
tion in January and February may well have been on the order 
of $10 billion on a GNP basis, triple the rate prevailing 
through most of 1964, with about a third of the total occur
ring in steel and autos, mainly the former.  

If steel accumulation continues at current rates until 
the official contract termination date of May 1, stocks would 
then be higher than they were at the earlier peaks in 1962 
and mid-1963, when strike threats also induced accumulation.  
A wage settlement, or even a temporary continuation of the 
present contract under conditions which suggest ultimate settle
ment without a strike, probably would result in sharp cutbacks 
in steel orders and production--perhaps enough a depress the 
total production index by as much as two percentage points.  
If this were concomitant with a cutback in auto production 
from present exceptionally high levels because, say, dealers' 
stocks finally reached their usual spring peak, another one
half of a point would be subtracted from the index. To these 
direct effects must be added also the effect of declines in 
supplying industries. In dollar terms, the combined effect 
of such a reduction in steel and auto output with accompanying 
inventory decumulation might exert an initial downdrag on GNP 
by some $8 billion, annual rate, in late spring and early summer.  
In the event of a strike, the amount of inventory liquidation, 
and the consequent impact on GNP, would obviously be much 
sharper.  

In light of the continuing strength being displayed in 
other sectors of output and demand, the rough orders of mag
nitude cited above do not suggest the inevitability of reces
sion when steel inventory accumulation ceases and/or auto 
production adjusts downward from its present phrenetic pace.  
They do, however, suggest a check to the rate of economic 
expansion, unless other forces, including fiscal policy, 
provide a sufficiently stimulative offset.

-52-



3/2/65 -53

(2) Prices--In view of the current high rate of capacity 
utilization in many industries, what are the prospects for 
price stability? 

Present high rates of industrial capacity utilization 
have not upset the general stability of prices that has 
prevailed over the past six years. The rise in the industrial 
wholesale price index last fall--sparked mainly by shortages 
and production bottlenecks in nonferrous metals--has not been 
reversed, but neither has the price advance become cumulative 
or broader in scope.  

Utilization rates implied in most forecasts for further 
economic expansion are not, in themselves, inconsistent with 
continued overall price stability. Moreover, some of the 
important cases of current high utilization rates are clearly 
temporary.  

One of the fortunate developments of this business expan
sion has been that spending for plant and equipment picked up, 
and presumably the rise in capacity accelerated, long before 
output generally reached high rates in relation to capacity.  
By the end of 1962 output of business equipment was up more 
than a tenth from the highs of 1957 and 1960, and since 1962, 
such output has increased nearly a fifth further. Prospects 
for increases in capacity commensurate with rising output are 
more favorable than in earlier expansions in the postwar period.  

Rates of capacity utilization, however, are only one of 
many important influences on prices. In recent years business 
pricing decisions have been strongly conditioned by longer 
term competitive considerations, including the development of 
new products and new methods, the installation of new, cost
reducing equipment, and increased substitutability of other 
products and other sources of supply, foreign as well as 
domestic.  

Potential destabilizing forces could, however, develop 
out of changes in international tensions, particularly the 
Southeast Asian situation. Another important influence on 
the future course of industrial commodity prices is what 
happens to steel wages and prices this spring, in part because 
of the potential repercussions on other wage settlements and 
in part because of the cost impact of price changes in so 
important a material as steel. Both last year's auto settle
ment and the current record activity in the steel industry 
no doubt strengthen the union's case for increases in wages 
and fringes above the 2 - 2-1/2 per cent per year increases 
of the 1962 and 1963 contracts, and internal union dissension 
may result in large demands. But management resistance may 
be fostered by uncertainty over the extent to which any cost 
increases can be passed on to buyers under present competitive



3/2/65

conditions. The Administration's wage and price guideposts 
may also serve to moderate the terms of the settlement and 
its consequences for prices.  

(3) Balance of payments--To what extent does the fourth
quarter deterioration in the U.S. balance of payments now 
appear to have resulted from temporary influences? 

In the fourth quarter, the seasonally adjusted deficit 
on "regular" transactions was $1,450 million, $770 million 
larger than in the third quarter and $700 million larger 
than the quarterly average for the year. At least $500 
million of the fourth-quarter deficit (i.e., two-thirds of 
the deterioration from the third quarter) is attributable 
to certain definable temporary influences. Even without 
these influences, however, the fourth-quarter deficit still 
would have been disturbingly large--about $900 million.  

The main temporary development was the bulge in new 
foreign security issues to $585 million, seasonally adjusted, 
up $420 million from the third quarter and $320 million 
above the average for the year. The bulge occurred mainly 
in Canadian issues, which had been postponed earlier pending 
enactment of the IET. The expectation that new foreign issues 
in 1965 will be at about the same rate as in 1964 implies that 
the temporary element in fourth-quarter issues may be put at 
something over $300 million. In January-February 1965, new 
issues were again large--$300-$350 millon--but this sum 
includes $181 million of a single IBRD issue; the remainder, 
seasonally adjusted, is not very different from the average 
expected for 1965.  

A second adverse factor in the fourth quarter was the 
waiver of the scheduled U.K. year-end debt service payments 
of $138 million.  

Capital outflows reported by U.S. banks rose much more 
than seasonally in the fourth quarter, but it is hard to say 
how much of the rise could be regarded as "temporary." Net 
long-term bank lending of $330 million, seasonally adjusted, 
was up about $100 million from both the third quarter and the 
quarterly average for the year, but much of this increase 
should probably be viewed as part of a rising trend. If there 
was any acceleration of term-loan disbursements in anticipation 
of Government measures to restrain capital outflows, it was 
far smaller than in January 1965, when long-term bank lending 
shot up to $215 million in a single month.  

Short-term outflows reported by U.S. banks of $440 million, 
seasonally adjusted, were up about $250 million from the third 
quarter and $60 million from the quarterly average for the year.  
Unadjusted, the outflow was heavily concentrated in December,

-54-



3/2/65 -55

and some of it (in addition to the portion allowed for by 
seasonal adjustments) may have been temporary, flowing back 
rather early in the new year. The January 1965 return flow 
of $170 million (unadjusted) points in this direction. There 
have been similar large January reflows in some other recent 
years, but this year's net reflow occurred despite reported 
efforts of some institutions to place funds abroad in anticipa
tion of Government restructions.  

So far there is little evidence on which to judge whether 
there were temporary movements, favorable or unfavorable, in 
other "regular" transactions during the fourth quarter. The 
balance of these transactions, on which little detail is yet 
available, was about the same as in earlier quarters of 1964.  

(4) Bank credit and money.  
A. Is the recent contraseasonal strength in bank loan 

demands likely to continue, or has it been a response 
to special influences likely to diminish in the near 
term? 

Available information suggests that a good part of the 
recent unusual strength of bank loan demand is temporary. This 
increased demand has been confined almost exclusively to busi
ness loans, where borrowing has been affected by a combination 
of special circumstances. These temporary factors, however, 
do not account for all of the loan bulge. With the economy 
recently showing an accelerated rate of expansion and with 
internal sources of business funds probably growing less 
rapidly than financing needs, a strengthening in the under
lying trend of business loan expansion may also be in progress.  

The recent acceleration in business borrowing has been 
much sharper than usually has been associated with increases 
in business activity at present rates. From a fairly steady 
pace of $400-$500 million per month over the first 11 months 
of 1964, the seasonally adjusted increase in business loans 
rose to $800 million in December, $1.7 billion in January, 
and $1.1 billion (preliminary estimate) in February.  

Factors which probably accounted for most of this year's 
bulge are the following: First, the dock strike, which tied 
up a substantial volume of both incoming and outgoing mer
chandise shipments, is reported to have been mainly responsible 
for the contraseasonal rise in commodity dealer loans this 
year. The strike may also have contributed to the recent strong 
loan demand by food processors and possibly trade concerns as 

well. Second, inventory accumulation to hedge against a possible 

steel strike probably accounts for most of the contraseasonal 
rise in the metals group. The contribution of such borrowing 
to the January-February loan bulge may have been on the order



3/2/65

of $150 million a month. Third, the pace of foreign lending 
rose rapidly in recent months, presumably in anticipation of 
restrictive Government measures. Foreign term lending in 
January amounted to more than $200 million according to pre
liminary estimates. Fourth, a loan of about $100 million 
was extended to a petroleum company in mid-February to acquire 
a large block of its stock.  

The impact of some of these factors on loan expansion may 
continue for a while, but at a diminishing rate. Liquidation 
of the loan bulge connected with the dock strike may be expected 
shortly. Steel inventory accumulation presumably will continue 
until a strike occurs or the threat of a strike is removed.  
Foreign lending will need to taper off soon if banks are to 
hold outstandings within their proposed ceilings, although 
some further expansion may occur in the near term because of 
prior commitments.  

The total impact of these temporary influences on business 
loan expansion since the turn of the year may have amounted to 
as much as $600 million per month. But this still leaves a 
residual expansion substantially larger than the average monthly 
increase in 1964. Some of this residual may reflect early bor
rowing in anticipation of large tax payments in March and April, 
but some undoubtedly reflects the general strength in business 
activity.  

B. To what extent has the reduced rate of expansion in 
the money supply since November been a reflection of 
the higher rates offered on time and savings deposits? 
What are the implications of probable time and savings 
deposit growth in the near term for the money supply? 

Preliminary estimates indicate a substantial decline in 
the money supply in February, offsetting the moderate increases 
in December and January and bringing the money stock back to 
the November level. This recent money supply performance in 
large part probably reflects the accelerated growth in time 
and savings deposits. However, a rise in U.S. Government 
deposits (seasonally adjusted) also has tended to moderate 
money growth over this period.  

The months following previous increases in Regulation Q 
ceilings also saw sharp increases in time and savings deposits 
and moderation in the growth of money as the public adjusted 
its liquid asset holdings to changed market alternatives.  
Much of the initial adjustment takes the form of one-time shifts 
out of money and other highly liquid financial assets into time 
and savings deposits. The pattern of changes since November 
suggests that the public's response to this change in Regulation Q 
is broadly similar to that following earlier revisions.

-56-



3/2/65

Rate increases, together with the extensive publicity 
accorded them, presumably account for most of the surge in 
savings deposit inflow since year-end. Banks generally also 
have increased their outstanding negot:able CDs substantially 
since year-end. Some banks have been promoting new nonnego
tiable savings and investment certificates, designed to 
attract funds from small businesses and other investors 
unable to acquire negotiable CDs.  

Judging from the limited historical experience, it seems 
likely that the recent rates of growth of savings and time 
deposits will moderate soon. In periods following previous 
ceiling rate increases, the influence of one-time shifts from 
other assets lasted about one quarter. Moreover, as loan 
demands from the temporary influences discussed above in 
answer to question 4A recede, banks probably will reduce 
their issuance of relatively high-cost CDs.  

Correspondingly, growth in the money suppy over the near 
term may accelerate. Additional economies in cash utiliza
tion stimulated by current higher yields on liquid assets 
may have some moderating influence on money growth, but trans
actions needs for money, related mainly to the pace of busi
ness activity, are likely to be more directly reflected in 
demands for cash balances in coming months.  

(5) Money and credit markets.  
A. Has the recent shift in policy been fully reflected 

in the principal money and capital markets, or are 
further market adjustments likely? 

Market participants generally have come to the conclusion 
that a mild policy shift toward less ease has been effectuated.  
Most assume the policy objectives include a lower, and at times 
negative, level of free reserves, and a 3-month bill rate in 
the neighborhood of the discount rate. In other words, market 
participants do not now seem to expect much more firming than 
already has developed during the past three weeks.  

Partly because the recent policy shift has been only 
moderate in scope and is being so interpreted by active in
vestors, the related adjustment in capital markets also has 
been moderate. The upward movement in long-term U.S. Govern
ment rates has been relatively small, despite the unfavorable 
technical position of the Treasury bond market. Adjustments 
in corporate and municipal bond markets have been larger, in 
part reflecting the unusual strength in these markets in 
December and January, and in part the growing calendar of 
new corporate and municipal issues. Upward pressures stem
ming from those forces have been tempered, however, by Treas
ury and System purchases of coupon issues during the past two

-57-



3/2/65

weeks; these purchases have tended to buttress a market view, 
encouraged by Administration statements, that long-term rates 
are not likely to rise much.  

Assuming no further change in policy, short-term rates 
might still show some seasonal rise, with the most likely 
time coming around the March tax and dividend dates. But 
if the rise is small enough to avoid generating expectations 
of a discount rate increase, the odds are against a signifi
cent furtner weakening in the long-term market. The tech
nical position of the U.S. Government securities market is 
gradually improving, with dealer holdings of over-20-year 
maturities reduced to under $300 million. However, further 
enlargement of the calendar of corporate and municipal issues 
and/or continuation of strong bank loan demand could produce 
new upward rate pressures in both intermediate- and long-term 
maturity areas.  

B. Assuming that the somewhat firmer policy adopted at 
the last meeting has been communicated to and fully 
reflected in the money market, what interest rate 
structure and conditions of reserve availability 
would be mutually consistent and best designed to 
maintain the present policy posture? 

Some moderate additional pressure upon the money market 
is likely to develop between now and the mid-March tax and 
dividend dates. This will result primarily from the needs 
of corporations to make higher outlays for dividends and 
taxes; their Federal income tax liability in March is esti
mated at some $6.9 billion, about one-tenth higher than last 
year. While the existence of a $2.5 billion tax anticipation 
bill will help smooth the pattern of payments, the period is 
nonetheless likely to produce its usual temporary concentra
tion of pressures on Government security dealers and a tempo
rary rise in the basic reserve deficiency of major New York 
City banks.  

In recent years, such March tax date pressures have tended 
to be reflected more in day-to-day financing rates than in 
Treasury bill rates. This could be the pattern again in 1965, 
particularly since major city banks have already pared their 
Treasury bill holdings considerably in recent weeks in adjust
ment to tauter money market conditions and higher levels of 
borrowing both by member banks and their customers.  

In view of recent business loan strength, it seems reason
able to assume a larger amount of business borrowing for tax 
purposes from banks in March. The likely pattern of loans 
demand, however, is complicated by several temporary factors 
(discussed in the answer to question 4A). Assuming these special

-58-



3/2/65 -59

demands recede as the weeks progress, large banks may accom
modate the tax-associated demands in the first half of March 
more by bidding aggressively for short-term funds and bor
rowing from the System than by further adjustments in invest
ment portfolios. In these circumstances, one might expect 
average borrowings from the Reserve Banks to fluctuate around 
the $400-$450 million level; reserve availability to move into 
the $0-$50 million net borrowed range; dealer loan rates to 
advance to around 4-1/2 per cent; and the Federal funds rate 
often to be at 4-1/8 per cent, even though bill rates might 
not move outside a 3.95-4.05 per cent range. After the tax 
date pressures are past, the money market might be expected 
to return to the conditions prevailing in late February. Long
term interest rates probably would be little affected by these 
money market developments.  

Assuming no change in the posture of monetary policy and 
continued large inflows of time and savings deposits, the 
interest rate and marginal reserve developments outlined 
above could be consistent with little change in reserves 
behind private demand deposits, apart from seasonal movements.  
Such reserves declined a little in January and substantially 
in February.  

Chairnan Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with Mr. Hayes, 

who made the following statement: 

1. Business activity. The domestic business situation 
remains favorable--perhaps, if anything, a bit more favorable 
than at the beginning of the year. The prospects for first
half growth being sustained in the second half of 1965 now 
seem brighter than they did. Production gains in January were 
well diffused throughout the economy. Retail sales appear to 
continue at the high January level, and a record auto year is 
generally forecast. There are further signs that the decline 

in residential construction may be bottoming out. Unemploy
ment in January was at the lowest level since October 1957.  
The chief uncertainty is of course steel, with further delays 
in a wage settlement now indicated. Steel inventory accumula

tion was substantial in the fourth quarter of 1964 and is 

probably continuing; but for manufacturing as a whole inventory
sales ratios in December remained at a low level.  

2. Prices. Industrial wholesale prices were about un

changed in January, but readings thus far in February suggest 

a renewed rise, after allowance for seasonal factors. Price 
announcements continue to be predominantly on the upside.



3/2/65

Clearly we must be alert to the threat of more intense cost 
and price pressures.  

3. Balance of payments. Our basic balance of payments 
position has been obscured by the very large transfer to 
foreign accounts in January and more particularly in early 
February in anticipation of various measures that had been 
rumored would be part of the President's balance of payments 
message. It was unusual to have an overall deficit in 
January despite the reversal of special year-end outflows.  
For the first half of February the deficit may well have 
exceeded $500 million. Our large annual deficits have con
tinued almost unchecked, and as a result our ability to 
finance the deficit by any means other than gold sales has 
been severely curtailed. The outlook is for further heavy 
gold sales in the coming months. Sterling has strengthened, 
but many uncertainties remain ano the international situation, 
both financial and political, is tense and potentially explo
sive. In these circumstances we must be prepared for quick 
defensive action.  

Fortunately the program of voluntary restraint on foreign 
bank lending is off to a good start and, together with the 
related programs with respect to corporations and nonbank 
financial institutions, should begin to produce significant 
results in a few months; but these programs will not be easy 
to administer and will call for steady resistance to pres
sures by various interests, public and private, that would 
water down their effectiveness.  

4. Bank credit and money. Total bank credit advanced 
very strongly in January on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
with total loans (adjusted) showing the largest increase on 
record. For the thirteen months ending with January the net 
increase in bank credit was at an annual rate of 8.3 per cent, 
as compared with 7.4 per cent for the same period a year ago.  
Although the growth of business loans in January reflects 
several special factors--including a spurt in bank loans to 
foreigners, and the effects of the steel strike threat and 
the actual dock strike--basic domestic Loan demand also 
appears to be strong. This impression is confirmed by the 
results of our recent survey of loan projections at eight large 
New York City banks.  

The money supply was still on a 4 per cent per annum 
growth trend in January; but time deposits scored a record 
advance in the month. Undoubtedly the higher interest rates 
offered on time and savings deposits have been an important 
cause of this time deposit growth. Banks seem to have been 
able even to attract some funds from savings and loan associa
tions.

-60-



5. Money and credit markets. The financial markets have 
concluded that a mild shift in policy has taken place and have 
about completed their adjustment to it. Some further firming 
of intermediate and long rates could take place, especially if 
short rates should push somewhat higher in view of the tax and 
dividend dates that loom ahead. On the other hand, continued 
substantial flows of funds into the longer-term markets seem 
to provide a good deal of insurance against any substantial 
upward rate movements in this area.  

Monetary policy. For the time being the System should 
focus its efforts on making the restraints on capital outflows 
work and might well leave monetary policy about where it is.  
As the Chairman wisely and realistically stated before the 
Joint Economic Committee the other day. if the program does 
not work we shall probably have to move to a policy of tighter 
money in order to make the attack on the problem a full success.  
In try judgment the balance of payments problem is now too 
critical to permit the risk of failure.  

We should also be scrutinizing closely the rate of bank 
credit expansion over the coming months. Some slowdown would 
be desirable, apart from the expected slowdown in foreign 
lending; but we may find that credit demand is so strong that 
a slowdown will require a somewhat more restrictive policy.  

Open market operations should be conducted in the next 
three weeks in such a way as to confirm the modest change of 
posture voted at the last meeting. To me this means that free 
reserves should be more often below zero than above, and the 
bill rate should fluctuate around 4 per cent, with swings 
above that level more frequent than dips below 4 per cent.  
From a psychological standpoint this sort of confirmation of 
posture seems to me very important as we embark on the volun
tary restraint program. Such criticisms as are heard of the 
program are usually based on the contention that Government, 
including monetary policy, is not contributing enough to the 
payments solution while a heavy burden is being placed on 
private finance and industry. We should make clear that we 
are doing our part.  

I like the wording of the directive as drafted by the 
staff, which takes note of the President's balance of payments 
program and expresses the System's support, besides dropping 
the reference to Treasury financing and indicating a need to 
maintain the firmer money market conditions established in 
recent weeks.  

Mr. Ellis reported that steady expansion continued to prevail 

in the New England economy with manufacturing employment and output

3/2/65 -61-



3/2/65 -62

pushing to new highs. Further expansion was anticipated in the views 

of manufacturers reporting in the Boston Reserve Bank's quarterly 

survey of expectations. Fourth-quarter 1964 sales substantially ex

ceeded earlier expectations of these manufacturers and buttressed 

their outlook for the present quarter. Their preliminary reports con

cerning capital outlays for 1965 suggested a further rise in the rate 

of such investment but the returns were too incomplete to support an 

estimate of how much.  

Savings deposit balances in the Bank's reporting sample of 80 

mutual savings banks rose by 0.7 per cent in January, Mr. Ellis con

tinued. New deposits, interest credits, and withdrawals all increased 

from December; the net result brought gains in deposit balances from 

January of last. year to almost 9 per cent. This flow of funds was 

sufficient to hold unchanged at 5-1/4 per cent the interest rates Boston 

savings banks charged on conventional type mortgage loans even though 

demand, as reflected in contract awards, was running impressively above 

a year ago.  

Mr. Ellis commented that total residential contract awards in 

New England were 34 per cent higher in December than a year earlier.  

Their total for 1964 was 19 per cent above that for 1963, compared with 

a national increase of only 0.3 per cent. As of February 17, this 

strength in demand had been translated into an 18 per cent year-to-year 

growth in real estate loans at First District weekly reporting banks; 

such demand had been especially strong in the last several weeks.



3/2/65 -63

Turning to the agenda questions, Mr. Ellis noted that the 

first question, relating to business activity, naturally focused on 

inventories. Granting that the special situations in steel and autos 

dominated immediate prospects for the economy, the fundamental strength 

underlying the whole spectrum of demand was what in his judgment would 

predominate during the months further ahead. There did not appear to 

be any substantial reason to question that strength for the rest of 

the year. Incomes were high and rising, consumer spending expectations 

were optimistic, and all of this was contributing to the inventory surge.  

As to the second question, concerning prices, Mr. Ellis thought 

the price stability rested on capacity and output high enough to out

weigh rising demand, both real and speculative. The trend of events 

in Viet Nam raised new threats that speculative demands, reinforced by 

ready credit availability, would tip the scales toward price increases, 

and toward the boom-bust cycle referred to by Mr. Noyes.  

The staff response to the third question suggested, Mr. Ellis 

said, that because the fourth-quarter surge in the balance of payments 

deficit appeared largely traceable to capital outflows, including bank 

lending, it seemed logical to expect the voluntary credit restraint 

program to have the effect of making the fourth-quarter deterioration 

temporary. However, he failed to find in the present program any 

measures that offered reassurance that the $2 billion rate of deficit 

existing prior to the special events of the fourth quarter was being 

resolved.



3/2/65 -64

Mr. Ellis observed that the agenda question on bank credit was 

concerned with possible reasons for "the recent contraseasonal strength 

in bank loan demands." Quite obviously such temporary factors as the 

dock strike, the steel labor negotiations, and foreign lending had 

contributed extra strength to demand. But the more important underlying 

and longer-run consideration was the continuation of very sharp rates of 

bank credit expansion. Since July total bank credit had expanded at an 

annual rate of almost 9 per cent and this was almost by definition un

sustainable. He was concerned about the large increase in Federal Re

serve credit on the basis of which this bank credit expansion had occurred.  

That, Mr. Ellis said, raised the issue of the appropriate course 

for monetary policy. Mr. Noyes had posed the controversial question of 

whether or not some demands could be deferred; in his judgment one cer

tainly could hope that that was possible. The Committee might already 

have waited too long, particularly if there were lags in the effects of 

policy actions. The positive response of bankers to the voluntary 

restraint program seemed to assure that there would be some reduction 

in foreign lending by banks. To the extent such reduction was achieved, 

more funds would be available to domestic borrowers. The recent degree 

of credit availability, in his judgment, would continue to support un

sustainable expansion in domestic lending.  

Mr. Ellis said that he had been disappointed to hear from Mr.  

Stone that the market adjustment to the action taken at the previous 

meeting had been completed; he would rather have heard that it was still



3/2/65 -65

in process. He thought the slight firming trend in policy should be 

continued for the next three weeks. Differences in viewpoints as to 

the appropriate degree of firmness were small but important, and the 

Committee's targets should be defined carefully in the instructions 

given to the Manager. In this connection, he regretted that the staff 

had not prepared a "trial" directive for this meeting, but he understood 

the frustrations involved in laboring over a document that was rarely 

considered.  

His own preferences for policy targets, Mr. Ellis said, would 

be net borrowed reserves generally in the range of zero to $50 million; 

short-term bill rates in the range of 3.95-4.10 per cent, and generally 

above the discount rate; Federal funds rates usually at or above the 

discount rate; and member bank borrowings averaging $400 million or more.  

He favored no discount rate action at this time.  

Mr. Irons reported that the general economic situation in the 

Southwest was one of strength. Activity was at high and relatively 

stable levels. Industrial production was holding steady, and there were 

indications that it might move up slightly further over the next month 

or two. Employment promised to show some improvement in the next few 

months and perhaps to move up to record levels. The District's unemploy

ment rate was below that of the nation. There had been a decline in 

construction contracts from the very high levels of the past few months.  

Agricultural conditions were spotty, depending on the amount of rain in 

particular areas, and cash farm receipts currently were running below 

a year ago, but it was too early to say whether the change was significant.



3/2/65 -66

Retail sales at department stores in the District were at record levels, 

and new car registrations were quite high.  

Mr. Irons observed that bank loan demand was very strong in the 

District, as it was in the nation. As elsewhere, time and savings deposits 

were up substantially at District banks and demand deposits were down a 

bit. Demand for Federal funds was strong, and the average volume of 

discounting had risen in the past three weeks. Apparently, as soon as 

the market showed signs of firming, the larger banks found it necessary 

to restore their reserve positions by buying funds at rates up to 4-1/8 

per cent or by borrowing from the Reserve Bank. However, discounting 

was limited primarily to a relatively small number of banks.  

The national situation, Mr. Irons said, also showed evidence of 

strength and the trend certainly was expansionary. As to monetary policy, 

he noted that the Committee had made a significant move toward less ease 

during the past four weeks. The market situation was now firmer, and 

participants in the market had recognized the change. He favored con

tinuing the degree of firmness that had existed in recent weeks. He 

agreed with the figures the staff had given in response to the final 

question on likely developments under the present posture of policy, 

and, more generally, he agreed with their conclusions in answering all 

of the questions. He favored maintaining marginal reserve availability 

fluctuating around zero, and on the negative side more often than on 

the positive. He thought dealer loan rates might rise a little, and 

would expect the Federal funds rate to be at 4 per cent and occasionally 

higher.



3/2/65 -67

Mr. Irons said that he had some qualms about permitting the 

bill rate to move significantly above the discount rate at this time 

to the 4.10 or 4.15 per cent area, except perhaps for a day or two.  

Such a development might engender the feeling that a further move 

toward restraint was being made and might stimulate speculation about 

the possibility of another change in the discount rate. That would 

be undesirable, in his judgment, in view of the fact that the voluntary 

credit restraint program had just been launched. Were it not for that 

factor, he definitely would favor a firmer policy. He did not favor 

a change in the discount rate at this time.  

Mr. Swan commented that the basic economic situation in the 

Twelfth District seemed to be good but it was not entirely consistent 

with that in the nation. The unemployment rate in the Pacific Coast 

States, which had dropped in December, increased again in January in 

contrast with a decrease at the national level. Agricultural employment 

declined in January, and while nonagricultural employment as a whole rose 

slightly manufacturing employment again went down rather significantly.  

There had been a much larger decline in housing starts, relative both 

to December and to January 1964, in the West than in the rest of the 

nation. Lumber prices were reduced from the highs reached after the 

recent floods but were still somewhat above pre-flood levels.  

As spring approached, Mr. Swan said, there was a good deal of 

uncertainty about both the availability and cost of agricultural labor 

with the end of the bracero program. This uncertainty seemed to be 

reflected in the attitudes of processors with respect to their contracts



3/2/65 -68

with growers and in the attitudes of lending institutions with regard 

to financing arrangements. It was too early to say exactly what effect 

the labor situation would have on those areas but there did seem to be 

somewhat more caution than there was a year ago. The nonferrous metals 

markets remained tight and the copper situation was being aggravated 

by the dock strike. Steel production in the District remained at high 

levels with some indications of shipments of structural steel to the 

Midwest.  

Mr. Swan remarked that weekly reporting banks in the District, 

as elsewhere, had large increases in commercial and industrial loans in 

the four weeks ending February 17--much larger than in the equivalent 

period a year ago. However, there was a slight decline in real estate 

loans in contrast to a very substantial increase in the same period last 

year. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank in the last three weeks had not 

risen at the same rate as in the rest of the country.  

Mr. Swan said he was still uncertain as to how to interpret the 

inventory situation. He could not arrive at an adequate explanation 

of the increase in inventories other than of steel and autos; perhaps 

it simply reflected the general rise in business activity. He had been 

unable thus far to find any evidence of speculative inventory accumula

tion in anticipation of higher prices. As a negative conclusion this 

might be considered a little suspect, but at least in the Twelfth District 

there was not much indication of overheating.  

Mr. Swan was inclined to agree with Mr. Koch's analysis of the 

significance of the recent acceleration in growth of time and savings.



3/2/65 -69

deposits. Developments in the Twelfth District were consistent with 

the staff's conclusion that the time depcsit growth rate might well 

moderate somewhat after the one-time adjustment to higher interest rates, 

although some further growth in savings deposits might be expected.  

It seemed to Mr. Swan that, following the shift in policy at 

the previous meeting in support of the national balance of payments 

program, it would be desirable to hold policy unchanged until some in

dication was available of the effectiveness of that program. He did not 

think there had been enough change in the domestic situation to warrant 

a further policy shift. Like Mr. Irons, he would not quarrel with the 

quantities mentioned in the staff response to the last question, and 

he endorsed Mr. Irons' remarks about the undesirability at the mcment 

of having a bill rate constantly above the discount rate. He agreed 

that the slightly firmer conditions recently achieved should be main

tained but he did not think that the firming should be carried further 

at this point. In this connection he noted that the staff's expectations 

with regard to levels of borrowings, free reserves, Federal funds rates, 

and so forth, were related to some extent to the fact that the period 

immediately ahead included the March 15 tax date. The staff response 

said that "After the tax date pressures are past, the money market might 

be expected to return to the conditions prevailing in late February." 

It was useful to note that the conditions referred to were those existing 

subsequent to the change in policy. The staff's draft directive was 

satisfactory to Mr. Swan.



3/2/65

Mr. Strothman commented that the present continuing economic 

expansion in the Ninth District would seem to be explainable in part, 

but by no means entirely, as stemming from construction and the steel

related industries--notably mining. Employment in those industries 

had improved markedly. However, other industries, including retail 

trade, services, and durable goods, also had shown sharp employment 

increases. January unemployment in Minnesota was at the lowest rate 

in 13 years. The Minneapolis Bank's opinion surveys continued to re

flect modest optimism but with some pessimism from predominantly 

agricultural areas.  

In banking, Mr. Strothman said, in recent weeks the District 

had experienced a heavier-than-usual decline in demand deposits and a 

more-than-seasonal increase in loans. The extent to which inventory 

buying had spurred loan demand was not clear. Nor was it clear from 

available data that demand deposit growth had slowed in the District 

because of the availability of higher time-deposit rates.  

Mr. Scanlon, in commenting on the first question, reported that 

the trend of business in the Seventh District appeared to be vigorous 

and healthy, aside from unsustainable rates of inventory accumulation 

in the steel and motor vehicle industries. Employment in most areas 

continued to edge up, and unemployment rolls continued to be reduced 

gradually. Retail sales had been strong.  

There had been a tendency to raise projections of activity both 

for the economy as a whole and for individual firms and industries, Mr.  

Scanlon observed. There was less concern about a leveling or decline

-70-



3/2/65 -71

in general business in the second half of the year. Forecasts of sales 

of passenger cars close to the 9 million level in 1965 (down from the 

rate thus far) were widely thought to be possible of achievement. A 

large Chicago steel firm expected 122 million ingot tons of steel to 

be produced this year with a 17 per cent decline from the first half of 

the year to the second. Orders for business equipment had been higher 

than expected, and a 10 per cent rise in total capital outlays from 1964 

to 1965 seemed reasonable to informed people with whom he had talked.  

Mr. Scanlon remarked that a vague uneasiness existed among 

bankers and businessmen concerning the balance of payments situation 

and the problems of Southeast Asia. It was suggested that these condi

tions constituted a threat to the continuance of prosperity, but there 

was little evidence that such fears had influenced business decisions.  

Statements of executives of General Motors and Ford, issued 

early last week, that they had reached their goals of acquiring an 

additional 60-day supply of steel were greeted with surprise and out

right skepticism in trade circles, Mr. Scanlon said. Reports persisted 

that steel producers were falling further behind on promised delivery 

schedules. Allocation procedures were being enforced strictly and many 

smaller users of steel had not been able to build inventories. Except 

for steel and autos there was little evidence of inventory building in 

excess of operating needs.  

Mr. Scanlon agreed with the staff statement on the second ques

tion, relating to prices.



3/2/65

On the balance of payments question, Mr. Scanlon agreed gener

ally with the staff reply although he was not thoroughly convinced that 

several of the factors described as temporary in nature actually were 

as temporary as the staff response implied.  

Mr. Scanlon also agreed generally with the staff answer to part A 

of the fourth question, relating to bank credit and money. However, he 

felt the underlying trend in bank loan demand might be stronger than 

was implied in the staff statement and that corporate tax needs in mid

March might be greater than usual. The widespread distribution of the 

loan increases, both geographically and by industry group, suggested 

that they were due not only to special and temporary influences but also 

to a basically strong demand that was likely to persist at least for 

some weeks ahead.  

With respect to question 4B, Mr. Scanlon said he was unable to 

provide a satisfactory answer to the first part, regarding the relation 

between the higher rates on time and savings deposits and the reduced 

rate of expansion in the money supply. For the near term, he did not 

foresee any unusual movements in time and savings deposit growth that 

would have material implications for the money supply. This assumed, 

of course, that the level of short-term yields would remain roughly where 

it was at present in relation to ceilings under Regulation Q.  

The "reduced rate of expansion in the money supply since November" 

appeared to Mr. Scanlon to be noticeable for the most part because it 

occurred against the backdrop of the unusually large monthly gains around 

the middle of the year, particularly in June and July. The substantial

-72-



3/2/65 -73

increases that took place at that time might well have been related to 

the March tax cut, then working itself out in terms of its impact upon 

aggregate income.  

Mr. Scanlon said he had nothing to add to the staff comment on 

part A of question 5 beyond noting that the municipal market might show 

some further upward rate adjustment as a result of the tighter bank 

reserve positions. He was in general agreement with staff statement 

on part B, except that if the underlying loan demand was strong, as he 

suspected it was, following the March tax payments banks' reserve posi

tions would not return promptly to the conditions prevailing in February.  

Mr. Scanlon said he agreed with those who favored continuation 

of the policy in effect over the past three weeks. He was a little 

unhappy about the reference in the directive proposed by the staff to 

accommodating growth in the money supply "at a more moderate pace than 

in recent months" when the most recent money supply figures showed a 

decline. However, he was inclined to accept the draft directive because 

he thought the Committee's position was made clear in the second para

graph. he did not favor a change in the discount rate at present.  

Mr. Clay said it would appear appropriate to him to continue 

monetary policy unchanged at this time. A policy move had been made 

at the last meeting, and that change apparently had been implemented.  

It remained to be seen, however, how sensitive longer-term interest rates 

might prove to be. That policy move was only a part of a larger package 

of special measures designed to deal with the international payments



3/2/65 -74

deficit. It would appear logical, he thought, to maintain the new 

monetary policy posture essentially unchanged at this juncture as the 

new program of special measures was applied. In the meantime, a close 

watch could be kept on both domestic and international developments.  

The performance of the domestic economy was in some ways 

rather impressive, Mr. Clay said. It was impressive to observe the 

ability of the economy at this advanced stage of the upswing to absorb 

the impact of recent developments in steel and autos without exhibiting 

the serious strains characteristic of a boom. It also was impressive 

in terms of the widespread nature of industrial activity as discussed 

by the staff's response to the questions submitted for consideration.  

The latter aspect might help cushion the inevitable readjustment in 

the steel, automobile, and related industries. Nevertheless, it would 

be very important to keep the expected readjustments in those industries 

in perspective in formulating monetary policy in the months ahead. The 

growing capacity of the economy pointed to the need for continued expan

sion in aggregate demand, particularly when those immediate factors had 

run their course.  

Price developments also were on the encouraging side, Mr. Clay 

said. The staff answers rightly suggested the possibility of a continua

tion of favorable price developments so far as demand forces were con

cerned, apart from possible international tensions. It remained true 

that the more serious threat of upward price pressures rather came on 

the cost side, from the outcome of the steel industry labor contract 

negotiations.



3/2/65 -75

The staff analysis of the current loan expansion appeared 

logical to Mr. Clay in view of the special developments that had taken 

place in the economy. The impact of the temporary factors could not 

be measured, but they must be very large, as suggested by the staff 

estimates. The temporary acceleration in loan expansion resulting from 

the dock strike and the threatened steel strike would appear to have 

limited meaning for the formulation of monetary policy. The bulge that 

apparently took place in loan volume in anticipation of international 

payments restrictions presumably should work itself out in the period 

ahead as the international payments program went into effect.  

In carrying out monetary policy for the period ahead, Mr. Clay 

said, it should be the aim to maintain money market conditions in line 

with those that had prevailed in recent weeks. This would include a 

90-day Treasury bill rate in the range of 3.95 to 4.05 per cent. The 

staff draft of the economic policy directive would be suitable for a 

continuation of the current policy posture. In his judgment no change 

should be made in the discount rate.  

Mr. Wayne remarked that, in view of the past month's develop

ments, it would seem that the move toward a slightly firmer policy made 

at the Committee's last meeting was an appropriate one. The balance 

of payments problem remained the key element in the present situation.  

If the voluntary program was reasonably successful in reducing the out

flow of funds and perhaps in producing some return flow, a considerably 

slower rate of growth in total bank lending would be necessary to prevent



3/2/65 -76

an undue expansion in domestic credit. A lower availability of reserves 

would be the most appropriate way to encourage and induce such a contrac

tion.  

Domestically, Mr. Wayne observed, economic and financial develop

ments of recent weeks also indicated the desirability of a firm policy, 

but those conditions could change quickly. If a continued high level of 

activity could be counted on some credit restraint would be in order to 

curb domestic prices.  

But the present level of activity could not be taken for granted, 

Mr. Wayne said. Almost certainly, steel production would be cut back 

rather sharply in the next two or three months. It was doubtful whether 

automobile sales could be maintained for long at the present feverish 

pace. Construction, even if it could hold its present level, did not 

promise any significant gain. Stagnation or declines in those three 

major areas at the same time would spell trouble for the economy, in 

his opinion. While the optimism of businessmen seemed to be rising 

sharply, a condition which often produced excesses in the final phase 

of a period of expansion, such precarious optimism should not be encour

aged by any easing of credit.  

As noted by Mr. Stone, Mr. Wayne continued, the market seemed 

to have completed the adjustments, at least in the short end, needed 

to reflect fully the recent shift in policy. The current relationship 

of short-term rates to the discount rate was approximately what it had 

been a few weeks before the last change in the discount rate. In the



3/2/65 -77

long end, the continued heavy flow of savings approximately balanced 

the strong demand and kept rates fairly stable. But further increases 

in short rates must exert considerable pressure on the longer rates.  

Taking into account the need for a lower availability of reserves 

to offset or induce a reduction of foreign lending, Mr. Wayne said, net 

borrowed reserves of sizable amounts might be required to keep short

term rates where they were or to raise them a little. He would not be 

averse to seeing such net borrowed figures and would not like to see any 

substantial amounts of free reserves. Even so, he recognized that it 

would be necessary for the Desk to provide considerable amounts of 

reserves to offset the large gold losses which apparently lay ahead.  

He favored a continued firm policy but no change in the discount rate 

for the present. The draft directive was acceptable to him.  

Mr. Robertson made the followirg statement: 

In this past month both we and the Administration 
have taken major policy steps that, hopefully, will deal 
adequately with the balance of payments deficit without 
handicap to the achieving of our twin objective--con
tinued vigorous, noninflationary economic growth.  
Nobody is sure these measures will work effectively.  
The particular combination of actions is well-nigh 
unique; and like any other compromise package, probably 
nobody favors all parts of it. Certainly I am not partic
ularly fond of the general monetary tightening that went 
along with the package. But having come forth with this 
combination, I think it now behooves us to give it a 
chance to show what it can do.  

Insofar as the voluntary foreign loan restraint 
program is concerned, our early experience reminds me 
of an old saying we have out in Broken Bow country, 
"You can tell how much a hog is hurt by how loud he 
squeals." Judging on that basis, the restraint program 
is already doing some pinching. And, frankly, I hope 
we can manage to administer our parts of it in a way 
that cuts very substantially into capital outflows.



3/2/65

The only reason I can see for not holding monetary 
policy steady while waiting for our latest actions to 
take effect is if new or exaggerated forces appear that 
would push us into an inflationary spiral or a run on 
the dollar if we did not act. I see no such develop
ments. We are probably already past our peak rates of 
acceleration in inventory accumulation, business loans, 
and bank lending abroad. Once the first quarter is 
past, I suspect we could be seeing more comforting 
statistics in all these areas. Now is not the time to 
compound pressures by further action based on statis
tics that are still describing pre-February 12 perform
ance.  

With these considerations in mind, I would vote for 
a monetary policy that continued to maintain money market 
and bank reserve conditions about as prevailed in the 
past few weeks. While I did not favor last month's move 
to tighten money market conditions further, I do not 
think it would be constructive at this juncture to try 
to undo that action. Looking ahead, however, I would 
lay emphasis on the Manager's meeting the reserve needs 
as they emerge in March without allowing any extra 
measure of market pressure to develop. Modest net 
borrowed reserves might result in a week or two, I 
recognize, but I would not want to see a steady string 
of net borrowed reserves from now until the end of 
March. With this understanding, the draft of the current 
directive as distributed by the staff is satisfactory to 
me.  

Mr. Shepardson observed that the indications of the staff reports 

and other information were of a continuing strong--although possibly not 

sustainable--expansionary condition in the economy. As Mr. Ellis had 

pointed out, if the program for arresting capital outflows was effective 

it would result in a greater availability of funds in the domestic market.  

For that reason he thought it would be desirable to continue the present 

directive, calling for moving toward slightly less ease. He favored a 

range of zero to minus $50 million for free reserves, a bill rate in the 

3.95-4.10 per cent range, and borrowings at the level necessary to pro

duce such conditions. He thought the Committee's policy move at the

-78-



3/2/65 -79

previous meeting had been appropriate, but he questioned whether it 

should consider the move to have been completed by the attainment of 

the conditions prevailing since that meeting.  

Mr. Shepardson thought that Mr. Hayes' remarks had tended in 

a similar direction, although Mr. Hayes had found satisfactory the 

proposed directive calling for the maintenance of current money market 

conditions. Along with Mr. Ellis, he (Mr. Shepardson) would prefer to 

go a step further and move toward slightly firmer conditions, although 

a drastic move certainly was not in order until there was an opportunity 

to observe developments under the voluntary credit restraint program.  

Mr. Mitchell said that monetary policy and expectations in the 

securities market had been buffeted about on a sea of words--official 

and unofficial--and as a result the market had been moving on a trend 

with an ambiguous destination. Perhaps he should defer to Mr. Stone's 

judgment that the market had completed its adjustment to the recent 

policy action, but he could not quite believe it; it seemed to him 

that the market was highly uncertain. Probably the best contribution 

official action could make at this time would be to maintain the cur

rent degree of uneasiness.  

The country's foreign friends would be happier if they believed 

that the voluntary restraint program was being buttressed with some 

tightening of policy, Mr. Mitchell said, and those at home who were 

fearful that the domestic economy was peaking out would feel that 

monetary policy was not a factor pushing the economy inexorably toward



3/2/65 -80

recession as long as bond prices, particularly in the tax-exempt field, 

did not break. But he thought a great deal of caution had to be ex

ercised in connection with any further move toward tightening, for one 

reason because there still was a considerable overhang of longer-term 

securities in the market.  

In any case, Mr. Mitchell said, there was not too much in the 

way of action on the domestic or foreign front that could be justified 

in the Committee's present state of knowledge. Domestically, the leads 

and lags were such that if a recession was going to come in 1965 it was 

almost here. He did not agree with Mr. Noyes' analysis; in his judgment 

a possible downturn was dangerously close. On the foreign front the 

Committee could hardly imply that the newly-conceived plan for checking 

capital outflows would fail before it was off the launching pad. Tempo

rarily, for better or worse the posture of general monetary policy had 

hardened.  

One could hope for an abatement of the recent rate of expansion 

in business loans at banks, Mr. Mitchell continued. He had been inclined 

to agree with the staff's conclusion that much of the recent growth was 

temporary. He noted, however, that several of the Reserve Bank Presi

dents who had spoken thus far thought there was more underlying strength 

than the staff had suggested, and he gave credence to their judgment.  

But assuming that judgment was correct, he still did not see how one 

could advocate a move to reduce the rate of bank credit growth if that 

would mean a more drastic contraction in the money supply than had occurred



3/2/65 -81

in the past eight weeks. His preference for money supply figures was 

the seasonally adjusted series prepared at the St. Louis Bank; in his 

judgment they gave a consisten:ly better picture of developments than 

those compiled at the Board. This series had declined at an annual 

rate of about 10 per cent in the last eight weeks, after seasonal adjust

ment.  

Mr. Mitchell said he felt a little nostalgic about the "trial" 

directives that now had disappeared. They had had a clear, positive 

approach; there was no yielding before the hard questions. With respect 

to the draft of the regular directive, he strongly recommended deleting 

the reference to accommodating growth in the money supply; in his judg

ment it would be a mistake to ignore the fact that it had declined 

recently. He suggested ending the first sentence with the phrase "to 

accommodate growth in the reserve base and total bank credit." Also, 

he thought the next sentence would be a little more forthright and 

stronger if it simply read "This policy seeks to support fully the national 

program to strengthen the international position of the dollar," deleting 

the words "and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures." 

Mr. Daane complimented the Desk on what in his judgment had been 

a highly skillful implementation of the directive the Committee had adopted 

at the previous meeting; they had achieved some snugging up in reserve avail

ability and money market conditions while reinforcing the general expecta

tion that longer-term rates would prove viable. Looking back, he had to 

confess that he was a bit unhappy about the official purchases of longer-



3/2/65 -82

term securities for Treasury account since the beginning of the year, 

and he was not completely convinced that the maturities chosen in 

purchases for System account had been completely appropriate. On the 

whole, however, he thought the Desk had done an excellent job in attain

ing the objectives the Committee had indicated.  

Mr. Daane said his policy prescription was similar to that a 

number of others had expressed. He would favor having free reserves 

fluctuate close to zero but on the negative side. With this end in 

view he found the directive prepared by the staff acceptable, but he 

had no strong objections to the revisions suggested by Mr. Mitchell.  

Referring to the discussion after Mr. Koch's presentation of 

the implications of the recent growth rate of time and savings deposits, 

Mr. Daane said he found it difficult to translate the ex post equality 

of saving and investment into thinking of all savings as automatically 

flowing into investment and being income generating. He preferred the 

analytical approach which treated today's savings as a function of 

yesterday's income and as accommodating today's investment. In this 

light he derived comfort from the high current level of savings and 

viewed it as a healthy factor, necessary to accommodate a desired non

inflationary expansion in investment.  

Mr. Hickman commented that it might be better to say that today's 

inventory excesses were a function of yesterday's savings and yesterday's 

monetary policy. He hoped the Committee was not accentuating the unsus

tainability of present conditions.



3/2/65 -83

Mr. Hickman then complimented the staff on the excellence of 

their answers to the questions posed for discussion. He had little 

to add to those answers, but thought, that an independent approach per

haps might turn up a few points that: otherwise might have been over

looked.  

Business conditions in the Fourth District and in the nation 

were still dominated by superheated activity in autos and steel, Mr.  

Hickman said. Since the last meeting of the Committee steel deliveries 

had been lengthened, allocation systems had been reinstated, and orders 

had been trimmed or rejected. Steel production continued to run at the 

annual rate of 135 to 140 million ingot tons, but most analysts believed 

that output would decline sharply to aggregate about 115 to 120 million 

tons for the year. The close union election had been a highly unsettling 

factor. Extension of the bargaining beyond May 1, as some had suggested, 

might aggravate the situation still further by expanding the time for 

hedge buying of inventories.  

Mr. Hickman noted that the auto industry also appeared to be 

operating above sustainable levels, although the excess was less marked 

than in steel. Despite record sales in the past three months, inventories 

by the end of February had climbed to about the year-ago level. Both 

production and sales had pretty much caught up from the strike inter

ruption, and some letdown in the auto industry was to be expected.  

Nevertheless, production schedules for March continued at very high 

levels.



3/2/65

Accompanying the lush but ominous developments in steel and 

autos, other industries, including machinery, had continued to show 

moderate advances, Mr. Hickman said. In the months and calendar 

quarters ahead their continued advance would be required even to 

maintain the current level of industrial production.  

The question of the trend of prices was still unresolved, Mr.  

Hickman continued. There had been a number of flurries of price in

creases, followed by periods of relative calm, one of which the economy 

seemed to be enjoying now. Despite near-capacity production in autos 

and steel the price line appeared to be holding at the moment. On the 

other hand, prices of aluminum products and nonelectrical machinery, 

where operations were also near capacity, had been inching up.  

On the balance of payments front, Mr. Hickman remarked, part 

of the fourth quarter deterioration was temporary, possibly as much as 

$1.5 billion of the $5.8 billion annual rate of deficit, counting factors 

that contributed temporarily on both the plus and minus sides. But that 

was surely academic at this juncture. Foreign confidence had been shaken 

and massive steps were needed to restore faith in the dollar.  

Insofar as bank credit was concerned, Mr. Hickman expressed the 

view that part of the recent strength in business loans and in consumer 

credit undoubtedly could be traced to the overheated atmosphere in autos 

and steel, as well as to the dock strike and the bulge in foreign lending.  

Some of the strength in business loans also could be explained by the 

narrower spread in recent months between the prime rate and open-market

-84-



3/2/65 -85

rates on commercial and finance company paper. Selective adjustments 

in bank lending rates now seemed to be in process.  

In Mr. Hickman's opinion, the money market had largely adjusted 

to the slight shift in policy adopted at the last meeting. But the 

market for longer-term U.S. Treasury issues still had a way to go, to 

judge by past experience in a free market economy. Whether past ex

perience was a useful guide under conditions of a controlled market was 

a moot question. Both the Administration and the System had endeavored 

to hold long-term interest rates below the rates that would prevail 

under free competitive conditions. The excellent chart show presented 

at the last meeting raised some questions about the appropriateness of 

that approach, since major adverse capital flows in the balance of pay

ments had occurred in the intermediate- and long-term areas.  

Aside from his reservations about operations in the intermediate

and long-term market, Mr. Hickman thought monetary policy had been executed 

appropriately and adroitly in the four weeks since the last meeting. Over 

the next three weeks, because of his concern about the domestic situation, 

he would prefer to see free reserves in the range of zero to plus $50 

million most of the time, but he would not be disturbed if there were 

net borrowed reserves occasionally. The bill rate should remain close 

to or slightly below the discount rate, as Messrs. Irons and Swan had 

suggested, and the Federal funds rate should hold at 4 per cent most of 

the time. Under the slightly firmer conditions now emerging in the money 

market, Mr. Hickman thought that borrowings again would serve as a good 

indicator of the degree of tightness or ease. He would prefer to see



3/2/65 -86

borrowings at $400 million or above rather than $300 million or below.  

The staff draft of the directive was acceptable to him, and he did not 

regret the demise of the "trial" directive.  

Mr. Bopp reported that in the Third District the strong economic 

upsurges of recent months had slowed substantially. Unemployment had 

begun to increase moderately in some of the District's less-advantaged 

areas, and had stopped declining in the rest. Output remained strong 

but might have leveled off in January. Department store sales had 

dropped well below the national rate of advance, and in the latest 

week declined slightly from year-ago levels.  

Rather than comment on each of the questions prepared by the 

staff, Mr. Bopp said, he would limit his further remarks primarily to 

the question of bank credit. From a review of both national and District 

trends, it appeared to him that the recent contraseasonal upturn in bank 

loans and deposits was symptomatic of special circumstances superimposed 

upon an otherwise moderate further expansion in business activity. On 

the national scene, the near-record expansion in business loans stemmed 

largely from inventory expansion associated with strikes--the dock strike 

and the threat of a steel strike--and from the apparent sizable upward 

movement in foreign business loans anticipating implementation of the 

Gore Amendment.  

Contrary to the national picture, Mr. Bopp remarked, business 

loans in the Third District had shown no more than moderate strength 

this year. One reason for this apparently was that the special factors



3/2/65 -87

stimulating loan demand in the nation were less evident in the District.  

Both business loans abroad and loans to finance domestic inventories 

had shown little strength. These facts were revealed both by an examina

tion of the Reserve Bank's own figures and by a survey of District re

serve city banks. Bankers with whom he had talked made only minor refer

ences to financing steel inventories or carrying merchandise tied up by 

the dock strike. The loan categories which had increased in the District 

were those characteristic of a moderate business expansion.  

As for other factors bearing upon the pace of economic activity, 

Mr. Bopp said, commodity price indexes remained roughly stable, suggesting 

that further increases in production could be sustained before overall 

capacity pressures became pronounced. Admittedly, however, the picture 

was obscured by inventory building in anticipation of a steel strike and 

by the aftermath of the auto strike.  

On the international front, continued balance of payments pres

sure was evident. In Mr. Bopp's opinion, however, any further shift in 

monetary policy aimed at reducing the deficit should be deferred until 

some indica:ion was available of the success or lack of success of the 

package of measures introduced by the President.  

Another aspect of the President's program which had to be watched, 

Mr. Bopp continued, was its possible impact on the domestic economy. It 

was possible that some loan and investment funds would be diverted from 

foreign to domestic uses, producing some excess in credit availability.  

This development, however, remained only a possibility. There was no



3/2/65 -88

certainty that such a redirection would occur, and if it did, that it 

would in fact be excessive.  

On balance, it seemed to Mr. Bopp too early to consider a change 

in monetary policy based either on the international or domestic implica

tions of the President's payments measures. Therefore, bearing in mind 

both the currency pace of business activity and the evolving internaticnal 

climate, Mr. Bopp recommended no change in the present posture of monetary 

policy. The figures on money market conditions mentioned by the staff in 

response to the final question seemed appropriate. He thought the ref

erence to the money supply in the draft directive implied a factual in

accuracy, and accordingly either should be deleted or replaced with a 

different statement.  

Mr. Bryan said he thought the economy of the Sixth District could 

be described properly as being in a state of boom. Loan demand in the 

District was particularly strong, and the figure on insured unemployment 

was much better than that for the nation as a whole.  

Although the data were subject to revision, Mr. Bryan said, the 

national money supply narrowly defined evidently had declined in the 

latest month, whereas the series including time and savings deposits had 

risen substantially, and time and savings deposits themselves had gone 

up like a rocket. The question of the appropriate definition of the 

money supply could be debated for a long time. However, he would sug

gest that the Committee simply recognize that the money supply was in

determinate. As had been pointed out in the past, "money" was anything



3/2/65 -89

that did money work, and since money had a number of functions the 

appropriate definition would vary from narrow to broad depending on 

the particular functions one had in view.  

As to policy, Mr. Bryan thought that at the present time the 

Committee ought to maintain approximately the existing degree of 

firmness, with free reserves fluctuating around zero and more often 

negative than positive. However, he would like to repeat an observa

tion he had made before--at this particular juncture free reserves 

were a dangerous measure, since they represented a residual after the 

System had supplied all of the reserves demanded. He also would repeat 

his belief that the more fundamental measures, such as total reserves, 

were growing at unsustainable rates. Mr. Bryan thought the reference 

to the money supply in the draft directive was inappropriate in light 

of the recent decline in the money stock.  

Mr. Shuford reported that economic activity in the Eighth 

District had advanced rapidly since early last fall. Payroll employ

ment had risen at a 6.7 per cent annual rate since September, with 

significant increases shown in both the durable and nondurable goods 

industries. Manufacturing output had gone up at nearly a 10 per cent 

rate, with gains in the Little Rock and Memphis areas particularly 

large. Spending, as measured by the volume of check payments, had 

increased markedly in most major cities of the area.  

Since September, Mr. Shuford continued, deposits at weekly 

reporting banks in the District had risen at a rate a little faster 

than in the nation. Expansion centered in time deposits, which had



3/2/65 -90

risen sharply; demand deposits had grown only slightly. Business 

loans at weekly reporting banks had moved up at about a 12 per cent 

annual rate, as an unusually sharp gain at banks in St. Louis was 

partially offset by declines at Louisville and Memphis banks.  

Nationally, Mr. Shuford said, economic activity had continued 

to rise during the first two months of the year, as already had been 

noted. Production, sales, and incomes all were markedly higher now 

than before the auto strike. The expansion in activity reflected produc

tion for a precautionary buildup in steel inventories, but there was 

strength in other areas as well. Wholesale prices had increased since 

last summer, and industrial prices had moved up significantly.  

As had been discussed, Mr. Shuford said, the balance of payments 

problem remained serious. It was hoped and expected that voluntary credit 

restraint and other aspects of the Administration's balance of payments 

program might result in a reduction in the outflow of funds, but develop

ments in those areas warranted close attention.  

In late November and again in early February, Mr. Shuford noted, 

the Committee had made moves toward slightly firmer money market conditions 

in response to the acceleration in the outflow of funds from the country 

and the strength in the domestic economy. It probably was too soon to 

judge accurately the total impact of those actions. Few figures were 

available either on domestic economic conditions or on the balance of 

payments since the Committee's most recent action. Short-term interest 

rates had moved higher, but most other yields had changed little. Total



3/2/65 -91

member bank reserves, time deposits at commercial banks, and bank credit, 

particularly business loans, had continued to rise markedly. On the other 

hand, growth in the money supply had slowed considerably.  

Mr. Shuford said he had found Mr. Koch's observations on recent 

banking and money supply developments valuable. The February decline in 

the money supply undoubtedly was due, at least in part, to the recent 

rapid increase in time and savings deposits and the recent larger-than

usual rise in U.S. Government deposits. Moreover, there frequently were 

periods in which the money supply showed sharp short-run fluctuations and 

perhaps the present was one of those periods. In his opinion it was too 

early to be concerned about the decline in the money supply, but if the 

recent trend was prolonged unduly it would need attention.  

Mr. Shuford said he appreciated Mr. Mitchell's remarks about the 

usefulness of the St. Louis Bank's money supply figures. The St. Louis 

Bank probably had done more work in the area of the money supply than 

most Reserve Banks because of their particular interest in the subject, 

and he was grateful to the Board's staff for their encouragement and help 

in this work. He had found the discussion of the money supply this morn

ing useful and thought that further discussion of a similar nature would 

be desirable. In his judgment the money supply was an important factor 

for the Committee and the Federal Reserve System to keep in view; there 

was evidence in historical studies of a significant relation between its 

changes and business cycle fluctuations. However, he certainly did not 

think that the money supply, however defined, should be considered as the



3/2/65 -92

exclusive guide to policy. Other variables also were important, including 

flows of funds, total bank credit, business credit, aggregate reserves, 

and, in the short run, free reserves and measures of the tone and feel 

of the market. All of these were matters that the St. Louis Bank tried 

to take into consideration in its analyses and which the Committee had 

to consider as it reached its conclusions on monetary policy.  

As Mr. Mitchell had mentioned, Mr. Shuford continued, the St. Louis 

Bank's figures showed a decline in the money supply at about a 10 per cent 

rate in the most recent eight weeks. However, the staff members at the 

Bank who followed the situation were not greatly concerned about this 

development, for reasons similar to those Mr. Koch and others had men

tioned. Considering a somewhat longer period, from the average for the 

four weeks ending October 7, 1964, to the average for the four weeks 

ending February 24, 1965, the money supply had increased at an annual 

rate of 1.6 per cent. One would, of course, find other rates of change 

if the comparison was made with different starting dates.  

Mr. Shuford thought it would be a mistake to delete the reference 

to the money supply from the directive. It was an important variable 

over which the Committee had influence; and as he read the draft language 

it did not imply either that the money supply had not declined in recent 

weeks or that it would decline in coming weeks.  

Mr. Shuford said he favored continuation of the policy of the 

past four weeks, with money market conditions about the same as they 

had been recently, including a Treasury bill rate around the discount



3/2/65 -93

rate. He would be willing to accept the figures the staff had provided 

in the answer to the last question, i.e., average borrowings around the 

$400-$450 million level, dealer loan rates around 4-1/8 to 4-1/2 per cent, 

and the rate on Federal funds at about 4 per cent and at time 4-1/8 per 

cent. He favored no change in the discount rate.  

Mr. Balderston remarked that Chairman Martin had observed, in 

his February 26 statement before the Joint Economic Committee, that since 

the middle of last year the averages of both industrial material and prod

uct prices had edged up and that he could not avoid feeling that the country 

had been, and still was, sailing very close to the edge in this area. Ear

lier in his statement the Chairman had indicated his belief that "monetary 

policy did what it could and should do to facilitate healthy economic growth 

within the United States. In our effort to try to do all that we could, I 

only hope that we did not do a little more than we should have." 

The burden of Mr. Balderston's concern today was that now, after 

a business expansion entering the fifth year of its life, bank credit con

tinued to expand at an annual rate of about 8 per cent whereas real CNP 

had been rising at an annual rate of only about 5 per cent. It was to 

this basic fact that he wished to call the Committee's attention; it was 

portrayed in the first of the two pages of charts he had had distributed.  

(Note: A set of the charts to which Mr. Balderston referred has been 

placed in the files of the Committee.) Whether or not the cumulative 

effect of those two trends had by this time created pools of liquidity 

that might cause inflation, he did not know. What was fairly clear to



3/2/65 -94

him was that, even though only 28 per cent of total credit was bank 

credit, the increase in the latter that the System had permitted was 

sufficiently great to add to the volume of dollars seeking investment 

abroad. It also was clear to him that the relation to GNP of the money 

supply narrowly defined was a deceiving guide. Corporations had learned 

to economize in the use of cash, and so the stock of money now did not 

have to be as large proportionately to GNP as once was the case. How 

to obtain an adjusted figure for money supply and its rate of growth 

seemed tc him to defy solution, but he did suggest that some adjustment 

was needed, at least to give some weight to corporate funds invested in 

negotiable CDs. Thus, he had had CDs included along with the narrowly 

defined money supply in the middle panel on the second page of the charts, 

showing recent monthly percentage changes in various monetary series.  

Some weight might also be given to savings accounts of individuals, the 

recent growth in which had been stimulated to some extent by the monetary 

policy of the System, in his opinion. If future events should reveal 

that the tinder had been laid for a speculative outburst it would be, 

in his view, a fair criticism of the System that it permitted the rela

tionship between growth in bank credit and in GNP, as depicted in the 

first chart, to exist too long.  

Now that the nation faced an international liquidity crisis that 

threatened to shrink further the already shrunken stock of gold, Mr.  

Balderston said, it seemed to him to be high-time that the policy adopted 

four weeks ago should be implemented more vigorously. In concrete terms, 

he thought that in coming weeks free reserves should be negative most of



3/2/65 -95

the time even if that resulted in some further stiffening of bill rates.  

He would be willing to accept some stiffening of long-term rates also if 

that were to develop. To make clear that the Committee wished no cessa

tion in the application of the policy adopted on February 2, Mr. Balderston 

suggested that the second paragraph of the draft policy directive be mod

ified to read, "To implement this policy, System open market operations 

over the next three weeks should be conducted with a view to extending the 

recent firming of conditions in the money market." He would delete the 

reference to the money supply in the first paragraph because, as he had 

noted earlier, he considered the money supply figures to be a deceiving 

guide.  

Chairman Martin said he thought that Mr. Balderston's charts were 

interesting and that the Committee should keep them in mind. As to policy, 

evidently the Committee felt that it should not retreat from the step 

taken at the previous meeting, but the majority apparently did not favor 

going as far as Mr. Balderston had suggested. As to the directive, he 

would prefer not to eliminate the reference to the money supply. As he 

had said before, words meant different things to different people, and 

he did not see how the semantic problem could be resolved today. What 

was necessary, he thought, was to try to put together the best possible 

language, recognizing that there inevitably would be some gray areas.  

Mr. Mitchell said he had not meant to imply that money supply 

references should be excluded from all of the Committee's policy directives; 

he had suggested omitting the reference from this particular directive be

cause recent changes in money were difficult to interpret. By calling for



3/2/65 -96

accommodation of growth in total bank credit the Committee would be reccg

nizing what was happening to deposits, including CDs and other time de

posits.  

Mr. Koch noted that the staff had debated the question at issue 

in preparing the draft directive and he might try to clarify the rationale 

of the proposed language. The thought was that the phrase "to accommodate 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply," could be 

reasonably taken to refer to the three variables as a group and not individ

ually, and with respect to a longer time period than just a few weeks.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that the problem under discussion pointed 

up the desirability of employing an alternative form for the directive, 

such as that of the "trial" directive, which was more specific.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that the staff's memorandum on member bank 

reserves indicated that the aggregate money supply had increased in every 

recent month except February, and the figure for that month was labeled 

"estimate." He thought that these data did not invalidate the general 

proposition that the money supply had increased in recent months. Ac

cordingly, he did not consider the reference to be objectionable.  

Chairman Martin said that that was his view also. He then noted 

that Mr. Mitchell had suggested deleting the proposed phrase "and to avoid 

the emergence of inflationary pressures" from the first paragraph. He 

(Chairman Martin) would prefer to retain that phrase because he thought 

there still were inflationary pressures in the economy. In his judgment 

the volume of credit, however measured, was dangerously high at present



3/2/65 -97

and this would be revealed by coming developments. He hoped he was 

wrong, but that was his conviction.  

After further discussion Chairman Martin suggested that the 

Committee vote on the directive as drafted by the staff.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York was authorized and directed, 
until otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

In light of the economic and financial developments 
reviewed at this meeting, including the generally strong 
and continuing expansion of the domestic economy and the 
continuing adverse position of our international balance 
of payments, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's 
current policy to accommodate growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply but at a more moderate 
pace than in recent months. This policy seeks to support 
fully the national program to strengthen the international 
position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of 
inflationary pressures.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions over the next three weeks shall be conducted with 
a view to maintaining the slightly firmer conditions in 
the money market that have prevailed in recent weeks.  

Votes for this action: Messrs.  
Martin, Hayes, Bryan, Daane, Mitchell, 
Robertson, Scanlon, and Clay. Votes 
against this action: Messrs. Balderston, 
Ellis, and Shepardson.  

Mr. Balderston said that he had voted against this action because, 

as he had indicated earlier, he thought a further move to tighter condi

tions was required at present. Mr. Shepardson observed that he had dis-

sented on the same grounds.



3/2/65 -98

Mr. Ellis said he had dissented for two reasons. First, he 

also favored a firmer policy. Secondly, he did not believe that the 

present directive form was sufficiently clear and definite to serve 

adequately as an instruction to the Account Manager. To the extent 

that his dissent was on procedural grounds, he proposed to limit it 

only to this occasion and not to repeat it at subsequent meetings, 

even though he might continue to object to the form of the directive.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that he shared Mr. Ellis' views on the 

directive but had voted favorably because he thought the policy decision 

was appropriate. Mr. Bryan indicated that he had voted favorably on 

the same basis as Mr. Mitchell had.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, March 23, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

Sec r etary


