









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 11, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Bryan 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Holland, and Koch, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, Sys:em Open Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hilkert and Patterson, First Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Atlanta, respectively



5/11/65 -2

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Mann, Jones, Parsons, Tow, 
and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, St. Louis, 
Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas, respec
tively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Fousek and Parthemos, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Geng and Meek, Managers of the Securities 
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. MacLaury, Manager, Foreign Department, Feceral 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Rothwell, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia 

Chairman Martin noted that two new members of the Committee were 

attending their first meeting today--Sherman J. Maisel, member of the 

Board of Governors, and Hugh D. Galusha, Jr., President of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis--and that both had executed their oaths of 

office as members of the Federal Open Market Committee prior to today's 

meeting.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on April 13, 1945, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

April 13 through May 5, 1965, and a supplemental report for May 6 through 

10, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the

Committee.



5/11/65

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said that the Treasury had not yet decided whether to show a decline 

in the gold stock this week, but probably would reach a decision today.  

The last published change was the $150 million drop during the week 

ended April 14. Since mid-April, however, sales to foreign countries 

out of the Stabilization Fund's holdings had continued, with the result 

that the Fund's holdings, which were approximately $150 million at mid

April, were now down to about $45 million. Between now and the end of 

May, a further drain was anticipated on the Stabilization Fund's gold 

holdings of more than $100 million, mainly attributable to further 

sales to Spain ($30 million, for value today), Austria ($12.5 million), 

and France ($50 million). There was little doubt, therefore, that there 

would have to be another drop in the gold stock this month; the only 

question concerned its timing.  

On the London gold market, Mr. MacLaury reported, the fixing 

price reached an April high of about $35.17 at mid-month. Thereafter, 

the price eased as supplies from new production, together with some 

sales by disappointed speculators, sufficed to meet the continued 

moderately active demand. This morning the price was $35.1020, a low 

figure by recent standards. The gold pool on balance picked up gold 

during the latter half of April, and for the month as a whole showed 

a surplus of about $10 million, leaving the cumulative deficit since 

the beginning of the year at $183 million. That figure had been 

maintained with minor fluctuations thus far in May.



5/11/65

In the exchange markets, Mr. MacLaury observed, the Committee 

would recall that sterling began to show a somewhat better tone fol

lowing the presentation of the British budget on April 6 and particu

larly after the Prime Minister's speech to the Economic Club of New 

York on April 14. As the sterling rate strengthened (from about 

$2.7950 at mid-month to about $2.7975 on April 20) the New York Reserve 

Bank, with the agreement of the Bank of England, began to sell limited 

amounts of sterling in the New York market to reduce somewhat System 

and Treasury balances that had been acquired last fall at the time of 

the sterling crisis. During the week of April 22-28, $9.1 million 

equivalent was sold in New York for System account and $7 million for 

Treasury account. In addition, $1.4 million equivalent and $2.8 mil

lion equivalent for the two accounts, respectively, were sold directly 

to the Bank of England as it picked up dollars on a moderate scale in 

London. As a result of those sales, the System's sterling position 

was reduced from about $52 million equivalent to about $41.5 million, 

while the Treasury's position dropped from $71.5 million equivalent to 

$61.7 million.  

Although the sales, as was the intention, were absorbed by the 

market without difficulty, Mr. MacLaury continued, it had not seemed 

wise to press the operations further for the time being. As the Com

mittee was aware, the market for sterling had not been particularly 

strong in the last couple of weeks. The one exception was at the end 

of April when the Bank of England, rather than announcing the reduction 

in Bank rate that had been widely expected by the market, introduced

-4-



5/11/65 -5

special deposit requirements for the London clearing banks and Scottish 

banks. The market reacted favorably to that unexpected tightening of 

British monetary policy, and the pound moved nearly to parity with 

the Bank of England taking in some $60 million. That was the largest 

intake in the recent period. Thereafter, the market moved in a range 

of about $2.7975-90 without any strong trend; this morning the rate 

was $2.7986. Sterling eased a week ago today (May 4) when the British 

authorities announced only a moderate increase of reserves in April 

(of $22.4 million, to $2,352.1 million). The market had expected a 

larger increase and was taken aback somewhat by the statement that the 

Bank of England had had recourse to further central bank credits prior 

to the budget message, only part of which had subsequently been repaid.  

During April, the Bank of England drew some $200 million from central 

banks other than the Federal Reserve System, and on balance repaid $40 

million of its drawings on the System. Its indebtedness to foreign 

central banks after those transactions, therefore, stood at $280 million 

drawn on the Federal Reserve swap and some $800 million drawn on other 

central banks.  

Although the technical position of sterling remained strong 

and market sentiment was definitely better than it was a month or so 

ago, Mr. MacLaury said, there clearly had been no rush by the market 

to cover forward sterling commitments. However, the strengthening 

of the forward rate, apart from reflecting speculation on a Bank rate 

reduction, did indicate that there might be some covering of such 

commitments going on. The market was still vulnerable to unfavorable



5/11/65 -6

headlines, and probably would remain so as long as the British efforts 

to reach agreement on an incomes policy remained in a state of flux 

and uncertainty continued concerning the government's stability, partic

ularly in the light of the steel nationalization discussions. Under 

the circumstances, it was of great importance that the British authorities 

continue to have at their disposal resources with which to counter pos

sible speculative pressures. In this connection, Mr. MacLaury noted 

that all of the hurdles had been cleared for the British International 

Monetary Fund drawing of $1.4 billion later this month. It was under

stood that the British would use a good part of the proceeds to pay 

off their short-term indebtedness. Press reports had indicated that 

some $700 million would be required for that purpose, but the New York 

Bank's calculations indicated that $1.1 billion would be required.  

Accordingly, assuming no large market transactions in the intervening 

period, about $300 million would remain from the drawing after repayment 

of short-term debts.  

With respect to continental currencies, Mr. MacLaury reported 

that the System had been able to make some progress during the period 

in paying off swap drawings. The most notable change was the prepay

ment of $50 million equivalent of the swap drawings with the Swiss 

National Bank. The major portion of that repayment ($45 million was 

made possible by purchases of francs from the Swiss National Bank when 

difficulties of two small Swiss banks reportedly contributed to market 

selling of Swiss francs and necessitated heavy offical support of the 

Swiss franc. That problem was a temporary one, although the Swiss franc



5/11/65 -7

had tended to remain well below its ceiling. There was some possibility 

that further repayments on that drawing could be made before its maturity 

on June 1, since the Swiss authorities were now using dollars from their 

reserves to purchase Italian lire in connection with remittances by 

Italian workers in Switzerland. Such remittances had previously been 

used to pay down the $100 million swap between the Swiss National Bank 

and the Bank of Italy, but that swap now had been fully liquidated.  

In addition to repayments on the Swiss drawing, Mr. MacLaury 

said, early in the period the System paid off the last $5 million 

equivalent of its drawing on the German Federal Bank, and also $5 million 

equivalent of its drawing on the Netherlands Bank, bringing the latter 

to $45 million equivalent. Thus, at the moment, the System's gross 

debtor position was $525 million and its net debtor position was $245 

million. Those figures compared with $580 million and $210 million, 

respectively, at the time of the last meeting of the Committee.  

So far as the situation in the Netherlands was concerned, Mr.  

MacLaury continued, during the period the Syscem was also able to 

reduce its forward guilder commitments by $25.3 million equivalent, 

to the present level of $54.5 million equivalent. The Treasury's guilder 

obligations were also reduced, by $20.6 million equivalent to $64.1 

million equivalent. That meant, in effect, that the series of forward 

guilder contracts undertaken last December and January had now either 

been liquidated or rolled over through new sales. The prospects for 

further reductions in the U.S. guilder obligations were mixed; on the one 

hand the Account Management had been told that the Dutch money market



5/11/65 -8

was expected to remain tight throughout May; on the other hand, the 

New York Bank might be able to acquire some guilders, as well as other 

needed currencies, at the time of the U.K. drawing on the Fund.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
April 13 through May 10, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

As he mentioned earlier, Mr. MacLaury said, it was hoped to 

reduce further the System's drawings on the Swiss National Bank.  

However, in the event that was not possible, he requested the Com

mittee's approval of a renewal for another three months of the drawing 

on the Swiss National Bank, now in the amount of $20 million, which 

matured on June 1. This would be a first renewal.  

Possible renewal of the S20 million 
drawing on the Swiss National Bank for a 
further period of three months was noted 
without objection.  

Mr. MacLaury then noted that the $750 million swap arrangement 

with the Bank of England would mature on May 28, 1965, and recommended 

its renewal for another twelve months.  

Mr. Daane said that in light of the discussions at Paris and 

Basle last week he thought it was important to support the British 

by renewing the swap line. Chairman Martin expressed similar views.  

Renewal of the $750 million swap 
arrangement with the Bank of England 
for a further period of twelve months 
was approved unanimously.  

Finally, Mr. MacLaury said, the System probably would roll over 

its $15 million equivalent sterling/guilder swap for another three



5/11/65 -9

months (and the Treasury would do the same). This would be a second 

renewal.  

Renewal of the $15 million equivalent 
sterling/guilder swap for a further period 
of three months was noted without objection.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to comment on develop

ments at the meetings he had attended recently in Paris and Basle of 

Working Party 3, the Group of Ten Deputies, and the Bank for Inter

national Settlements.  

Mr. Daane said he would report first on the weekend meeting 

of the BIS at Basle. The tone of the discussion at that meeting was 

quite mild, for the obvious reason that the substance, relating mainly 

tc the British drawing on the IMF, had already been covered in earlier 

meetings. Lord Cromer of the Bank of England discussed recent develop

ments in sterling in a little more detail than the British had at the 

preceding meetings in Paris, and was quite optimistic with respect to 

the recent strength of the pound. He noted that the British had gained 

something over $100 million equivalent in spot sterling since announce

ment of the budget, most of which was acquired since the April 30 

announcement of special bank deposit requirements. They had repaid 

about $100 million of continental central bank advances and added $22 

million to their reserves, and their total gain came to about $140 

million, taking into account the decrease in Federal Reserve and U.S.  

Treasury holdings of sterling that Mr. MacLaury had reported. That 

left them with short-term obligations under the stabilization package 

of slightly under $1.1 billion--specifically, $1.097 billion. Lord



5/11/65 -10

Cromer also commented at some length on his recent letter to the clear

ing banks. The spirit of that letter was being relayed to all financial 

institutions; they would be informed that the budget contemplated an 

increase of only 5 per cent in bank advances from mid-March 1965 to 

mid-March 1966. That would represent quite a change from the last two 

years, when the increase in advances had been 14 and 16 per cent, 

respectively. Lord Cromer also reported that Britain was experiencing 

a shortage of mortgage money for house building.  

There was general satisfaction expressed with the credit measures 

now being taken by the British, Mr. Daane said. As the chairman of the 

Basle meeting put it, 5 per cent was a severe limit. The only critical 

question raised at Basle was with respect to the method the British 

used to finance their domestic budget deficit. In effect, through the 

Exchange Equalization Account they used the proceeds of their sales of 

foreign exchange for this purpose. That meart that the larger their 

external deficit the more easily they could finance their domestic 

deficit. Some of the Basle members noted that that was a rather odd 

procedure unless it was conceded that domestic deficits always should 

be financed in an inflationary fashion.  

Mr. Blessing, President of the Bundesbank, gave a rather strongly 

worded statement on conditions in Germany at the Basle meeting, Mr. Daane 

continued. Mr. Blessing noted that the boom was continuing and that 

restrictive measures were being taken in both short- and long-term 

markets. Among other things he expected the rate of house construction 

to be dampened and considered that a desirable development. The Germans



5/11/65 -11

were making a determined effort to keep prices from rising. Their 

balance of payments now seemed to be moving into deficit.  

Turning to the preceding meetings in Paris, Mr. Daane said 

that the two half-day sessions of the Working Party 3 meeting on 

May 5 and 6 were devoted almost entirely to interrogation of the 

British and discussion of their situation, leaving only a brief 

period for review of the U.S. situation. He felt that the tone of 

the whole discussion was sympathetic and constructive. There was 

general concern about the narrowness of the margin of safety in the 

British program. It was felt that the British would manage quite 

well if all of their projections proved accurate, but that there was 

no real margin for error. There was general uneasiness about the 

degree of progress the British were making toward their goal of 

releasing resources to the export industries. It was thought that 

their program did not provide for a sufficient cut-back in domestic 

demand, especially since all of the cut-back called for rested on 

the private rather than the government sector of the economy. A 

budget hardly could be considered deflationary or even neutral when 

it called for a substantial increase in government spending. And there 

was some feeling that the monetary measures taken still had allowed too 

great a degree of credit availability, although the April 30 action on 

bank advances won commendation. Finally, considerable skepticism was 

expressed abouc the probable efficacy, at least in the short run, of 

the government's incomes policy.



5/11/65 -12

The British representatives volunteered the suggestion that 

the whole British situation be reviewed at Working Party 3 meetings 

in July, September, and December, Mr. Daane continued. His own judg

ment was that the willingness of the continental countries to go along 

with the British rested more on the content of Chancellor Callaghan's 

letter of intent to the Managing Director of the IMF than on the govern

ment's program. In his letter Mr. Callaghan said flatly that the Brit

ish were determined to take such further action as was necessary, includ

ing monetary action. It was hard to quarrel with such a statement.  

Discussion of the British situation was continued in the suo

sequent meeting of the Group of Ten Deputies, Mr. Daane said. That 

meeting was concerned specifically with the question of activating the 

General Arrangements to Borrow in connection with the British Fund 

drawing. Most of the session was devoted to the wording of the com

munique to be issued; after the earlier meetings there was a clear 

initial consensus that the GAB should be activated. Only two sub

stantive issues were considered at any length, both of which related 

to the composition of the proposed drawing. The gold component in the 

proposal had been raised to $400 million from the figures of $250 million 

and $350 million that had been discussed earlier. Many of the conti

nental representatives expressed satisfaction over that increase, but a 

number felt that $400 million was still too low. The American repre

sentatives took no part in this discussion on the ground that it basically 

was a question for the IMF.



5/11/65 -13

There also was some dissatisfaction expressed over the size of 

the dollar component, $250 million, Mr. Daane observed. The Americans 

indicated that they thought that amount was sufficiently high, with 

Under Secretary of the Treasury Deming resting the U.S. case principally 

on two grounds. The first was that as a matter of basic principle the 

Fund should not draw on the currency of a deficit country in connection 

with this sort of operation. Mr. Polak of tne Fund endorsed that prin

ciple, but it was not accepted by the continental representatives, who 

pointed out that most of their countries now were in a deficit position.  

Secondly, Mr. Deming advanced the more pragmatic argument that the 

exposure of the U.S. after the drawing would be much greater than that 

of other countries because of the System's swap line with the Bank of 

England, the Export-Import Bank credit, and the volume of dollar secu

rities in the British portfolio. The continental representatives were 

unwilling to accept the existence of the swap line or the Export-Import 

Bank credit as a justification for a low dollar component because those 

were matters of this country's own bilateral doing. However, they were 

quite willing to accept the proposition that the U.S. had what, in a 

sense, was an unwanted responsibility as a result of the dollar secu

rities in the British portfolio. In any case, they agreed to activate 

the GAB and to go along with the revised package as proposed by the 

Managing Director.  

The Deputies also held a preliminary discussion of the renewal 

of the General Arrangements to Borrow, Mr, Daane commented. The GAB 

would expire in October 1966, but renewal was required by October 1965.



5/11/65 -14

From that discussion it seemed to him that most countries did not plan 

to raise quest:.ons about the general structure of the Arrangements.  

However, some questions probably would be raised about their duration.  

The original GAB had had a four-year term, but some representatives, 

including the French, expressed the view that a shorter term, such as 

two years, would be more desirable on renewal in light of the studies 

under way on means of improving the international payments mechanism.  

Mr. Deming indicated that he did not feel there was a link between the 

studies and the GAB, and expressed a tentative preference for another 

four-year term.  

The final item on the agenda, Mr. Daane said, was a report by 

Chairman Ossola of the Study Group on Creation of Reserve Assets. Mr.  

Ossola outlined the Group's planned report and indicated that it would 

be submitted for study to the Group of Ten Deputies possibly about 

June 10 or 12. Decisions with respect to procedures for handling the 

report, as well as with respect to its substance, were left open.  

Mr. Ellis asked whether any views had been expressed at the 

meetings on the progress of the U.S. balance of payments program. Mr.  

Daane replied there was a feeling that the U.S. program was working, 

but the continental countries were mainly interested in the way the 

United States viewed it--what effects were expected, how long it would 

be carried on, and so forth. There was very little indication of any 

trepidation on their part with regard to its effects on them. At the 

Basle meeting, he (Mr. Daane) had given a cautiously optimistic report 

of progress to date which seemed to have been welcomed.



5/11/65

Chairman Martin noted that the agenda for today's meeting 

called for a discussion at this point of the possibility of entering 

into swap arrar.gements with Mexico, Venezuela, and Peru. He pro

posed that the discussion be deferred until a later meeting when 

Mr. Mitchell, who originally had suggested the matter for discussion, 

would be present. There were no objections to the Chairman's proposal.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period April 13 through May 5, 1965, 

and a supplemental report for May 6 through 10, 1965. Copies of both 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

The money market remained generally steady during the 
past four weeks, holding firm enough to keep Federal funds 
generally at 4-1/8 or 4 per cent and member bank borrowing 
around $400-$500 million, while also accommodating a suc
cessful Treasury refunding operation. As in the similar 
period of other recent years, the major money market banks 
benefited from temporary Treasury redeposits of April 15 
tax receipts. However, the money market as a whole did 
not ease as it had in similar circumstances in the past, 
possibly because of the high rate of reserve utilization 
and the smaller cushion of excess reserves in banks out
side the money centers.  

System operations provided reserves on balance over 
the period, particularly in the latter part when normal 
month-end reserve drains were augmented by swap repay
ments and continuing substantial growth in required re
serves. Much of the recent reserve need was met through 
short-term repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers.  
In this connection the Committee's recent authorization 
to permit such agreements against Treasury issues of any 
maturity, during periods of Treasury refunding, proved

-15-



5/11/65 -16

particularly helpful. The System's holding of Treasury issues 
under repurchase agreements reached a level of $685 million on 
May 5--the day that subscription books closed for the Treasury's 
refunding. Of this $685 million, some $501 million were against 
rights in the refunding and if it were not for the Committee's 
new authorization, the repurchase agreements against rights 
would have had to be terminated on May 6 to the extent that 
dealers turned in those rights for the Treasury's reopened 
nine-year bond. The dealers did in fact convert their rights 
mainly into bonds and if the Desk had had to cope with massive 
repurchase agreement withdrawals a huge offsetting provision 
of reserves would have been needed--probably in the form of 
outright bill purchases which would have added to downward 
pressure on rates. The System also held on May 5 some $11 
million of other long-term (i.e., over two-year) issues under 
repurchase agreements, as permitted under the revised authoriza
tion. Holdings of Treasury issues under repurchase agreement 
declined on May 6, but rose again to $701 million on Friday, 
May 7, and still included some $501 million against rights 
and $9 million against issues maturing in over two years.  

The Treasury refunding was well received by the market 
after a bit of initial hesitation, and a useful amount of 
debt extension has been achieved. The public subscription 
of about $2 billion of the reopened 4-1/4 per cent bonds of 
1974 was somewhat more than most market participants had 
anticipated. But on the whole the bonds are regarded as 
reasonably "well placed." Dealers have a sizable job of 
distribution yet to be done, but the mild market reaction 
to the large subscriptions to the long bonds indicates that 
they are approaching the task with confidence.  

Treasury bills have continued in demand during recent 
weeks, with normal refunding demands and other seasonal demands 
augmented, as indicated in the written reports, by Treasury 
account purchases. In yesterday's auction, the three-month 
bill rate edged down slightly further to about 3.89 per cent 
while the six-month issue was sold at an average rate of 
about 3.95 per cent. I would see little prospect for higher 
bill rates on the immediate horizon, given the reduced level 

of dealer holdings in the wake of the refunding, and the pos
sibility of some demand being generated by attrition from the 

refunding. Dealers are generally cautious, however, at cur

rent rate levels and it may well be that some upward tendency 
will develop as the next tax date approaches and as the 

period of seasonal Treasury cash needs draws closer.  

There is little to add to the written reports by way of 
comment on other markets. Tax-exempt issues have been coming 

to market in good volume at slightly higher rates than prevailed



5/11/65 -17

a few months ago. Today, several large issues are reaching 
the market, including $100 million State of California bonds.  
Corporate bond issues have come to market at rates very close 
to those prevailing earlier, but a number of these issues 
have been a little sticky in distribution. The sizable over
hang of undistributed bonds in both markets has contributed 
to a certain underlying feeling of caution.  

In the bankers' acceptance market, dealers' inventories 
have declined substantially since dealers raised their rates 

1/8 per cent on April 23--partly reflecting particularly 
heavy purchases by a major New York City bank. During the 
recent period, repurchase agreements in bankers' acceptances 
again proved a useful adjunct of open market operations.  

As far as third-country acceptances are concerned, we 
have distributed a new tabulation dated May 6 showing hold
ings in our portfolio, and propose to distribute similar 
tabulations at least twice a month in the future. (Note: 
A copy of this tabulation and of the accompanying memorandum 
has been placed in the Committee's files.) 

Mr. Swan noted that there had been a good deal of comment about 

the demand for Treasury bills by public fund, as one of the factors 

leading to relatively low bill rates recently. He asked whether such 

demand was expected to continue. Mr Holmes replied that a reversal 

was expected; public funds probably would be net sellers of bills in 

the period ahead, adding to possible upward rate pressures.  

Mr. Robertson asked whether Mr. Holmes planned to supplement 

tabulations on third-country acceptances of the type distributed with 

a memorandum to the Committee on the desirability and workability of 

alternative means of reducing the volume of such acceptances in the 

Bank's portfolio.  

Mr. Holmes said that personnel of the Bank had held several 

discussions of this subject and had concluded that any request to 

dealers for a smaller volume of third-country acceptances was likely



5/11/65 -18

to produce undesirable reactions in the market and to lead to other 

problems, as Messrs. Hayes and Treiber had noted at recent meetings.  

It seemed preferable to deal with any problems in this connection at 

the point where the acceptances were created, rather than in the 

secondary market. Mr. Holmes added that he would have a memorandum 

prepared for the Committee outlining the reasoning underlying these 

views.  

Mr. Balderston asked if Mr. Holmes would analyze briefly for 

the Committee the factors that had led the Desk to buy a substantial 

volume of Treasury bills on Friday, April 30, after the Treasury had 

announced the terms of the current refunding but before the books 

were open. Mr. Holmes said that as he recalled the transactions in 

question the System's purchases were made in response to indicated 

reserve needs. At the same time, the Treasury also was buying bills 

for its investment accounts. He thought the Treasury probably was 

concerned about the hesitant reception accorded the 4 per cent notes 

to be issued, which were priced close to the market. Although the 

System's purchases were made for a different reason, both sets of 

operations obviously had effects on the bill market.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period April 13 through 
May 10, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had



5/11/65

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Noyes made the following statement on economic conditions: 

It often seems that the uncertainty which plagues us 
when we try to look ahead focuses on a particular period, 
and we feel that once that time has passed, many of our 
doubts will be resolved.  

Early May was such a time this year. Much of the 
speculation as to the pattern of economic developments in 
1965 emphasized that our foresight was clouded by the pos
sibility that by May 1 we might see either a steel strike, 
or an overly generous settlement, with the impact of one 
or the other of these alternative possibilities affecting 
a wide range of business decisions.  

As is almost always the case, the passage of time has 
only partially resolved the doubts that concerned us earlier 
and has brought its share of new ones. Nevertheless, it 
does seem to me that the additional knowledge that we now 
possess is favorable, on balance, to the continuing healthy 
expansion of the economy. This seems to me to be true 
whether one was more concerned about the possibility that 
a sharp curtailment of activity in steel would spread to 
other lines and precipitate a downturn; or, on the other 
hand, that the very rapid pace of the first four months 
would set in motion an inflationary spiral, which would be 
further aggravated by rising labor costs.  

As is suggested at several points in the staff comments 
on the questions suggested for discussion today, we are now 
moving into a period when demand pressures should be less 
intense; that is, demands will be rising less rapidly in 
relation to our expanding capacity. At the same time, the 
shift now seems likely to be less violent than we feared 
earlier, partly because of the nature of the interim 
settlement in steel, and partly because capital expenditure 
plans are being revised upward. The magnitude of the change 
in the outlook can be illustrated very roughly with the 
GNP aggregates. Earlier in the year we speculated about 
GNP growth in the second quarter only about one-third as 
large as in the first--say perhaps something like $5 billion, 
as compared to $15 billion. Now the first quarter expansion 
looks closer to $14 billion or less, and a gain of $7 billion 
or more in the second does not seem unreasonable.  

A more favorable view of the outlook along these lines 
apparently received nearly unanimous support at the meeting 
of the Business Council in Hot Springs last week, where both 
the possibility of a downturn and the danger of "overheating" 

got short shrift.

-19-



5/11/65

Naturally, as a central banker, one must view all this 
optimism with skepticism and, as usual, one can find some 
basis for misgivings. While most of the recent rise in 
wholesale prices is associated with a recovery in farm 
products from unusually depressed levels, the fact remains 
that the run-up last summer and fall in prices of sensitive 
industrial materials, which was associated at the time with 
transitory supply developments, has not yet been reversed.  
However, in fairness it would be unreasonable to expect 
downward price adjustments to have occurred in the period 
when the economy was running under the forced draft of steel 
strike anticipations and auto strike make-up. The time 
when these prices will really be tested lies just ahead.  

The increase in plant and equipment expenditure plans 
deserves special mention, but for the short-run,some 
further pick-up in this area seems altogether fortunate, 
as does the rise in housing starts and building permits.  

Retail sales hit an extraordinarily high level in 
February and were off a little in March and again in April.  
Were it noc for the fact that the February figure was so 
obviously out of line on the high side, two consecutive 
months of decline in retail sales, in an otherwise booming 
economy, might be cause for concern. In the circumstances, 
it is hard to regard what has happened so far as other 
than a healthy adjustment, especially in the light of the 
fact that sales for the week ending May 1 seem to be above 
the normal post-Easter pattern.  

Unemployment was up a little in April to 4.9 per cent 
from the favorable 4.7 per cent in March. Industrial 
production probably did not change much in April, as some 
seasonally adjusted decline in autos was perhaps a little 
more than offset by gains elsewhere. It looks like, if 
anything, a stronger performance than might have been 
anticipated on top of recent advances.  

I am sure it is apparent by this time that I am 
straining to find faults in a situation which has generally 
developed more favorably than it was reasonable to hope.  

To summarize, pressures on resources should ease a 
little as we pass through a period of steel inventory 
adjustment--and perhaps a lower level of auto demand--but 
the chances of an actual decline in overall activity now 
seem quite remote. At the same time, the period of maximum 
danger of overheating should be behind us for the moment.  

Certainly, continued vigilance is needed if monetary 
policy is to contribute constructively to another year of 
reasonably stable growth on top of the four just passed, 
but I see nothing in domestic economic developments which 
would suggest that the policies of the Committee thus far 
this year have been inappropriate, or that they are in 

need of change at this time.

-20-



5/11/65

Mr. Holland made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

This seems to me to be one of those fortunate occasions 
when the fog of financial statistics has also lifted a bit, 
enabling us to perceive a little better the terrain over 
which we have just come, and thereby to judge better current 
conditions and prospects.  

The most helpful new numbers in this respect are the 
just-released flow-of-funds data through the first quarter, 
for they let us view the big bank credit bulge this year 
against the perspective of broader finncial and economic 
developments. When we do so, we see that the bank credit 
jump was not simply the most obvious part of a massive 
credit upsurge, but rather a powerful competitive enlarge
ment of the banking system's share of a total private credit 
flow that actually grew rather less than past relationships 
might have suggested.  

Ordinarily, periods of vigorous growth in private GNP 
such as we had in the first quarter generate--and in turn 
are reinforced by--a relatively even more rapid increase 
in private borrowing, as individuals and businesses rely 
heavily upon external sources of funds to supplement their 
own internal resources. In the first quarter of 1965, 
however, net funds raised by the domestic nonfinancial 
sector expanded just about as much percentagewise as did 
GNP itself, and this is true whether one compares these 
first quarter results with the preceding quarter or with 
the average for the year 1964 as a whole. These data,of 
course, have their weaknesses, but they reflect, if anything, 
a shade more conservative rather than a more liberal relative 
use of external debt by the private sector in financing its 
1965 bulge in spending. That run-up in spending had its 
destabilizing potential, but it lay more in the type and 
concentration of expenditures made than in how they were 
financed.  

Beyond the first quarter, the available data narrow 
down to descriptions of the banking system and little else, 
with a corresponding loss of perspective. Nonetheless, one 
can see signs of change of pace in banking alone that ought 
to be indicative of some redressing of the enlarged bank share 
of financial flows that developed late last year. I would 
judge three factors to be at work dampening bank credit and 
deposit expansion after the first quarter: (1) some moderation 
in demands for financing by bank customers, (2) virtual comple
tion of the public's shifts out of stocks of other financial 
assets and into time accounts in response to the attraction of 
the latest round of interest rate increases on time deposits;

-21-



5/11/65

and (3) a mild further tightening of bank reserves and 
relative liquidity positions, with Federal Reserve policy 
chiefly responsible for the former and Treasury debt manage
ment actions contributing to the latter.  

The effect of these influences is not shown symmet
rically in our summary banking statistics. This is in 
good part oecause a late surge of bank expansion took 
place at the very end of March; this rise is captured in 
the March data in the end-of-month series used to measure 
bank loans and investments, but is largely carried forward 
into the April numbers in the average bank deposit series 
which is based upon an average of the daily figures through
out each month. On an end-of-month basis, total bank loans 
and investments are now estimated to have risen about $1.8 
billion during April. This is only about two-thirds as 
much as the average for the first three months of 1965, 
but still a shade higher than last year's pace. Business 
loan growth appeared down from $1.2 billion in March to 
$700 million in April. There still exists a vigorous 
demand for bank loans by business, however, as attested 
by the $300 million rise (not seasonally adjusted) at New 
York City reporting banks in the week of May 5. Leading 
bankers also seem to be expecting good loan demand, for 
prime-name banks are still pushing CD sales quite vigorously, 
a source of funds that they have manipulated quite adroitly 
this year to capture extra funds to loan to businesses when 
needed.  

Other than New York City CDs, time deposit growth has 
been much slower in March and April than earlier this year, 
presumably reflecting the wearing out of the impact effect 
of higher time deposit rates. At the same time, the rate 
of growth of money supply rebounded in March and April to 
a 5 per cent annual rate, and the savings flow at mutual 
savings banks seemed to improve a little relative to seasonal 
expectations. Presumably the flow of financial savings in 
the d:rection of other nonbank intermediaries and direct 
market securities has also recovered somewhat in the last 
month or so.  

This redirected savings flow can represent a needed 
cushion for the enlarged supplies of longer-term Federal, 
corporate and municipal securities now being brought to 
market. A concentration of these supplies in a few brief 
weeks, however, does create a potential short-run digestion 
problem that leaves the capital markets technically vulner
able to upward interest rate pressures at this juncture.  
This is most true of the municipal and U.S. Government 
markets, where dealer inventories of longer-term securities 
are currently large by historical standards.

-22-



5/11/65

In these circumstances, the "even keel" constraint on 
monetary policy might well be construed to extend a few 
days beyond the May 17 payment date for the Treasury refund
ing issues, just as sometimes it has been regarded as ending 
a few day. before payment date when the refunding issues 
were shorter-term, dealer holdings were low, or redistribu
tion to final investors was rapid. Furthermore, after the 
"even keel" period is presumed over, it might be deemed wise.  
in the light of the more satisfactory economic outlook 
described by Mr. Noyes, not to tighten money market conditions 
in a way that would compound upward rate pressures in the 
longer-term securities markets as dealers try to speed the 
redistribution of their current inventories of bonds.  

What particular measures of money market and reserve 
conditions might fit within the definition of "even keel" 
are, of course, matters of judgment on which reasonable men 
can differ. The staff's own effort at a consensus in this 
respect is expressed in its answer to question 6.  

Mr. Daane asked whether there was any evidence of pressure on 

banks to raise the prime rate. Mr. Holland said he had not heard much 

talk of increasing the prime rate lately. There was evidence of some 

upward pressure on rates on nonprime loans and on term loans, but 

there was no sign, as far as he knew, that banks were poised for an 

increase in the prime rate itself.  

Mr. Robertson and Mr. Wayne observed that there seemed to be 

a tendency to dispense with the prime rate altogether. Mr. Hayes com

mented that New York banks appeared to be sensitive to the political 

implications of any change in the prime rate.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

On the surface, the balance of payments outcome in March 
and April can be described as a surplus, without qualifica
tions: a surplus with or without seasonal adjustment, and a 
surplus on either the Commerce Department definition or the 
"official settlements" definition. But this outcome was 
probably heavily influenced by the catching up of exports

-23-



5/11/65 -24

after the interruptions of the port strike--as well as by the 
sharp reduction that has occurred in outflows of bank credit.  

Since the Green Book 1/ was put out, we have gotten the 
March export total, and we now have enough weekly information 
on the settlement items to allow us to make a fair guess of 
the April surplus, which looks like about $200 million before 
seasonal adjustment. While this is much less than the sur
plus in March, now revised to $433 million, the difference 
seems to reflect mainly seasonal factors. The result in April 
was a decline in liabilities to foreign official accounts.  
And foreign private balances, which usually tend to rise in 
April, failed to increase.  

To get around some of the difficulties of guessing month
to-month seasonal changes and irregularities, I will speak 
mainly in terms of average monthly figures, comparing the 
March-April averages with averages for the five preceding 
months, October through February. I will mention seasonal 
corrections only when they make an important difference. In 
the October to February period, as you know, the monthly 
deficits were very large, and were running at a much higher 
level than for the year 1964 as a whole. The shift from that 
5-month period to March-April, with surpluses suddenly emerg
ing, is very striking.  

In round terms, what we have to explain is a change from 
an average monthly deficit on the Commerce Department defini
tion of nearly $500 million a month in the preceding five 
months to an average monthly surplus of $300 million in March 
and April--that is, a shift in level of about $800 million.  

On the official settlements basis, the change has been 
only about half as much. The difference between the two 
measures of improvement--$800 million per month on the standard 
calculation, and $400 million on :he official settlements 
calculation--is huge, and I will have to come back to that 
later.  

First we might look at the conventional measure, and 
inquire what were the increases in receipts and drops in pay
ments that produced so great an improvement in the position, 
and also try to arrive at some judgment as to how much of the 
improvement was in some sense or other strictly temporary.  

One factor was the reflux of U.S. corporate liquid funds.  
From confidential Canadian data, we know of about $400 million 
in March. Even if there was no further reflow in April, this 

1/ The report "Currency Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared by the Board's staff for the Committee.



5/11/65

would explain $200 million of the monthly average overall 
improvement, since the net movement in the preceding 5 
months was small. Continued reflows of U.S. liquid funds 
at that average pace seem unlikely.  

Two other main elements are involved: the net out
flows of U.S. bank credit, and merchandise trade. In both 
cases we have data only through March, but I believe that 
reasonable guesses can be made for April.  

The part of the overall improvement that was due to 
the cut in U.S. bank credit outflow, which was a cut of 
about $250 million a month, unadjusted, we do not need to 
think of as strictly temporary. If things go well with the 
voluntary program, it may be quite a while before the ques
tion of "what next?" will have to be faced in this area.  
The:e is every reason to think that April's outflow was 
small, like that of March, and no reason to fear any change 
for the worse in the near future.  

It is very different with the trade surplus. What 
happened in March was that unadjusted exports nearly doubled, 
approaching $3 billion. Though imports also jumped, exceeding 
$2 billion, the statistical trade surplus rose from only $50 
million in February to $850 million in March. In the five 
months October through February, it had averaged a subnormal 
$400 million.  

Durirg the port strike, exports had been held back much 
more than imports. The catching-up process was in full 
swing in March, but there was still a long way to go. In 
April the statistical trade surplus can easily have been 
about as big as it was in March. By now, in May, there 
should begin to be a rather sharp taper.ng off in exports, 
and by June we ought to be back to a new normal trade sur
plus.  

We will have to wait till July or August for statistics 
that will allow us to make a judgment of what the new normal 
level is. In the meantime, a guess in the range of $500 to 
$600 million a month seems plausible, and allows us to say 
that of March's $850 million trade surplus, we may have to 

count as strictly temporary an excess over normal of some 
$300 million; and something like the same will doubtless 

apply to April. Furthermore, actual net receipts must have 

been abnormally large; I find it implausible to suppose that 
any great amount of the delayed exports had already been paid 
for. If, then, we take out this strictly temporary element 
in the trade picture, the balance of payments on the conven
tional basis was not in surplus by anything like $300 million 
a month in March and April and may even have been in deficit.  

I want to come back now to the question of why the change 
in the official settlements deficit since the period around 
the turn of the year has been so much less encouraging than 

the improvement in the conventional balance. In fact, when

-25-



5/11/65

we make a correction for the abnormal trade situation, the 
change looks very moderate indeed.  

What has happened is this. In 1964 foreign private 
holders, especially commercial banks abroad, were building 
up their holdings of dollars in the United States--by $1-1/2 
billion for the year as a whole. In March and April of this 
year, however, foreign private balances in the United States 
appear to have declined by about $250 million. Usually in 
April there is an increase, sometimes exceeding the usual 
March decline. This year, there was a sizable draw-down 
in March, associated with the return flow of U.S. corporate 
liquid funds from Canada. But our tentative figures indicate 
that the normal April build-up of foreign private balances 
failed to develop.  

Now you will recall that during the year 1964, the 
official settlements deficit was $1-1/2 billion, while the 
conventional deficit was $3 billion, the difference 
representing the build-up of foreign commercial bank and 
other private balances. Around the turn of the year, in 
the October-to-February period, the monthly average deficit 
on the official settlements basis, seasonally adjusted, was 
heavy, about $300 million a month. The conventional deficit 
was heavier still, averaging $500 million a month. In 
March and April, however, the relationship was completely 
reversed. The official settlements balance was now a sur
plus of about $100 million (this allows for some seasonal 
correction but none for the trade abnormality). The 
conventional balance, instead of looking the less favor
able of the two as it had before, was an even larger sur
plus, averaging $300 million a month.  

In principle, one can't say that either of the two 
measurements is wrong. Both can be "right," because each 
measures a different thing. It is important that we under
stand clearly what we are measuring with either. The 
large apparent improvement in the U.S. payments situation 
shown by the standard calculation represents the effects 
of the export catch-up, plus the effects of the cutback 
in bank lending, plus the reflux of corporate liquid funds, 

plus other changes in current transactions and in U.S.  
capital outflow, but does not count as an adverse factor 
the apparent shift in the movement of foreign private 
balances from an inflow to an outflow. At a time when 
our concern is to halt the accretions of foreign official 
reserves in order to stop the gold outflow, we need to 

keep watching all the elements of the situation. One of 
the elements to watch is the movement of private foreign 
balances. Perhaps because of the drop in U.S. capital 
outflow, perhaps also as an effect of the temporarily 
high level of our exports, foreign commercial bank

-26-



5/11/65

balances in the United States have appa:ently been tending 
to fall in the past two months.  

Our measures to reduce U.S. capital outflow are thus 
not immediately exerting their full force on foreign official 
reserves. This does not mean they are useless. The Gore 
Amendment and the voluntary program for the banks have 
made a very important change in the situation. Perhaps 
it was inevitable that last year's build-up of foreign com
mercial bank balances would slow down greatly this year.  
If so, the official settlements balance might have increased 
very sharply in the absence of the new measures. The new 
measures seem to be accomplishing what could be expected of 
them. The question remains, whether that is enough.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he had found Mr. Hersey's explanation 

of the differences between the balance of payments figures on the two 

bases of measurement to be lucid and interesting. He felt that it was 

vital for the Committee to keep the figures on both bases in view, 

rather than concentrating on one to the exclusion of the other.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(1) Business activity--What does the extension of the steel 
wage contract suggest as to the near-term outlook for indus
trial activity, inventories, and prices" 

The interim steel agreement has had a stabilizing 
influence on the near-term outlook. Had settlement 
of a new steel contract been reached by May 1, steel 
production probably would be declining sharply now, 
as it did in 1962 and 1963, while steel consumers 
were using up excess stocks accumulated as a strike 
hedge. The interim agreement offers an opportunity 
for a more orderly adjustment of steel production to 
final consumption rates. At the same time, the terms 
of the agreement, and the range of the differences 
between the union and the companies, suggest that the 
final settlement is not likely to involve excessive 
wage and price increases in steel--or in other sectors 
of the economy where labor settlements in the past 
have tended to follow the steel pattern.

-27-



5/11/65

It is too early to tell how promptly steel 
inventories will level off or decline. The threat 
of a steel strike on or after September 1 continues 
to be a source of some uncertainty, Production is 
high, and is expected to decline only moderately 
over the next month or so, even if shipments fall as 
is expected. Some further increase in steel stocks 
is likely up to midyear, but at a rate substantially 
lower than in recent months. The impact of the 
settlement, therefore, on the near-term outlook for 
overall economic activity may show mainly in a 
reduced rate of inventory accumulation without 
significant repercussions outside the steel indus
try.  

There is no evidence a, yet that the 2.6 per 
cent wage increase provided in the interim agree
ment will give rise to any appreciable steel price 
increases. Since 1962, labor costs per ton of 
steel have been declining. The steel wage increase 
is well below that granted in the earlier auto 
settlement, and less than the average rise in manu
facturing or the increases provided in the recent 
can and rubber pacts. Current negotiations in 
the aluminum industry, and those coming up prior 
to September 1 in aircraft and shipbuilding, are 
not expected to produce any breakthrough in the 
general pattern of recent wage trends.  

Even though wage cost increases have on the 
average been maintained within the economy-wide 
rate of gain in productivity, some selective 
price increases may, nevertheless, follow contract 
settlements. For example, the can industry raised 
prices by 1 per cent, and some increases have been 
reported in tire prices. Over all, however, the 
industrial price level has edged up only slightly 
so far this year.  

(2) Capital spending--What are the implications for sustained 
economic activity of the higher levels of capital spending 
now being projected by businessmen? 

The higher levels of business fixed-capital 
spending now being projected for 1965 strengthen 
prospects for continued economic expansion through
out the year. Results of the McGraw-Hill survey 
conducted in March-early April indicate a rise in 
capital spending from the fourth quarter of 1964 
to the fourth quarter of 1965 of about 13 per cent,

-28-



5/11/65

substantially above the 7.5 per cent gain projected 
earlier and not far below the large increase (16 
per cent) posted over the preceding four-quarter 
period. The raising of business investment sights 
provides some offset to the expected slackening in 
the pace of inventory investment.  

Pressures on capacity appear to be a major 
influence contributing to this year's large planned 
increases in capital spending. According to the 
McGraw-Hill report, manufacturers will place much 
greater emphasis on capacity expansion this year 
than in the preceding five years. Manufacturers 
reported that on average they were operating at 
88 per cent of capacity at the end of 1964, and 
nearly one-third were operating at or above pre
ferred capacity utilization rates. Further expan
sion in factory output in the first quarter prob
ably brought the average capacity utilization rate 
to 90 per cent, a factor undoubtedly contributing 
to the recent step-up of investment plans. Manu
facturers now plan to expand capacity by 6 per 
cent this year, as compared with their stated in
crease of 4 per cent last year. The prospective 
large increase in capacity is an encouraging 
element in the outlook for price stability.  

(3) Balance of payments--How do the major types of capital 
flows in the U.S. balance of payments appear to be responding 
to the program of voluntary restraint? 

Judgments about program effects are necessarily 
still tentative, but the partial information, statis
tical and other, available on developments since 
February 10 is moderately encouraging. As noted 
below, significant declines have occurred in out
flows of long-term and short-term bank credit.  

There have been some further term-loan com
mitments by banks to borrowers subject to the IET 
since the Gore Amendment went into effect, but 
through April these apparently amounted to less 
than $60 million. Commitments to borrowers in the 
less developed countries were large, amounting to 

about $200 million in this two-and-a-half month 
period, with the greater part in March and signif
icantly less in April. On an annual rate basis, 
commitments to the less developed countries were 
about equal to their 1964 average, though much 
less than their rate in the latter part of 1964 
and first six weeks of 1965. In contrast, the flow

-29-



5/11/65

of new commitments to industrial countries was 
reduced to roughly one-fourth of its 1964 rate.  

The actual net outflow of long-term bank credit 
during March (revised preliminary data from the 
Treasury's Form B-3) was $43 million--an annual 
rate (without seasonal correction) of about $0.5 
billion, or about one-half the rate in the year 
1964. The outflow in April may have been at least 
as gceat as in March, since it is known that one 
very large individual loan committed in March was 
scheduled for disbursement in April.  

Tentative indications (inferred from the Federal 
Reserve Form 391) are that net bank-reported short
term outflows in March were much less than the $100 
million shown in the Green Book, and possibly close 
to zero. If the figure turns out to be at this 
lower level, it would represent a drop of about 
$100 million from the average of the five preceding 
months. The corresponding drop in 1964 was $54 
million. It seems clear that a significant decline 
has occurred from the rates of these short-term 
outflows experienced earlier--$1.5 billion in the 
year 1964 as a whole, and somewhat under a $1 bil
lion annual rate in the five months from October 
through February.  

For direct investment outflows, preliminary 
quantitative information covering the first quarter 
will not be available until June. The Department 
of Commerce has been obtaining single-figure estimates 
from large corporations with foreign subsidiaries and 
branches of the planned change between 1964 and 1965 
in each company's own "balance of payments" (includ
ing its exports to all areas as well as its investment 
income from and capital outflow to industrial countries, 
but not including its imports). Assistant Secretary 
Brimmer stated in a recent speech that these reports 
indicate a planned $1.2 billion improvement in 1965, 
occurring principally through export expansion rather 
than curtailment of new investment.  

The remaining major types of identifiable capital 
flows in the U.S. balance of payments are securities 
transactions and movements of liquid funds. Securities 
transactions are affected by the IET where it is 
applicable, and the program of voluntary restraint 
for nonbank financial institutions may possibly have 
some influence on them. However, the sharp drop in 
purchases of new foreign securities (seasonally ad
justed) from $600 million in the fourth quarter of 
1964 to about $300 million in the first quarter of

-30-



5/11/65

1965 is unrelated to the program, and represents 
largely the ending of a temporary bulge in Canadian 
new issues in the United States.  

With respect to U.S. corporate liquid funds, 
the only sizable inflows since mid-February thus far 
identified are from Canada. Confidential Canadian 
data show a decline in March in their banks' U.S.  
dollar liabilities to others than banks in the 
United States of $375 million. In turn, Canadian 
banks reduced holdings with their agencies in New 
York in March by about $320 million. Both of these 
movements were in good part seasonal.  

The reflux of U.S. funds from Canada benefits 
the U.S. balance of payments as presently computed.  
However, this reflux is offset by the decline in 
Canadian bank holdings of U.S. dollars in New York 
if the balance is calculated on an "official settle
ments" basis.  

(4) Savings flows--What are the implications of the recent 
abatement in time deposit growth for the overall volume and 
composition of funds being supplied to credit markets? 

Rapid growth of commercial bank time deposits early 
in 1965 resulted mainly from shifts among existing 
stocks of financial assets in response to increases in 
rates on savings deposits and CDs, rather than from a 
growth in total financial saving. Net acquisitions of 
all types of financial assets by consumers and corpora
tions together increased only marginally in the first 
quarter, according to preliminary flow-of-funds estimates.  
Shifts in asset preferences were reflected in reduced 
demands for money balances, for claims against nonbank 
intermediaries (especially savings and loan shares), and 
also for market securities.  

The large first-quarter increase in time deposits, 
together with the rise in Treasury balances at commercial 
banks, permitted an enlargement of funds supplied by 
the banking system at a time of strong demands for credit.  
Credit demands were heavily concentrated in categories of 
financing--such as business loans and consumer credit-
in which banks participate most actively. Since last fall 
banks have been able to finance a large customer loan 
expansion and to increase their purchases of municipal 
securities without heavy liquidation of Treasury issues.  
In both the last quarter of 1964 and the first quarter 
of 1965 the share of total funds supplied by commercial 
banks was higher than in the first three quarters of 1964.

-31-



5/11/65

Slower growth of time deposits during March and 
April seems principally to have reflected the comple
tion of the adjustment to the higher level of interest 
rates mentioned earlier. To some extent, however, it 
probably also reflected larger-than-usual deposit 
withdrawals for payment of individual income taxes 
in those two months. Barring further changes in 
interest rate relationships, the pace of time deposit 
expansion in the months ahead should continue to be 
less rapid than in January and February.  

Continued growth in economic activity and a likely 
rise in the ratio of financial saving to income from 
the rather low first-quarter level probably will in
crease the volume of total financial saving considerably 
in the second and third quarters. With slower growth 
of time deposits expected, the share of the enlarged 
total savings flow channeled through the banking 
system should be significantly smaller in the coming 
months than it was during the first quarter.  

(5) Bank credit--What do recent developments suggest as to the 
pace of business demands for bank credit? 

After rising rapidly in the first quarter, growth 
in business loans at all commercial banks moderated in 
April, with the abatement of some temporary stimulating 
factors. Indications are that business loan demands 
over the next few months will remain relatively strong, 
but will expand considerably less rapidly than in the 
first quarter of this year.  

The moderation of business loans in April reflected 
the continued unwinding of temporary factors that raised 
bank lending so sharply earlier in the year. There was, 
for example, more than seasonal repayment of the commodity 
dealer loans built up during the dock strike. In addi
tion, there was probably further abatement of foreign 
lending as commitments were cleaned up in line with the 
voluntary credit restraint program.  

Continued steel stockpiling in anticipation of a 
May 1 shutdown, on the other hand, led to a strong 
contraseasonal increase in borrowings by the metal and 
metal products industries. April business loans were 
also probably increased somewhat by the over $500 mil
lion of additional corporate tax payments under the 
revised tax payment schedule.  

Beneath the cross-currents induced by these 
temporary factors a basically strong underlying loan 
demand is evident. Loan demands in April were partic
ularly strong in miscellaneous manufacturing and mining

-32-



5/11/65

and construction, and also showed some strength in trade 
and textiles. A further sharp increase in business loans 
took place at New York and Chicago banks in the first 
week of May.  

The industrial distribution of business borrowing 
thus far in 1965 suggests that bank loans have been 
used to finance growth in capital spending as well as 
working capital needs. The impression that recent 
financing needs of firms have been partly of a long
run nature is reinforced by the increase in the ratio 
of term loans to total loans to a record high in New 
York City. Upward revisions of plans for plant and 
equipment spending implied by the recent McGraw-Hill 
survey, together with the continuing need for some 
inventory financing, suggest that business loan expan
sion will continue vigorous over the next few months, 
but probably less so than in the first quarter of the 
year.  

(6) Money market relationships--Assuming a continuation of current 
monetary policy and taking into account the Treasury refunding, 
what range of money market conditions, interest rates, reserve 
availability, and reserve utilization by the banking system might 
prove mutually consistent during coming weeks? 

Market activity associated with the current Treasury 
financing has produced some slight further reduction of 
bill yields relative to other money market rates. The 
financing stimulated additional demand for bills from 
holders of "rights," and this demand was supplemented by 
official bill purchases in the market in the last state
ment week totaling about $650 million (about two-thirds 
of which was for Treasury accounts). Under these condi
tions the yields on 3- and 6-.:,onth bills declined to 
trading levels of around 3.90 and 3.96 per cent, respec
tively, despite continued tautness in the Federal funds 
market and the maintenance of relatively high rates on 
negotiable CDs, bankers' acceptances, and dealer loans.  

Net borrowed reserves of banks in recent weeks 
have been close to $100 million, somewhat below the 
average in late March and the first half of April. Bor
rowings have varied in a wider range, as is usual, but 
the $465 million average for the last three weeks was 
only slightly below the preceding 3-week period. In 
addition to the relatively high level of member bank 
borrowing, nonborrowed reserves increased rapidly in 
April, as Government deposits rose sharply and private 
demand deposit expansion continued brisk. The money 
supply rose at a 5.3 per cent annual rate, and the

-33-



5/11/65

demand deposit component at a 5.8 per cent rate. Time 
deposit growth, however, slackened further last month.  

In coming weeks, conflicting pressures will be at 
work in the money markets. Downward pressure on bill 
yields will be exerted by the unusually low current 
level of short-term bills in dealers' inventories and 
by the reinvestment demand resulting from attrition 
in the current refunding. Upward pressure will come 
from cessation of heavy bill purchases by sellers of 
"rights" and by official accounts, from expected 
redistribution of reserves away from money centers, 
and from continuation of vigorous bank loan demand.  
On balance, it seems likely that net borrowed reserves 
in the $100-$150 million range would be associated 
with some modest net upward pressure on bill yields.  
In this environment, yields on 3-month bills would be 
likely to rise above 3.90 per cent again, while other 
sensitive money market indicators, such as rates on 
Federal funds and dealer loans, should continue firm.  

Private demand deposits may continue to rise 
fairly rapidly in the next few weeks, particularly 
if there is a shift of balances out of Treasury 
accounts. The yield structure specified above is 
not likely to generate deposits through encouragement 
of bank acquisitions of bills and other money market 
instruments. On the other hand, economic expansion 
is adding to transaction needs for money, and under 
the reserve and market conditions specified, demand 
deposit growth appears likely to continue at a rate 
averaging perhaps around 4 per cent in the next few 
months.  

The immediate outlook for longer term interest 
rates is greatly dependent upon dealers' success in 
retailing their more than $500 million awards of the 
reopened 4-1/4's of 1974. This is a larger position 
in the 4-1/4's, by almost $100 million, than they 
took when the same issue was offered at this time 
last year, and dealers' total position in over-5-year 
issues is now about $500 million above last year.  
Also, financing costs are now much closer to the 
4-1/4 per cent coupon than last year. If dealers 
encounter difficulty in distributing their holdings 
of the 4-1/4's, long-term markets may be vulnerable 
to some upward interest rate pressures. Also 
contributing to this vulnerability is the relatively 
full calendar of corporate and tax-exempt bond 
offerings, and the continuing heavy dealer inventories 
of the latter. Nevertheless, investor confidence in

-34-



5/11/65

current market rate levels is shown by the sizable 
($2 billion) public exchange for the 4-1/4's in the 
Treasury refunding.  

Chairman Martin next called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

Business activity. The business situation is strong, 
and there continue to be confirming signs that the outlook 
for the balance of the year is brighter than was thought 
likely several months ago. The postponement of the strike 
deadline in the steel industry should lead to some downward 
adjustment in production in that industry, but not so much 
as might have occurred if a final settlement had been reached-
some users will doubtless continue to build up stockpiles.  
After we make due allowance for some upward bias in the 
McGraw-Hil: survey of business spending on plant and equip
ment, the latest survey still suggests that the advance 
during 1965 is likely to exceed earlier expectations.  
High levels of capacity utilization and of corporate profits 
and cash flows provide a firm backing for expanded capital 
spending. It is also good to note accumulating evidence that 
residential construction activity is bottoming out. These 
and other data raise the possibility that overall economic 
activity will show both a higher level and a steeper growth 
rate than seemed probable a few months ago.  

Prices. While the terms of the ultimate steel settle
ment are of course a continuing major urcertainty, there is 
some ground for encouragement in the mocerate nature of the 
interim agreement and, with respect to industry in general, 
in the tendency for wage settlements so far this year to be 
about in line with the guideposts. However, I find cause 
for concern in the fact that producers in several areas 
continue to test markets with higher prices, in some cases 
successfully, as evidenced most recently by the price in
creases for copper and tires (and, I might add, aluminum) 
and by the mild upward drift in raw commodity prices and 
industrial wholesale prices. Even if various upcoming 

labor negotiations are settled on reasonable terms, they 
may offer an excuse for higher prices in the present 
buoyant business atmosphere. Fortunately, there still is 
little evidence that upward price pressures are substantial 
enought to be having any appreciable effect on business
men's inventory decisions--but we must keep a close eye on 
this area for possible adverse tendencies in the coming months.

-35-



5/11/65

Balance of payments. The President's balance of pay
ments program has been an important factor in the sharp 
improvement in the balance of payments figures in March 
and April. It has contributed to a large-scale repatriation 
of short-term funds from abroad and is responsible for 
keeping the rise in outstanding bank loans to relatively 
moderate proportions. An analysis of the performance of 
Second District banks reveals that they have made a 
determined effort to comply with the guidelines. In the 
corporate sector the program's principal effect appears 
to have been the repatriation of short-term funds. I am 
troubled by the fact that we have had no indications of sig
nificant deferments or cancellations of direct investment 
projects in the sensitive Common Market area. Besides the 
effects of the President's program, there were two other 
significant factors behind the recent payments improvement.  
As usual, U.S. corporations repatriated large amounts in 
March to meet regular tax and dividend needs; and the end 
of the dock strike in early March led to a very sharp rise 
in exports and in our export surplus.  

Although the balance of payments outlook for the second 
quarter is clearly favorable, it would be very unwise to let 
this lead to any feeling of complacency over the payments 
problem. Since the President's program represents a temporary 
line of attack designed to give time for more basic improve
ments, we must do all we can over the ccming year or so 
to contribute to that basic betternent.  

Bank credit and money. Following the record bank credit 
expansion of the first quarter, at an annual rate of nearly 
13 per cent, the preliminary estimates for April suggest 
tentatively a reversion to a growth rate about in line with 
that of the past few years--a rate which has appeared gen
erous and perhaps excessive in relation to the real growth 
of the economy. Loans continue to account for most of the 
total bank credit increase, and business loans remain strong.  
Total reserves and required reserves grew in April at a 
rate exceeding even the substantial pace of the first quarter-
but the April figures were almost certainly influenced by a 
change in the mix of the deposit expansion. This change in 
mix probably reflects largely the completion of adjustments 
to the late-November Regulation Q liberalization. The 
annual rate of growth of the money supply and time deposits 
combined in the first four months of 1965 was 8.6 per cent, 
well above the 6.1 per cent for the corresponding period of 
1964. Whereas some of this steep gain had earlier seemed 
to reflect the strengthened competitive position of the 
commercial banks--in the credit market because of the 
unchanged prime rate, and in the deposit market because

-36-



5/11/65

of the change in Regulation Q--it is interesting to note 
that the public's total nonbank liquid assets grew in the 
first quarter at a rate of 8.6 per cent, i.e., in effect 
just as rapidly as money supply and time deposits combined.  

Monetary policy. It would seem appropriate to try 
to maintain even keel conditions in the money market during 
the coming two weeks, since the new Treasury securities 
will not be delivered until next Monday, and particularly 
in view of the heavy subscription to the longer 4-1/4s, 
which may make for a relatively sensitive "after-market." 
Thus I believe monetary policy should not be changed in the 
period in question. Because of significant temporary 
influences in the bill market, we probably must resign 
ourselves to continuance, for a time, of the current 
relatively low level of bill rates, even though net 
borrowed reserves are maintained in the $100-200 million 
range. No change in the directive is needed at this 
time, apart from an updating of the reference to the 
Treasury financing. The draft directive prepared by the 
staff appears acceptable, with a slight change in the 
wording of the statement with respect to the balance of 
payments. 1/ In place of the phrase of the first sentence 
which reads "and some apparent improvement in our inter
national payments position," I would suggest "and a 
beginning toward improvement in the U.S. international 
balance of payments." 

Looking a little further ahead, I think it likely 
that we shall have to take some further steps to check 
the recent growth of bank credit. A slower pace would 
clearly be desirable in view of the latent price threat 
and the over-riding importance of improving our inter
national payments position. Some further tightening 
would seem to carry little risk in view of the evident 
very considerable strength of the economy.  

Mr. Shuford remarked that, as had been fully pointed out this 

morning, from all indications the domestic economy was continuing a 

strong and widely-based expansion. Recent surveys suggested no 

reversals in the immediate future and, for the present, the interim 

steel settlement had avoided a strike and its accompanying adverse 

economic effects.  

1/ The draft directive is appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-37-



5/11/65 -38

Economic activity in the Eighth District had generally kept 

pace with the national advance, Mr. Shuford said. Measures of 

production, employment, spending, and bank credit had all risen 

markedly since last fall, although there had been some slowing in 

recent weeks.  

While there still was little evidence that price movements 

had departed from the patterns of the past several years, there was 

some indication of increases and Mr. Shuford was inclined to believe 

that the economy might be approaching a point at which significant 

price increases were imminent. In his judgment the Committee should 

be prepared to foster a moderating monetary environment if excessive 

demand appeared.  

With respect to the international situation, while basic 

problems remained, the most recent data suggested some moderate im

provements to Mr. Shuford. The voluntary credit restraint program 

had been reasonably effective; whether the iprovements would continue 

or could be maintained, of course, remained to be seen.  

Mr. Shuford noted that the strong demands being generated 

by the domestic economy had tightened financial conditions somewhat 

since last autumn. The structure of interest rates had moved up more 

in the five-month period from November to April than it had in the 

preceding year. The increase occurred despite seasonal forces tending 

to push interest rates down. The money supply had expanded 3.6 per 

cent in the year ending last November and, according to weekly data, 

the average growth in money had continued at a rate near that from



5/11/65 -39

November to date. Although the rise in bank credit, particularly 

loans, had accelerated in recent months, part of that rise probably 

represented an expansion in the banking system's share of credit 

rather than net additions to credit in the economy.  

On considering those factors--the strength in the domestic 

economy, reasonable price stability, and the absence of a compelling 

reason to take restrictive actions on account of international 

considerations--and in view of the Treasury financing, Mr. Shuford 

favored no change in policy today. In this connection he noted 

that the Committee would meet again in two weeks. The staff's draft 

directive was acceptable to him.  

Mr. Bryan reported that the performance of the Sixth District 

economy seemed to be good by the usual statistical measures. In 

fact, on the basis of employment in particular and some other measures, 

the District was doing better than the nation. The one development 

that gave him some concern was that the value of new construction 

contracts in the District had been a sixth less during the first 

quarter than a year ago.  

Mr. Bryan said he had little comment on the staff questions.  

Postponement of the steel strike, under the announced terms, seemed to 

him to set a minimum for the prospective settlement, and probably 

more could be expected. It allowed more time for steel stockpiling, 

and for a developing hedging against the expectation of selective 

price increases.



5/11/65

Capital spending plans were encouraging and all to the good, 

Mr. Bryan remarked, subject only to the recognition that capital 

plans, until they were far committed with cash outlays, were subject 

to rapid cancellation. There was nothing in the Sixth District in 

the way of hard facts that gave an independent judgment on the 

balance of payments figures or on the voluntary credit restraint 

program. His opinion was simply that it was undoubtedly having a 

favorable effect; but other factors were having an unfavorable effect, 

and the net balance of forces was unclear at the moment. On the 

savings question, he would merely note that of the gains in savings 

accruing to commercial banks in the first quarter not all had been 

at the expense of the savings and loan associations and mutual savings 

banks. The tine deposit growth, therefore, was in part "for real." 

While this savings growth rate in commercial banks was now coming 

down out of orbit, the savings flows outside the commercial banks 

were again picking up.  

As Mr. Bryan looked at the figures, except for the Federal 

funds rate, the behavior of other money market rates had been es

sentially easy. Longer rates had been easy to steady. He would 

again draw attention to the growth in reserves. From January through 

March (seasonally adjusted at an annual rate), total reserves had 

gone up by more than 9 per cent, nonborrowed reserves by just under 

6 per cent, and total required reserves by 8 per cent. Under those 

circumstances he could do no more than repeat the suggestion he had

-40-



5/11/65 -41

made heretofore--if the Committee was going to give instructions 

essentially in terms of free reserves, its target should move further 

into a net borrowed reserve figure. As soon as the Treasury refund

ing was out of the way, Mr. Bryan thought the Committee should move 

toward a $150 million target rather than the figure of $100 million 

that had been characteristic of recent weeks.  

Mr. Bryan believed it was clear that the Committee had to 

halt what he regarded as a completely excessive reserve expansion.  

He took no comfort in the behavior of prices. He thought the System 

would need to make its discount rate effective by keeping the banks, 

in the absence of untoward developments in the money market and 

money market rates, more heavily in debt at the discount window than 

had generally been the case in recent weeks. He advocated no change 

in the discount rate at this time. Some change in the directive seemed 

desirable, but he had no specific suggestiors.  

Mr. Hilkert observed that economic advances had been common 

for over a year now in the Third District. Recently--since December-

those advances ceased in a number of the District's major economic 

areas, but since March the tempo had picked up again. Unemployment 

rates again had stabilized or had begun to drop; output was increas

ing; and store sales were strong, but as usual were not keeping up 

with national increases.  

Unemployment claims remained at very favorable levels relative 

to similar periods of recent years both in Pennsylvania and Delaware,



5/11/65 -42

Mr. Hilkert said. Unemployment rates (insured rates, seasonally 

adjusted) were down or stable in April in all but one major labor 

market. Electric power consumption by manufacturing industries in 

the District retained an unusually favorable position relative to 

national output measures, and increases in manufacturing employment 

confirmed the strength in output.  

Capital spending plans in the District, as in the nation, had 

been raised substantially since earlier estimates, Mr. Hilkert con

tinued. Manufacturers in the Philadelphia Metropolitan Area now 

planned to spend $526 million on plant and equipment in 1965. That 

represented an upward revision of nearly 17 per cent since previous 

estimates made in October 1964, and, if realized, would be an increase 

in capital expenditures of almost 35 per cent over last year's figures.  

Most other areas in the District also showed sizable upward revisions.  

This spring's findings for the Philadelphia Metropolitan Area con

tinued an upward trend which began in 1962. Since then, Philadelphia 

manufacturers each spring had raised their fall estimates, and also 

had increased the actual amount spent on plant and equipment each year.  

On the financial front, Mr. Hilkert reported that business 

loans in the District had lagged behind those in the nation. Since 

the beginning of the year, for example, business loans at District 

weekly reporting member banks had increased by less than 1 per cent, 

while national business loans were up by almost 6 per cent.



5/11/65 -43

As for the steel outlook, Mr. Hilkert continued, a brief dis

cussion with the largest producer in the District revealed that that 

company's shipments since the contract extension agreement were less 

than in other recent months, but only slightly so, and that there had 

been very few order cancellations. That producer expected orders to 

pick up in August, with the pickup perhaps related more to anticipa

tions of risirg prices than to anticipations of a strike.  

Mr. Hickman said that events of the past few weeks had altered 

his appraisal of the near-term outlook for business only with respect 

to timing. Thus, in response to the staff's first question, the interim 

steel contract suggested to him the following changes in the outlook: 

(1) improved prospects for steel production, possibly through August, 

which would contribute to a larger total tonnage for 1965 than had been 

previously thought likely; (2) deferral and enlargement of the inventory 

liquidation to come when final settlement was reached; and (3) a possible 

carry-over of the steel adjustment problem late into 1966.  

In view of a continued, but slackening, rate of inventory accumula

tion of steel, Mr. Hickman continued, the iron and steel component of the 

production index would probably change little in months immediately ahead.  

At the same time, the auto component, although continuing at high levels, 

would probably trend slightly downward. When the steel liquidation phase 

began, it might be expected to exert a drag on the production index of as 

much as 1-1/2 points from current levels, stretched over a period of six 

to nine months.



5/11/65

So far as the steel wage-price question was concerned, Mr.  

Hickman believed that the final settlement would be close to the 

guidelines on the wage side and would not involve a general steel 

price increase. While "selective" advances in isolated product lines 

were possible, they were unlikely to hit the big-tonnage items of the 

flat-rolled group, where product differentiation was minimal. Recently, 

there seemed to have been a renewed flurry of price increases in other 

industrial items, including aluminum, copper, tires, and trucks. While 

the weights of those items were small in the broad price averages, 

upward movement was again discernible in the diffusion indexes, which 

suggested the reed for continuing close attention to price developments.  

With reference to the staff's second question, Mr. Hickman said, 

the expected continuation of strong forward movement in capital spending 

this year was all the more important because of developments to which 

he had just referred. Also, the Cleveland Reserve Bank's spring survey 

of capital spending plans in the Cleveland area showed a substantial 

gain for 1965 over 1964, like the Philadelphia plans reported by Mr.  

Hilkert. The improvement was concentrated in the second half of the 

year. In addition, he noted that the McGraw-Hill survey suggested 

continued strength in capital spending next year. Such strength might 

be crucial for the economy in light of the presently expected additional 

fiscal drag in early 1966, resulting from higher social security taxes, 

if not corrected by appropriate adjustments in timing of tax payments.  

In regard to the balance of payments situation, Mr. Hickman 

remarked that there was very little that could be added to the staff's

-44-



5/11/65 -45

comments in the green book. It was gratifying that banks and corpora

tions were apparently responding favorably to the voluntary credit 

restraint program. While reports from Fourth District banks suggested 

some difficulty in meeting the guidelines, there were indications of 

progress, and it was only a matter of time before appropriate adjust

ments were made. Reports from large District corporations confirmed 

that efforts were being made to cooperate with the President's program.  

On the matters of savings flows and bank credit (questions 4 

and 5), Mr. Hickman commented that the recent abatement in the growth 

of time deposits should have only a limited effect on the volume of 

credit available for investment. Against the background of System 

policy and relatively large savings flows, there should be little dif

ficulty in meeting demands for credit, short of an unexpectedly large 

run-up in capital spending. Special factors that sparked a marked 

expansion in business loans earlier this year had passed, except that 

the deferral of the steel adjustment might extend business borrowing 

in that area temporarily.  

Insofar as policy over the next two weeks was concerned, Mr.  

Hickman thought that the Committee had no alternative, given the cur

rent Treasury refinancing operation, but to maintain an even keel with

in the policy directive adopted at the last meeting (or the one recom

mended by the staff for this meeting, since the two were substantially 

the same). Since such a directive would call for no change in money 

market conditions, he again recommended a bill rate in the range of 

3.95-4.05 per cent, borrowings above $400 million on average, and net



5/11/65 -46

borrowed reserves at whatever level was required to maintain those 

objectives--within, say, a range of $50 to $150 million. Since the 

91-day bill rate had been somewhat below the desired range, and since 

covered differentials were moving slightly against the United States, 

he would like to see the Treasury either issue a strip of bills or 

add to the existing supply of bills through the regular weekly auction, 

if and when such action was feasible.  

Mr. Maisel said he had nothing to add to the staff materials 

and preceding comments of members nor did he have any changes to pro

pose in the directive.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he had little to add to what had been 

said. He agreed that the securities issued in the Treasury financing 

still had to be fully digested, and that an even keel policy therefore 

was called for until the Committee met again in two weeks. With regard 

to the balance of payments reference in the directive, he thought it 

would be desirable to avoid the evaluations implicit both in the use 

of the word "apparent" to qualify "improvement" as proposed by the 

staff and in the alternative phrase that Mr. Hayes had suggested.  

Moreover, he would not favor another minor change proposed by the staff-

from the "balance of payments" to "payments position"--particularly since 

the Committee presumably would not change its policy today. He saw no 

purpose in changing words for the sake of change itself. Accordingly, 

he recommended that the phrase read "and some improvement in our inter

national balance of payments."



5/11/65 -47

Mr. Shepardson said that he also had little to add. He thought 

the staff reports indicated a generally favorable economic situation, 

although he was concerned that too optimistic an attitude was taken 

with respect to some indicators. He shared the concern Mr. Bryan had 

expressed; the recent rate of credit expansion was very high and in his 

judgment the Committee should be looking toward some tempering of that 

rate. In view of the Treasury financing, he agreed that it was appropriate 

for the Committee to make no change in policy during the coming two weeks, 

but he hoped that the Committee might be able to move to a little lower 

rate of credit expansion subsequently.  

With regard to the directive, Mr. Shepardson shared Mr. Daane's 

view that the word "apparent" should be omitted from the reference to 

the balance of payments improvement. He also questioned the proposed 

insertion of the word "further" before "growth in the reserve base, 

bank credit, and the money supply." The addition of that word implied 

to him that higher growth rates were desired; if anything the Committee 

should be leaning toward lower rates of growth. Accordingly, he would 

omit the word "further." 

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

It seems to me that the weight of the evidence before 
us this morning calls for no change in monetary policy dur
ing the next two weeks.  

With regard to the business situation, I find my view 
neatly summed up by the first sentence appearing in the 
Green Book, which says: "Changes reported in the domestic 
economic scene since early March have been of a kind generally 
conducive to further expansion in activity over the near-term 
without widespread price advances." A moderate slowing down 
in the pace of business expansion is taking place, but for 
reasons that do not call for a prompt response on the part 
of monetary policy.



5/11/65

On the financial side, too, some signs of moderation 
and readjustment are showing. Bank loan demand is not 
so unremittingly strong, and the latest money supply and 
time deposit figures seem to be explainable as readjust
ments from their unusual January-February performance.  
Bill rates have drifted down a bit in connection with the 
Treasury refunding, and I am not happy about the extent 
to which that may have been deliberately brought about 
by heavy official purchases of bills instigated by the 
Treasury for purposes of sweetening the refunding. But 
I am not concerned about the lower level of the three
month bill rate per se. I think fluctuations in yields, 
dowrward .as well as upward, ought to be expected and 
allowed to occur as part of the regular functioning of 
the market. In addition, I do not believe this, or even 
an appreciably lower, bill rate would constitute any 
threat to the balance of payments improvement we are 
seeking to achieve. Short-term interest-sensitive fund 
flows seem to be fairly well in hand and we should con
centrate our general economic and monetary policies on 
our more fundamental objectives.  

I am concerned about one aspect of the securities 
markets: the possibility that some upward adjustment of 
longer-term interest yields might take place under the 
weight of current Federal, state, local, and corporate 
bond marketings. I would not want to try to tinker with 
the long market to interfere with some temporary yield 
fluctuations that might occur as part of the process of 
digestion, but I also would want to be careful not to 
have our monetary policy either trigger or aggravate 
such a development. Accordingly, I would favor having 
the Desk aim at keeping money market and reserve conditions 
unchanged between now and the next meeting of the Committee.  

I would vote to approve the curren: directive to the 
Manager as drafted by the staff. I would prefer, however, 
as I mentioned last time, to substitute "support" for 
"reinforce" in the last sentence of the first paragraph, 
in order to avoid any connotation that further tightening 
is needed or desired.  

Mr. Robertsor added that he agreed that the word "apparent" 

should be deleted since the facts certainly indicated some improvement 

in the balance of payments, and he would also delete the word "position" 

after "international payments." However, he did not favor omitting the

word "further," as suggested by Mr. Shepardson.

-48-



5/11/65 -49

Mr. Wayne reported that the steady advance of Fifth District 

business continued with strength evident in almost every sector.  

Over half of the respondents in the Bank's latest business survey 

anticipated further gains in the weeks immediately ahead, and the 

others were confident that current strength would be sustained. Rates 

of insured unemployment declined more than seasonally over the first 

four months of the year. The outlook for the District's agricultural 

sector, however, was somewhat less favorable than for the rest of the 

economy. Last week the new acreage-poundage program for flue-cured 

tobacco was approved by growers. Even if that new program spurred 

tobacco farmers to produce a better-quality, higher-priced product, 

as was anticipated, the net effect might be to reduce income from this 

year's marketirgs by as much as 10 or 15 per cent, from $718 million 

to $650 million or perhaps even to $600 million.  

The outlook for general business continued favorable, Mr. Wayne 

said. While the interim steel settlement had not eliminated the 

uncertainty surrounding that industry, it had at least pushed the 

critical point four months into the future. Steel consumption remained 

strong and, given the political situation in steel labor, it appeared 

likely that contract negotiations this summer would provide steel users 

with a continuing incentive to maintain inventories at high, if not 

rising, levels. For the near term, the diminished urgency of strike

hedge buying and the possibility of some slackening in automobiles and 

durable goods output might lead to somewhat lower steel production 

figures. It was too early to assess the impact on prices of the current 

steel negotiations, but he was not optimistic on that score.



5/11/65 -50

Considering the longer-term prospect, Mr. Wayne said, it now 

seemed clear that business plant and equipment spending would continue 

to be a stimulating factor for the remainder of the year. Coupled 

with probable increases in Federal Government spending for defense 

and perhaps also for velfare, those outlays might well insure a con

tinuation of the present expansion even in the face of a major inter

ruption in steel in the second half. The latest Newsweek survey, how

ever, showed a significant reduction in manufacturers' capital appropria

tions in 1964's fourth quarter and was a reminder that businessmen's 

stated investment intentions were not always matched by their actual 

investment performance.  

In the international area, Mr. Wayne observed, there seemed to 

be substantial evidence that the voluntary restraint program had reduced, 

at least temporarily, all major types of capital outflows. The program 

appeared to have been especially effective in curtailing bank term 

loans to foreigners and, judging from the behavior of short rates, in 

promoting return flows of liquid capital. He also was encouraged by 

reports of postponement of foreign investment plans and of stepped-up 

borrowing abroad by U.S. corporations. At the present juncture, how

ever, the magnitude of the improvement, as well as its permanency, was 

uncertain. In the absence of more supporting data than had been pro

vided to date, the estimated $1.2 billion improvement indicated for 

this year in the reports by U.S. corporations to the Department of 

Commerce seemed optimistic to him.



5/11/65 -51

Mr. Wayne recalled that at the last meeting he had suggested 

the possibility that the demand for bank loans might ease, and there 

were indications that that might be happening. During the four weeks 

ended April 28, commercial and industrial loans made by weekly re

porting banks declined slightly, probably reflecting the receding 

effects of the dock strike, the reduction in foreign lending, and 

some small slowdown in automobile sales. Further, some slowing in 

consumer credit loans seemed possible in the immediate future. During 

the first. quarter of 1965 the monthly increase in outstanding instal

ment credit was about 40 per cent above the average monthly increase 

for last year. Commercial banks increased their holdings of instal

ment loans by almost 60 per cent more than last year's average rise.  

Such sharp inc-eases as those, coming after a long and sustained rise 

in consumer credit, were usually followed by a much slower growth. On 

the other hand, expanding outlays for plant and equipment were being 

financed to some extent by term loans from banks and that might help 

sustain loan demand.  

In the policy area, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that the Committee 

had realized little in the way of results from its last two moves to 

firmer conditions. It was true that marginal reserve availability had 

declined substantially as free reserves of $32 million in February 

gave way to net borrowed reserves of about $140 million in April, but 

the impact of that change on the rate structure had been small indeed.  

Long-term rates had held steady or declined very slightly while some



5/11/65 -52

short-term rates had risen slightly and others had barely moved. He 

was aware that in recent weeks the repatriation of funds from abroad, 

heavy institutional demand for bills, and the current Treasury refund

ing might have distorted the relationship between the Committee's policy 

posture and some money rates. Some of the effects of those factors 

might diminish soon and perhaps some rate adjustments would be seer., 

but in the face of the Committee's tightening moves, total reserves, 

nonborrowed reserves, and bank credit had increased at rates well above 

the average for last year. The behavior of those indicators made Mr.  

Wayne doubt whether the Committee had in fact tightened. In any 

event, if loan demand eased off and if there was some slowdown in the 

automobile and steel industries, there might be no need for firmer 

credit conditions. In view of that possibility and because of the 

Treasury refunding and the early date of the next meeting, Mr. Wayne 

favored no change in policy at this time. The directive as prepared 

and submitted by the staff with such changes in wording as the Com

mittee might be able to arrive at was satisfactory to him. He thought 

the substance of the draft directive was appropriate.  

Mr. Clay observed that recent developments in the domestic 

economy suggested a moderation in the pace of economic activity from 

the unsustainable rate of growth of the first quarter. It was evident 

that automobile sales were adjusting to a more reasonable pattern.  

While the interim steel agreement avoided the abrupt adjustment of a 

strike or a final settlement, it probably would have some moderating 

influence on output. Those adjustments were taking place in an



5/11/65 -53

environment of general economic expansion. In that connection, the 

economic outlook was bolstered substantially by the latest projections 

on business capital outlays. Moreover, the prospective extension of 

industrial capacity should be an important factor in maintaining 

relative stability of prices.  

Bank credit developments also appeared to be moderating, Mr.  

Clay said, as several temporary factors requiring a larger volume of 

business loans earlier in the year had abated. The underlying demand 

for credit remained strong, however. Continued expansion in economic 

activity, including business capital outlays, required a larger volume 

of financing.  

The staff statement indicated that the international balance 

of payments developments were on the encouraging side, Mr. Clay commented, 

but it obviously was too early to know the magnitude of the improvement 

and the ultimate impact of the Administration program.  

The domestic situation as well as international payments develop

ments suggested to Mr. Clay that monetary policy should be continued 

unchanged. The period of digestion following the Treasury refunding 

also indicated a continuation of the present monetary policy during 

the next interval between Committee meetings. In carrying out such a 

policy, Mr. Clay said, it should be the aim of the Committee to main

tain money market conditions essentially unchanged. No special effort 

should be made to move the Treasury bill rate upward, and reserve 

availability should not be reduced for that purpose. Neither should 

monetary policy action be permitted to put pressure on longer-term



5/11/65 -54

interest rates. In his opinion no change should be made in the Federal 

Reserve discount rate. The draft economic policy directive appeared 

satisfactory to him.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that economic activity in the Seventh Dis

trict remained strong. Shortages of skilled labor were evident in addi

tional areas. Durable goods producers continued to receive a good flow 

of new orders and were optimistic that those would continue. The Chicago 

Reserve Bank continued to receive reports of new expansion programs as 

firms encountered continued strong demand for their products.  

The Bank's contacts in the steel industry indicated that output 

was expected to decline only slightly through the remainder of the second 

quarter, Mr. Scanlon said. There had been surprisingly few order can

cellations or postponements following the four-month extension of the 

strike deadline. While there was some evidence that production of goods 

containing steel had been accelerated because of strike fears, adjustments 

would be confined largely to the steel industry itself. Local experts in 

the industry now anticipated a first half-second half decline in steel 

production of 22 per cent compared to declines of 19 per cent and 15 per 

cent in the second halves of 1962 and 1963 when strike threats boosted 

first half output. It was believed that the total buildup of steel inven

tories from September 1964 through June 1965 would amount to 9 million 

tons. A working estimate used by steel analysts was that 1 million tons 

of steel would be liquidated in the third quarter of 1965 and another 4 

million in the fourth quarter. That estimate envisaged production of 8.8 

to 9.0 million passenger cars this year and an FRB production index of 141 

in the fourth quarter.



5/11/65 -55

With respect to capital spending, Mr. Scanlon continued, infor

mation obtained from contacts with business firms, announcements of new 

projects, and statistics on new orders for various types of machinery 

and equipment--including such components as gears, bearings, and fluid 

power drives--all suggested further expansion of plans, consistent with 

the recently reported McGraw-Hill survey. Overall, the rise in capital 

spending appeared to be proceeding at a vigorous, but orderly, pace.  

From a District standpoint increases in activity in firms producing 

those goods would help to offset expected second half declines in 

autos and steel.  

He had little to add to the staff comments on the balance of 

payments, Mr. Scanlon said, other than that the voluntary credit restraint 

program was working very well thus far with banks in the Seventh District.  

All of the major banks were within their base. There continued to be 

concern, however, that the program for nonfinancial establishments was 

lacking in clearly defined goals. Bankers were fearful that anything 

they might accomplish toward improving the balance of payments would 

be offset by continued large outflows of direct investment.  

On savings flows, Mr. Scanlon noted that the recent abatement 

in time deposit growth seemed due largely to a sharp reduction in 

month-to-month gains in corporate deposits outside New York. The 

recent slowing in corporate time deposit growth at small banks appeared 

related in part to a narrowing in the spread between CD rates at small 

and large banks. Since smaller banks had to offer somewhat higher rates



5/11/65 -56

on CDs than large banks, the CD rate ceiling apparently had made it 

more difficult for the smaller banks to roll over maturing CDs and to 

attract new funds. Unfavorable publicity resulting from investigations 

of bank failures also had contributed to the decline in corporate time 

deposits at small banks. In addition, the typically small corporate 

customers of the smaller banks had sizable fractions of their total 

liquid asset hcldings in bank accounts; thus, the impact on time accounts 

of quarterly tax and dividend payments probably was somewhat greater 

than it was for larger firms able to raise cash from a wider variety 

of sources.  

For the first four months as a whole, Mr. Scanlon continued, 

it seemed that some of the reduction in corporate holdings of time 

deposits (and other liquid assets) was associated with the climb in 

capital spending, including the buildup of inventories. That such 

factors were important during the period in corporate firancial manage

ment showed up also in the sharp rise in business borrowing from banks.  

If the recent slackening in time deposit growth was to be attributed 

mainly to reduction in corporate holdings, due to increased disburse

ments of cash, the likelihood was that corporations would have a 

smaller volume of funds to supply to the market in coming weeks.  

On bank credit, demand factors still appeared to Mr. Scanlon 

to be sufficiently strong so that business loan expansion during the 

summer might be as large or larger than usual. The estimated step

up in capital expenditures could be expected to strengthen the demand 

for bank loans so long as the cost of bank borrowing remained low



5/11/65 -57

relative to capital market financing. In addition, postponment of 

the steel settlement would probably encourage some further inventory 

building, and increased credit needs, by steel users.  

With respect to money market developments, District banks had 

increased their holdings of Governments from the low end-of-March level.  

They had done very little borrowing lately. Chicago banks as a group 

had been reporting very moderate net purchases of Federal funds, but 

their CDs had risen by about $50 million over the past month. Mr.  

Scanlon concurred in the staff analysis relative to the outlook for 

bill rates.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon agreed with those who favored no 

change today and certainly would not recommend any easier position.  

He shared Mr. Wayne's views on the directive.  

Mr. Galusha said that the weather, as usual, had dominated 

recent developments in the agricultural sector of the Ninth Distric:; 

the past winter had been the most severe in history in many parts 

of the District. However, the area was now emerging from its effects.  

The livestock situation had improved markedly recently. A fundamental 

change in habits apparently was in process, with people eating more 

beef.  

The nonagricultural sector of the District was prospering, 

Mr. Galusha continued. There had been some evidence of an inventory 

buildup, especially in the Twin Cities area. Because of the recent 

disasters, the prospective demand for new construction in the District 

was heavy. It was estimated that in Minnesota, and in the Twin Cities



5/11/65 -58

area particularly, the floods did $80-.90 million of damage, and last 

week's tornadoes $20-$30 million. Those were not unmixed tragedies 

because the rebuilt plants would be better than the old ones.  

In the area of personal expenditures, Mr. Galusha noted that 

requests for reservations at Western national parks were high. It 

appeared that travel to those parks would be at an unprecedented level 

this summer.  

As to banking, Mr. Galusha continued, information from weekly 

reporting banks suggested that District loan demand, like that of the 

nation, slackened somewhat in April. Although total credit at weekly 

reporting banks increased slightly more in April than March, it 

increased less on a seasonally adjusted basis. The average loan

deposit ratio of District reporting banks presently was higher than 

at any time since early 1960 and net Federal funds purchases were 

high through April, so he would not suggest that District banks were 

now wallowing in funds. In fact, District banks might have some prob

lems in coming months, in view of the pressuce that would be put on 

them in connection with reconstruction.  

In a concluding remark, Mr. Galusha said that he agreed with 

the consensus expressed so far on the directive.  

Mr. Swan commented there had not been much change recently in 

the Twelfth District economy. In March, employment rose somewhat more 

slowly than earlier in the year and there was no change in the rate of 

unemployment. Preliminary California figures for April, however, showed



5/11/65 -59

some increase in the unemployment rate there. The farm labor situation 

still seemed to be generating more heat than light. The special panel 

appointed by Secretary of Labor Wirtz had recommended current use of 

2,500 foreign workers, including 1,500 from Mexico. That recommenda

tion dissatisfied people at both extremes; it was a considerably smaller 

number than the growers had requested, and there were those who felt 

that no foreign workers should be brought in at all.  

Mr. Swan said that business loans at reporting banks in the 

District decreased slightly in the four weeks ending April 23, in con

trast to earlier gains and to an increase in April 1964. Also, the 

decline in savings deposits during April was considerably less than a 

year ago, although virtually all of the decline in savings accounts 

at reporting banks nationally was accounted for by banks in the Twelfth 

District. Despite the business loan decrease and the strength in 

savings deposits, District banks seemed to come under somewhat more 

pressure during April, and were borrowing more from the Reserve Bank 

than earlier in the year. The increase in real estate loans in April 

was larger than that of the entire first quarter, but because the first 

quarter rise had been much less than in 1964 and because the April 

increase was concentrated in one week it was too early to say whether 

the rise reflected any change in bank attitudes toward mortgages.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he had little to add, or to differ with, 

with respect to the staff comments on the questions. He agreed that 

the extension of the steel contract did have a stabilizing influence 

on the near-term outlook, and it seemed to him that the announced capital



5/11/65 -60

spending plans were related to capacity pressures and were not out of 

line with the rest of activity.  

In light of domestic developments, the situation with respect 

to the foreign loan program, and the current Treasury financing, Mr.  

Swan agreed that there should be no change in policy today. That 

decision would seem to call for about the same level of member bank 

borrowing and net borrowed reserves as had been experienced recently.  

In view of the general tightness of Federal funds and other areas of 

the money market besides Treasury bills he certainly would not favor 

efforts to raise the bill rate within a generally unchanged posture 

of policy. It would be one thing if market forces led to some increase; 

but if they did not he would not do anything about it in the next two 

weeks.  

The draft directive was acceptable to Mr. Swan. However, he 

also would suggest that the word "apparent" be deleted.  

Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh District 

continued generally favorable. Some preliminary figures suggested that 

there might have been a slight slip off in April--certainly not a large 

one. There had been a minor decline in District industrial production 

recently and construction also had slipped off somewhat. Unemployment 

was up a bit in the last month but was still running under the national 

rate. Purchases of new cars had slackened somewhat but total retail 

sales were holding up well.  

The agricultural situation was somewhat mixed, Mr. Irons noted.  

Conditions in the eastern half or two-thirds of the District continued 

quite favorable but in the western part they were quite dry.



5/11/65 -61

On the financial front, Mr. Irons continued, bank credit and 

bank loans increased in April but less than previously, as in the nation 

as a whole. District banks had been active users of Federal funds, with 

purchases recently running about $275 million in excess of sales. Bank 

holdings of Treasury bills were down a bit. Borrowings from the Reserve 

Bank were little changed and discounting activity had not been unduly 

high.  

Mr. Irons said he would omit the detailed comments he had planned 

to make on the national situation since others had already made similar 

points. He recommended that there be no change in policy at this time.  

Such a conclusion was indicated by the economic situation, which in his 

judgment continued to show strength and also signs of somewhat greater 

stability in movement than the Committee might have anticipated. For 

example, the inventory situation appeared less unmanageable than earlier, 

and the interim steel settlement also worked in that direction. The 

fact that the Treasury financing would be in the process of being con

cluded in the period before the next meeting also argued for no change 

in policy.  

Specifically, Mr. Irons said, he favored net borrowed reserves 

of something above $100 million--perhaps in the range of $100-$125 

million. He would expect the Federal funds rate to be in the 4 to 4-1/8 

per cent area, more frequently at the latter figure than the former. He 

was not overly concerned about a bill rate level of around 3.90 per cent.  

Perhaps a 3.94 or 3.95 per cent rate would be better, and he would not 

object if it moved to that level, but he certainly would not favor 

deliberate, positive actions to force the rate up.



5/11/65 -62

The staff draft of the directive seemed satisfactory to Mr.  

Irons. He was prepared to leave the semantic questions to others at 

the meeting.  

Mr. Ellis commented that New England continued to illustrate 

that substantial and widespread expansion in aggregate demand and 

production could not be relied upon to resolve structural unemploy

ment, at least within a single region such as New England. Both 

manufacturing and nonmanufacturing employment rose more than seasonally 

in March, and total nonfarm employment reached a new peak, with each 

State in the District registering year-to-year gains. The regional 

unemployment rate for March was 4.4 per cent, below the 4.7 per cent 

national rate. The insured unemployment level as of mid-April had 

declined 24 per cent in twelve months.  

Supporting those statistics, Mr. Ell.'s said, were the many 

pages of employment advertisements in the daily press as well as 

testimony from a large Connecticut employer that Boston employers 

were trying to dissuade Boston newspapers from carrying ads for employ

ment in Connecticut. The same Connecticut employer claimed that the 

Pennsylvania Employment Office was withholding its services to potential 

recruiters. A spokesman for one of the larger private shipyards used 

personal appeals to oust a Seattle recruiting officer who was offering 

moving costs and tempting wages to draw trained workers to the West 

Coast. At yesterday's meeting of the directors of the Boston Reserve 

Bank two directors complained of the lack of skilled labor, and one



5/11/65

observed that he could expand employment by 2,000 if he could find 

the right workers. Those directors would not accept the notion that 

New England suffered from distress unemployment at present.  

Despite such evidences of over-full employment, Mr. Ellis con

tinued, New England continued to account for eight of the nation's 29 

major labor areas classified as having a substantial labor surplus.  

Nevertheless, the dominant tone of the region was one of prosperous 

expansion. Last minute telephone confirmations indicated current 

upward revisions in the 1965 capital spending plans of New England 

manufacturers, which presently tallied out as an expected gain of 19 

per cent. For three years, the reporting manufacturers had used bor

rowing to a greater extent than they had planned in advance. Last 

spring they foresaw financing 9 per cent of 1964 outlays by borrowing 

but they actually financed 14 per cent in that manner. This year 

they reported intentions to borrow 6 per cent of their 19 per cent 

higher outlays.  

Mr. Ellis saw no reason to disagree with the standard expecta

tions expressed in the staff memorandum resulting from the steel negotia

tions or the capital spending surveys. Both the extension of the steel 

wage contract and the further upward revision of capital spending served 

to strengthen the near-term outlook for business. With respect to 

international capital flows, he could only report that of the ten New 

England banks reporting monthly progress under the guidelines, only 

four were above year-end levels at all. Two banks exceeded the target, 

by 26 per cent and 57 per cent, respectively, the group averaged a 4 

per cent growth from December to March.

-63-



5/11/65 -64

The principal implication Mr. Ellis associated with the current 

rate of time deposit growth was that it probably represented a less 

excessive situation than prevailed in January and February. Growth in 

those two months quite clearly represented shifting from one type of 

account holding to another in response to the higher time deposit rates 

allowed under Regulation Q. Recent liquid asset growth had exceeded 

the true rate of saving out of income so in part it had to represent 

one-time switching of assets.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that the steel moratorium, slower auto sales, 

a moderation in the balance of payments crises, and slower expansion of 

retail sales all suggested that some of the pressure at the margin on 

bank loans to business might diminish. The current reports on business 

loans, however, gave a contrary indication.  

Mr. Ellis noted that the staff memorandum listed several factors 

that would be operating in money markets in the next few weeks, even 

within the framework of even keel. He would single out two that might 

operate to avo:.d further weakening of bill rates. First, the Treasury 

would not need to continue operations at the short end of the market 

to render its anchor issue more attractive. Secondly, reserve projec

tions indicated that instead of injecting substantial funds to achieve 

reserve objectives, the System Account might be able to make net sales 

in meeting the objectives for the next two weeks. Thus, within the 

framework of even keel, Mr. Ellis hoped and anticipated that there 

would be a rise of a few points in short bill rates and continued firm

ness in the money market, with member bank borrowing averaging $450 

million and net borrowed reserves in the $100-$150 million range.



5/11/65 -65

On the draft directive, Mr. Ellis favored dropping the word 

"apparent." On reflection he also would endorse Mr. Shepardson's 

suggestion to drop the word "further"; he was not sure what the word 

implied but on his interpretation it conflicted with the preceding 

phrase regarding avoiding the emergence of inflationary pressures.  

He did not think the Committee could continue for long to characterize 

a nine per cent growth rate in the reserve base as "moderate," or to 

permit such a rate to be maintained without recognizing that it was 

promoting inflationary pressures.  

Mr. Balderston commented that since the next meeting of the 

Committee would be held in only two weeks he would favor the status 

quo with respect to policy. He thought that in the interval before 

the next meeting Committee members might well consider carefully the 

points Mr. Bryan had made today. He (Mr. Balderston) was impressed 

not only by the fact that total reserves had been growing at a 9 per 

cent rate since the beginning of the year but also by the fact that 

demand deposit turnover at reporting centers outside New York was 

about 8 per cent higher in March than six months earlier.  

Mr. Balderston subscribed to the changes in the draft directive 

suggested by Mr. Ellis; he would delete the words "apparent" and "further." 

Chairman Martin remarked that there seemed to be general agree

ment today with respect to policy, although some differences of opinion 

existed as to the best wording of certain phrases in the first paragraph 

of the directive. There ensued some further discussion of the directive

language to be employed.



5/11/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate a generally strong further expansion 
of the domestic economy and some improvement in our inter
national balance of payments, but with gold outflows con
tinuing. In this situation, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's current policy to reinforce the volun
tary restraint program to strengthen the international 
position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of 
inflationary pressures, while accommodating moderate 
growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 
supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account 
the current Treasury financing, System open market opera
tions over the next two weeks shall be conducted with a 
view to maintaining about the same conditions in the 
money market as have prevailed in recent weeks.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 25, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

ecretary

-66-



Attachment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 10, 1965 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive 
for Consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee 

at its Meeting on May 11, 1965 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 

meeting indicate a generally strong further expansion of the domestic 

economy and some apparent improvement in our international payments 

position, but with gold outflows continuing. In this situation, it 

remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to rein

force the voluntary restraint program to strengthen the international 

position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary 

pressures, while accommodating moderate further growth in the reserve 

base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account the current 

Treasury financing, System open market operations over the next two 

weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the same 

conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks.


