









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 15, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bryan 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Holland, Koch, and 

Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors



6/15/65 -2

Mr. Patterson, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Link, Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, 
Jones, Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, 
St. Louis, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on May 11 and May 25, 1965, 
were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Cpen 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for 

the period May 25 through June 9, 1965, and a supplemental report 

for June 10 through June 14, 1965. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said the gold stock would remain unchanged this week but prospective 

sales between now and the end of the month might very well require 

a substantial reduction before the end of June. On the London gold 

market, demand had slackened somewhat with the price falling yester

day somewhat below $35.09. The gold pool, however, remained in 

deficit to the extent of approximately $170 million.



6/15/65

The main feature of the exchange markets had been the con

tinued lack of buoyancy in the pound sterling, Mr. Coombs observed.  

Confidence remained decidedly weak with much talk in the market of 

a new speculative drive on sterling later in the summer. The British 

announcement of a $200 million reserve increase at the end of May, 

over and above the funds obtained from the British borrowing from 

the International Monetary Fund, was received with suspicion, and 

the cut in the Bank of England's discount rate from 7 to 6 per cent 

had had little effect on market thinking. The market was looking 

for concrete evidence of improvement in the British situation which 

had not been forthcoming thus far. Trade figures for May, released 

just this morning, were discouraging; they showed a decline in 

exports and an increase in imports. Since the beginning of June 

intervention by the Bank of England had cost more than $100 million, 

and a heavy volume of forward contracts was maturing this month.  

The British Government was anxious to avoid showing reserve losses 

this summer before the September meetings of the World Bank and 

International Monetary Fund, and hoped to show a sizable increase 

in reserves. Some possibilities for doing that were open to them, 

including the conversion of part of their portfolio of U.S. stocks 

into liquid assets suitable for inclusion in dollar exchange 

reserves. Some use also might be made of their $750 million swap 

line with the System.

-3-



6/15/65

Another noteworthy development on the exchange markets, 

Mr. Coombs continued, had been the gradual decline of the German 

mark almost to the parity level. That had reflected a deliberate 

policy of the German Federal Bank, which had made no special effort 

to resist occasional minor selling pressures on the mark. The 

German authorities believed that their overall balance of payments 

position had moved to approximate equilibrium and that such a 

development should be reflected in an exchange rate around the 

parity level. In Mr. Coombs' opinion that was a sound, healthy 

approach, and one that other European central banks would do well 

to emulate in similar circumstances, rather than resisting declines 

in the exchange rates for their currencies.  

In the case of Japan, Mr. Coombs reported, there were some 

disquieting signs of developing pressure on Japanese reserves, partly 

reflecting increasing difficulty in securing U.S. or European 

financing of their sizable imports from less developed countries.  

Few European central banks seemed inclined at present to take over 

any substantial part of such Japanese trade finance, which hitherto 

had been largely handled in New York. If their reserve drains reached 

sizable proportions this month, the Bank of Japan might very well 

wish to draw on its $250 million swap line with the System. If 

the pressures continued to mount it would be well to consider what 

European central banks might do to help out in the event of a sudden 

drive on the yen.



6/15/65 -5

Finally, Mr. Coombs said, he regretted the need to report 

that the dollar had slipped back to the floor against the French 

franc and that the Bank of France already had taken in $50 million 

in June. Presumably they would take that amount and any further 

accruals in gold.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
May 25 through June 14, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin noted that in response to the Committee's 

request at the preceding meeting Mr. Sanford had distributed a 

memorandum dated June 10, 1965, entitled "Renewal of System swap 

drawings." (Note: A copy of this memorandum has been placed in 

the Committee's files.) The Chairman asked if any members had 

questions or comments regarding the memorardum.  

Mr. Shepardson said he had a question regarding the System's 

drawings under the swap line with the Naticnal Bank of Belgium. In 

May 1963, he observed, the Committee had revised its guidelines 

for foreign currency operations to indicate that drawings should 

be fully liquidated within one year of the time that any outstanding 

amount was first drawn. He noted from Mr. Sanford's memorandum that 

$60 million was now outstanding on the Belgian swap line, and it 

was his impression that there had been continuous use of either the



6/15/65 -6

standby part or the fully-drawn part of that arrangement for a 

protracted period. He asked Mr. Coombs tc comment on the matter, 

Mr. Coombs replied that the $60 million figure to which 

Mr. Shepardson had referred was composed of a $50 million outstanding 

drawing under the standby part of the arrangement with the National 

Bank of Belgium and of $10 million currently disbursed from the $50 

million part of the arrangement that was always fully drawn. It was 

unfortunate that the Belgians had preferred to have part of the 

arrangement drawn in full at all tines because such a procedure 

confused matters; but in any case, it seemed appropriate to measure 

use of that part of the arrangement by actual disbursements. By 

and large, the System had let the Belgians take the initiative in 

indicating when disbursements would be desirable, and disbursements 

had been made frequently both to absorb dcllar accruals on their 

part and to furnish them with dollars at times of need. August 

1964 was the last time the System's accourt with the Belgian Bank 

had been completely clear, with no disbursements under the fully

drawn part and no drawings under the standby part. The one-year 

period indicated by the guidelines thus would elapse in August 1965.  

It was his hope that the account would again be cleared up in the 

first week of July by means of the U.S. drawing on the IMF that 

was now under consideration. The desirability of doing so was one 

reason he was recommending a Fund drawing by the U.S.



6/15/65

Mr. Coombs then noted that the $50 million standby swap 

arrangement with the Bank of Sweden, which had a term of twelve months, 

would mature on July 19, 1965. He recommended its renewal.  

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said 

that no drawings had ever been made on this swap line.  

Thereupon, renewal of the standby 
swap arrangement with the Bank of Sweden, 
for a further period of twelve months, 
was approved unanimously.  

Mr. Coombs reported that two $150 million standby swap 

arrangements having terms of six months, with the Swiss National Bank 

and the Bank for International Settlements, would mature on July 20, 

and recommended their renewal. He noted that the Committee was 

inclined to extend the maturity of the swap arrangements to twelve 

months when that could be arranged, and expressed the hope that 

sooner or later the Swiss would agree to such an extension. However, 

he was not sure that they were prepared to do so at this time.  

Renewals of the standby swap 
arrangements with the Swiss National 
Bank and the Bank for International 
Settlements, for further periods of 
six months, were approved unanimously.  

Mr. Coombs then recommended renewal of four outstanding 

drawings. They were two drawings on the Belgian swap line of $20 

million and $5 million, which matured on June 30 and July 12, 

respectively; a $100 million drawing on the Bank of Italy, maturing

-7-



6/15/65 -8

on July 1; and a $60 million drawing on the Swiss National Bank, 

maturing on July 20. These would be secord renewals for the Belgian 

and Swiss drawings, and a first renewal for the Italian drawing, he 

noted. All four renewals would be for three-month periods, but 

Mr. Coombs was hopeful that it would be possible to repay the 

Belgian and Italian drawings early in July, if the Treasury made 

the recommended drawing on the Fund. No special means were available 

for repaying the Swiss drawing, except, perhaps, issue of a Treasury 

bond denominated in Swiss francs. However, the System had paid off 

about $135 million of its Swiss franc debt since March, and there 

was a good chance that the amounts still outstanding, which totaled 

$115 million, could be reduced substantially or repaid in full in 

the next few months. Market developments appeared favorable to that 

end; ordinarily the Swiss franc strengthened seasonally in June, but 

this year it had been weak despite seasonal forces.  

In response to questions, Mr. Coombs indicated that the Fund 

held sufficient Belgian francs for purposes of the suggested U.S.  

drawing, and that recent Italian accruals of dollars were a result 

in large part of tourist expenditures there. He added that the 

Italian balance of payments position had been strong for over a 

year; there had been a pendulum effect, reversing the earlier 

weakness. If the System's drawing was repaid in early July it might 

prove necessary to make a new drawing later in that month or in



6/15/65 -9

August to take care of further inflows of dollars to Italy. However, 

the pendulum might swing in the opposite direction in the late fall 

or winter, making it possible to repay any additional drawing 

without recourse to the Fund.  

Renewal of the drawings on the 
National Bank of Belgium, the Bank 
of Italy, and the Swiss National 
Bank for further periods of three 
months was noted without objection.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs recommended renewal for the third time 

of a $10 million sterling-Dutch guilder swap with the BIS that would 

mature on June 29. As indicated at previous meetings, he said, there 

was more flexibility in connection with this type of "third currency" 

swap than with the usual kind of drawing, but the swap in question 

had been outstanding for a rather long time and it would be 

desirable to liquidate it. Some progress had been made in that 

direction during the last month, and he was hopeful that the swap 

could be cleared up soon.  

Renewal of the sterling-guilder 
swap with the Bank for International 
Settlements for a further period of 
three months was noted without objection.  

Chairman Martin then noted that the Committee had held a 

preliminary discussion of Mr. Coombs' memorandum of April 30, 1965, 

entitled "Action on International Liquidity" at its previous meeting



6/15/65 -10

and had scheduled further discussion for the meeting today. He invited 

Mr. Coombs to comment.1/ 

Mr. Coombs observed that he had made two main points in his 

memorandum, one of which had already been touched on today. That 

point concerned the desirability of opening up a new source of 

intermediate-term credit to take over swap drawings that threatened 

to run on too long. In the past such drawings had been paid off by 

means of Treasury gold sales or, in a number of instances, by 

issuance of Treasury bonds denominated in foreign currencies. There 

was, however, a major source of intermediate-term credit available 

in the International Monetary Fund--a source that had never been used 

by the U.S. for balance of payments purposes. To open up that source 

would be consistent with the frequent statements by U.S. spokesmen 

to the effect that the Fund should be the major source of interna

tional liquidity in the future, and it would have a number of 

advantages. Specifically, at present it would enable the Federal 

Reserve to repay short-term drawings on two swap lines--$60 million 

with the National Bank of Belgium and $168 million with the Bank of 

Italy--before those drawings ran on for periods long enough to be 

potentially embarrassing to the U.S. and to the foreign central 

banks involved. He had raised the question of a possible Fund 

1/ Mr. Furth, Consultant to the Board of Governors, joined the 
meeting for the discussion of this subject.



6/15/65 -11

drawing with the Treasury, and while there had not been an official 

response as yet, he understood that the prospects were good. Also, 

he had been advised that the Treasury had no objection to the 

System's embarking on discussions with the European central banks 

concerned. Accordingly, he had discussed the matter with officials 

of the National Bank of Belgium and the Bank of Italy. They had 

taken the initiative on the subject some morths ago, and were 

favorably inclined toward the proposal. In Mr. Coombs' judgment, 

the thinking at both the National Bank of Belgium and the Bank of 

Italy in connection with the use of international credit facilities 

for dealing with problems of international liquidity was close to 

the philosophy of the System and the U.S. Treasury.  

As yet he had no official response from the Treasury on his 

second suggestion, Mr. Coombs continued. That suggestion was to seek 

arrangements with certain foreign central banks under which they would 

extend credit lines in favor of, say, the Bank of England and the 

Bank of Japan if either of those countries encountered difficulty 

in coming months. Problems could arise suddenly, as was demonstrated 

in the case of Britain last November and in the case of Italy 

earlier, and it was desirable, in his judgment, to give close study 

to possibilities for making advance arrangements to aid a country 

in difficulty. Last November's crash program of help for Britain 

had been successful, but he did not think anyone would want to go



6/15/65 -12

through such an operation again. Nor was there any guarantee that 

such an effort would succeed if tried a second time; it might fail 

simply because responsible officials of certain central banks 

happened to be unavailable at the moment. He did not propose large

scale interrational negotiations involving all central banks in the 

swap network; what he had in mind was approaching a few of them 

discreetly and informally, so that if there were an international 

crisis there would be a nucleus of central banks available to handle 

it until a larger operation could be mounted.  

In response to Mr. Hickman's question as to what central banks 

would be approached, Mr. Coombs said that in connection with a 

possible drive on sterling he would suggest the Banks of Canada, 

Italy, and Germany; the BIS; and possibly the Banks of Austria and 

Sweden. In the case of the Japanese yen he would again suggest the 

Banks of Italy and Germany, and the BIS; and possibly the Banks of 

Canada and Sweden. He would hope to secure, on an entirely informal 

basis, an understanding that they would be sympathetic to extending 

credit lines to the British or Japanese in the event of sudden crisis 

for either currency. If the countries approached felt that such 

understandings would enlarge their short-term comitments undesirably, 

the System would undertake to reduce the maximum amounts it would 

draw on its swap lines with those banks by equivalent sums. Such 

arrangements would cost the System nothing; in effect, other central



6/15/65 -13

banks would be extending credits that the System might otherwise be 

called on to grant.  

Mr. Wayne said he thought the Banks of England and Japan had 

a role to play in the negotiations since the object was to build 

defenses for sterling and the yen, and asked whether they had been 

consulted regarding the proposals.  

Mr. Coombs said he thought developments in the recent 

British and Italian crises demonstrated that the chances of success 

in a rescue operation were greatly enhanced if the U.S. was 

directly involved in the negotiations. Foreign central banks looked 

to this country to act as a catalyst in getting things moving. He 

had discussed his proposal with the Banks of England and Japan, and 

had found that both would be pleased to have the Federal Reserve 

do a certain amount of informal exploration, which would save them 

from possible embarrassment. If the Bank of England, say, were to 

approach another country with respect to a swap line, the question 

would immediately become a matter for formal, official negotiations, 

and the request might be taken to suggest that the British were on 

the verge of serious difficulty. The System, on the other hand, 

could pose the question in an informal and quiet way, without 

necessarily implying any reflection on the British situation.  

Mr. Daane said he was fully in accord with the first proposal, 

for a U.S. drawing on the Fund to clear up certain swap drawings.



6/15/65 -14

Such an action would validate the position the U.S. consistently had 

taken that Fund drawing rights were a usable reserve asset. Noting 

that a country drawing on the Fund normally had the right to use 

the proceeds in any way it chose, he said there was some question 

in his mind as to whether a clear link should be made in the first 

instance between the Fund drawing and repayment of the swap 

drawings. But a Fund drawing would be appropriate, he thought, 

with or without such a direct link, and could still be used for the 

same purpose.  

On the second point, Mr. Daane continued, he was sympathetic 

with the objective of making some advance preparation to assure that 

credit facilities would be available to countries in need of them, 

and he thought it would be useful to open discussions in a limited 

and exploratory manner as a precautionary measure. As he had in

dicated at the previous meeting, if the matter was pressed too far 

there might be an adverse reaction in the form of a belief that the 

U.S. was trying to assure the availability of credit facilities to 

Britain regardless of the policies that country followed. However, 

the approach Mr. Coombs described seemed to be reasonable, Mr.  

Daane thought the effort was worthwhile, although he was, perhaps, 

less sanguine than Mr. Coombs about the prospects for success.  

Nor was it entirely clear to him that the proposed arrangements 

would relievepressure on the dollar. There would be some initial



6/15/65 -15

relief of pressure in that the credit of another country would be 

substituted for that of the U.S., but that effect would disappear, 

he thought, orce the proceeds of any loan had been used.  

Mr. Coombs agreed with Mr. Daane's final point, but said 

that the proposal would have the advantage of making it unnecessary 

for the System to do a certain amount of lending and an equivalent 

amount of borrowing. As to the prospects for success, he thought 

the BIS was ready to go along with the proposal. He was not certain 

about the Bank of Italy, but felt they might also be agreeable; it 

was their view that any breach in the present system would make 

difficulties for all, including Italy.  

In response to questions by Messrs. Mitchell and Hickman, 

Mr. Cooms said he was not proposing to ask for unconditional com

mitments for credit extensions to countries in difficulty; indeed, 

even drawings under the present standby swap arrangements were always 

subject to the approval of the lending country. Nor did he suggest 

written documents in which the U.S. would agree to reduce its 

maximum drawing rights under existing swaps by the amounts of any 

credits extended to third countries. He proposed only informal, 

oral understandings to that effect.  

Mr. Bryan remarked that he agreed with Mr. Coombs' first 

proposal, for a U.S. drawing on the Fund. He was not sure of his 

position on the second proposal, but could see no reason for not 

exploring that avenue.



6/15/65

Mr. Ellis observed that there obviously was a sensitive 

relationship between the positions of the dollar and the pound, 

but it was not clear to him that weakness in the yen, which was 

not an international currency, would have serious implications for 

the dollar. He questioned whether a parallel should be drawn 

between the situations with respect to the yen and the pound.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the yen certainly did not play a 

role such as that of sterling in international finance, but it 

nevertheless was an important currency. Japan had a large population, 

was the world's third largest steel producer, and was a major 

participant in world trade. Accordingly, difficulties for the yen 

could have repercussions on the whole pattern of international 

trade and finance, including a possible sharp curtailment of U.S.  

exports to Japan. Moreover, with Japan's heavy borrowing in the 

Euro-dollar market, a collapse of the Japanese credit structure 

could have serious consequences in that market. Such a collapse 

thus could have far-flung effects.  

Mr. Ellis then asked whether third countries might not be 

willing to extend credits to Britain or Japan without informal 

agreement by the U.S. to reduce its maximum drawings under existing 

swap lines. It would be preferable, he thought, to increase the 

total volume of funds available on a standby basis in that manner, 

rather than to shift U.S. drawing rights to other countries.

-16-



6/15/65

Mr. Coombs agreed that such a course would be better if it 

was feasible. But a number of countries had been reluctant to 

offer standby facilities to nations other than the U.S. He did 

not think that the chances for successful negotiations would be as 

good if the U.S. did not provide the inducement of assuring no in

crease in the total commitments of the lending countries. He 

considered the proposal to shift some of this country's drawing 

rights to others more or less as a useful tactical approach; the 

alternative that Mr. Ellis described did not seem to be a realistic 

possibility for the next two or three years. In his judgment the 

best hope for moving in that direction would be to increase further 

the size of the Federal Reserve swap lines.  

Mr. Ellis commented that a particular System swap line would 

not be available for the defense of, say, the pound if it happened 

to be fully drawn by the U.S. Thus, he thought the System would 

be leading toward an increase in its swap lines, if, in effect, it 

made some of its drawing rights available to other countries.  

Mr. Scanlon asked if the action Mr. Coombs was proposing 

would impair the chances for eventual development of larger System 

swap lines, and Mr. Coombs replied that he did not think so. The 

System was continually reappraising the size of its various standby 

swap lines, and from time to time circumstances might suggest the 

need for increasing particular swaps, At the moment, for example,

-17-



6/15/65 -18

the line with the German Federal Bank appeared to be on the low side, 

in view of the fact that the Germans had extended a $500 million 

credit to the British. The question here was what route offered 

the best possibilities for getting the Germans to help the British.  

Mr. Scanlon then asked about the long-run prospects for a 

standby swap arrangement between Britain and Germany. Mr. Coombs 

replied that he had been optimistic on that score earlier but now 

was rather pessimistic. The atmosphere with respect to the British 

had changed recently; other countries noted the continuing 

difficulties in the U.K. situation and were concerned that the 

British were not taking sufficiently strong steps to deal with them.  

In response to Mr. Swan's question about the probable 

attitude of France toward the proposal, Mr. Coombs said he thought 

the French would not be particularly surprised by it and were not 

likely to have a strongly adverse reaction.  

Chairman Martin observed that the discussions proposed were 

exploratory in nature, and that everything possible had to be done 

to promote unity and coherence in the international payments 

mechanism. He thought it was necessary to recognize the current 

degree of interdependence in world monetary affairs and the 

importance of psychological factors; a cautious approach was 

required because of the risk of undesirable reactions. In that 

connection, he was sure the Committee could depend on Mr. Coombs' 

negotiating skill.



6/15/65 -19

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the risks involved in the 

proposed negotiations might be reduced by keeping the discussions 

general rather than couching them in terms of possible future 

difficulties for one or two particular currencies. There were good 

grounds for a general approach; Germany and Italy, for example, 

might find themselves in trouble at any time.  

Chairman Martin said he agreed with Mr. Mitchell's 

suggestion. The Chairman then proposed that Mr. Coombs be 

authorized to explore the matter with other central banks in a 

judicious manner, keeping the discussions in terms as general as 

possible and. meanwhile, staying in close touch with the Treasury 

and reporting back to the Committee from time to time on the status 

of the negotiations. No disagreement with the Chairman's proposal 

was expressed.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

May 25 through June 9, 1965, and a supplemental report for June 10 

through June 14, 1965. Copies of both reports have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



6/15/65

System operations during the past three weeks were 
conducted against a background of declining bill rates 
and rather congested long-term capital markets. In 
maintaining steadily firm conditions in the money market 
(with Federal funds trading mainly at 4-1/8 per cent and 
member bank borrowing hewing close to $500 million), the 
System injected a net of some $800 million of reserves.  
In view of the condition of the bill and bond markets it 
was both desirable and feasible to effect this reserve 
injection through a variety of means. Thus, while 
outright holdings of bills were increased by about $370 
million, the System also bought about $230 million of coupon
bearing securities. Extensive use was made of repurchase 
agreements through the period, resulting in a net 
addition of about $200 million to reserves in this form.  

The persistent demand for Treasury bills, which has 
brought the rate on three-month bills down about 10 basis 
points in the last three weeks and 20 basis points in the 
last few months, remains quite remarkable in the face of 
consistent firmness in the money market. Earlier this 
year, the repatriation of funds placed abroad and 
unusually heavy public fund buying appeared to be factors 
of some importance. More recently, it appears that the 
bill market and other short-term Treasury issues may also 
have been affected by demand from investors who were holding 
back in the placement of funds in the long-term market.  
In addition, there may have been some purchases of bills 
by sellers of stocks. Whatever the source of demand, it 
has clearly been active enough to keep dealer positions 
turning over so rapidly that financing costs have proved 
to be no great burden.  

Other short-term securities have not shared the 
strength exhibited in the bill market, although there 
have been some reports of switching from bills into other 
investments such as acceptances, commercial paper, 
certificates of deposit, and Government agency issues.  
These other short-term investments have held about steady 
in yield at the higher levels reached somewhat earlier 
this year.  

Recent developments in the longer-term debt market 

offer a more or less typical example of reaction to 

suddenly enlarged supplies. The "Fanny May" announce
ment of a $525 million sale of 1 to 15 year participation 
notes was followed in quick succession by capital 
offerings by two of the country's largest banks--aggregating 
another $1/2 billion--and these announcements were

-20-



6/15/65

augmented by additional primary and secondary stock 
offerings, interspersed with a number of private place
ments of long-term debt. With this plethora of new 
issues, it is not surprising that corporate bond prices 
have declined, and that concessions have also been 
required in order to distribute bonds from slower-moving 
tax-exempt accounts.  

Treasury issues retreated only slightly in price, 
in part because official purchases helped to relieve 
some of the overhang; dealers' holdings of Treasury bonds 
remain quite large, however, as dealers absorbed some 
selling by investors who were switching into corporate 
issues. On the whole, the Government securities market 
has performed quite well as the capital markets have 
adjusted to shifts in the supply-demand balance.  

In the last few days a better tore has developed in 
the bond market--in part, because of the further drop 
in stock prices. Corporate bonds seem to have found a 
level where investors are willing to commit funds. Indeed, 
the recent pickup in sales of slow-moving issues and the 
good interest indicated in the $525 million Fanny May 
issue being offered today suggests the market atmosphere 
could improve substantially. Once underwriters have 
waded through the current heavy backlog, the calendar 
ahead--as far as things now stand--is much less crowded.  

The next few weeks should be of more than routine 
interest in the market on several counts. First, the 
redistribution of reserves after today's quarterly tax 
date may produce some increased pressure on money center 
banks that in turn could be helpful in raising their 
dealer loan rates and in holding up bill rates. Second, 
there will be a further opportunity to test the viability 
of the corporate bond market, and to see whether greater 
investor interest may then develop in Treasury issues.  
Third, with the projections pointing to a large reserve 
need building up toward the July 4 week end, System 
operations may have to be on a scale that crowds the 
edges of the usual "marginal" role that it is preferable 
to maintain. As in the past three weeks, the purchase 
of coupon securities and extensive use of repurchase 
agreements will have to be employed as well as outright 
purchases of Treasury bills to meet these large needs.

-21-



6/15/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period May 25 through June 14, 
1965, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which had been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

My appraisal of the economy at midyear can be sum
marized briefly: "Things are not as bad as they seem, 
but they could become so." Gyrations in financial 
markets in recent weeks suggest, at a minimum, substantial 
uncertainty about the near-term future, and at worst, 
expectations of an imminent downturn. The worst may turn 
out to be the case, but at the moment there is little 
hard evidence of it in the facts we have on the recent 
performance of the economy, or what we have in the way of 
portents for the future.  

True, the pace of economic and financial growth is 
down from that in the first quarter. But few, if any, 
observers thought earlier in the year that we could keep 
up such a frenetic pace, induced by the aftermath of an 
auto strike and anticipation of a steel strike. In the 
event, production and sales have held up surprisingly well.  
Steel output has increased after a modest decline, and 
automobile sales appear to have leveled out at a very 
respectable rate. Sales of consumer nondurable goods have 
risen sharply, offsetting the drop in auto sales. In 

aggregate terms, the change in GNP, both in total and 
in major components, seems to be proceeding astonishingly 
close to the staff projections made at the turn of the 
year--about a $14 billion rise in the first quarter and 

about a $7 billion rise in the second.  
You will recall that the rest of the projection 

suggested further steady increases over the balance of



6/15/65 -23

the year, at a dollar rate close to the $10 billion 
average of the first half and a percentage rate only 
slightly smaller. What clues we have as to the near
term future are, by and large, consistent with this 
outlook. The latest surveys of business plans for 
capital spending are, if anything, more buoyant than we 
projected earlier, and surveys show consumer spending 
plans for durable goods remaining strong. Consumption
bolstering reductions in excise taxes and increases in 
Social Security benefits, both assumed in the projection, 
are closer to realization.  

It is difficult, therefore, to see cause for 
immediate alarm. Yet, while alarm may be premature, 
there are some disquieting possibilities that make one 
cautious about deprecating the recent behavior of the 
stock market. It may be just the semiannual recurrence 
of an occupational ailment, but once again I find 
myself seriously concerned about the possibility of 
declining rates of resource utilization accompanied by 
upward pressure on prices. Let me make it clear that 
I am not talking of "inflation amidst recession." 
Neither extreme seems likely. But I can see an economic 
performance inadequate to absorb our growing labor and 
plant capacity, yet accompanied by some further upcreep 
in industrial prices.  

As to the inadequacy of performance, gains in GNP 
at the projected rate noted earlier, 5-1/2 per cent in 
current dollars but less than 4 per cent in real terms, 
would probably not match the rate at which industrial 
capacity is expected to grow this year if the latest 
spending plans are realized. Even during the extra
ordinary volume of output in the first quarter of this 
year the average capacity utilization rate in manufacturing, 
as best we can measure it, did not reach the peaks of the 
mid-1950's, and the rate is likely to drift off from here 
on out. Capacity could become underutilized rather 
quickly; order backlogs are much smaller now, relative 
to capacity, than at the peaks of activity in 1956. A 
final settlement of the steel wage contract in the fall 
could significantly depress activity in the later months 
of the year.  

Similarly, we haven't achieved as high a rate of 
labor utilization in this upswing as in earlier cycles.  
The unemployment rate has not gotten down as low as it 
did in the mid-1950's, and expected growth in the labor



6/15/65

force is likely to keep it from doing so. The drop in 
the unemployment rate in May is less heartening than 
appears on the surface, since it reflected principally 
a lagging growth in labor force rather than a spurt in 
new jobs. Employment has not been rising as rapidly in 
recent months as earlier. Slowing in the pace of 
economic activity would limit job opportunities further, 
resulting in larger reported and concealed unemployment, 
particularly among the difficult-to-employ teenage 
group--not a comforting outlook for the hot summer 
months.  

Yet these developments are not inconsistent with 
some further price creep. To date, significant price 
increases have been concentrated, mainly in commodity areas 
that usually respond widely and sensitively to cyclical 
forces, rather than diffused throughout the structure of 
prices and costs. The nonferrous metal group, for example, 
accounts for 40 per cent of the rise in the total indus
trial materials index over the past year. The rate of 
wage increase has shown little tendency to accelerate, and 
productivity has gained consistently and rapidly. As 
a result, unit labor costs, even including large fringe 
benefits, have drifted down.  

But this decline in labor costs has depended impor
tantly on rapidly rising rates of production, as well as 
restraint in wage settlements. In the 1954-57 upswing 
unit labor costs in manufacturing declined over the first 
year of expansion, when output was rising rapidly. But 
the rise in production slowed markedly in 1956, while the 
rate of wage increase accelerated. As a result, unit 
labor costs also accelerated, and so d.d the price rise.  
Prices and costs continued to drift up in 1957 even after 
production turned down.  

Once again we appear faced with the prospect of slower 
rates of growth in production, the possibility of reduced 
rates of increase in productivity, and the possibility 
of large wage settlements. The outcome of the aluminum 
wage negotiations is disturbing, particularly since it 
may set the pattern for a steel settlement a few months 
from now.  

I do not assess the outlook as inflationary, in the 
sense that term describes the mid-1950's. There do not 
appear to be either the general economic preconditions 
of the pervasive psychology to support a repeat performance.  
Price pressures should continue selective--largely confined

-24-



6/15/65

to the metal areas, and for some time ahead, also to meats.  
But in aggregate these selective pressures could well 
produce a continued crawl in the total industrial price 
index at about the 1-1/2 per cent annual rate we have had 
since last fall.  

Such price, production, and employment possibilities 
as I have described would leave monetary policy impaled, 
as usual, on the horns of the price stability-full 
employment dilemma. It would be nice if there were some 
tried and true textbook guide for policy in a situation 
of mild but possibly persistent slackening in resource 
utilization and mild but possibly persistent upcreep in 
prices, but I don't know of any. I have faith in monetary 
policy as a stimulant and as a restraint, but not in its 
capacity to do both at the same time. Perhaps this is one 
of those occasions when it is best to stand pat and wait 
to see how conflicting forces seem to be balancing out, 
before throwing the weight of our economic influence in 
one direction or the other.  

Mr. Hickman said he completely endorsed Mr. Brill's statement, 

which he considered excellent. He then asked if the industrial 

production index for May was available as yet.  

Mr. Brill replied that the May index, which would be released 

tomorrow, was 141.3, up 0.5 from April.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The period since the last meeting of the Committee has 
been an eventful one in financial markets. The stock market 
has extended its decline--dating from mid-May--to a little 
over 6 per cent, which amounts to a sizable technical 
correction in average stock prices, The capital markets 
have been confronted with an upsurge in new corporate 
issues, and with continuing heavy inventories and indif
ferent retail demand in the tax-exempt area; yields in 

both markets consequently have adjusted significantly 
upward. And the Treasury bill market has continued 
exceptionally strong, with yields on the 3-month issue



6/15/65

falling to around 3.80 per cent, partly in response to 
the cut in the British Bank rate.  

These developments, to some extent, are interrelated.  
The strength in demand for bills, for example, probably 
reflects in part shifts of funds by sellers of stocks, 
particularly institutional investors. But, for the most 
part, the adjustments that have been taking place appear 
to me attributable to independent, and at least partly 
temporary, pressures at work in each market. A good 
case can be made for expecting stabilizing tendencies 
to appear before long in each case, though the changed 
yield relationships among markets that has emerged may 
prove more enduring. If the market adjustments do in 
fact prove progressive rather than limited, of course, 
the implications for monetary policy would be quite 
different.  

In the stock market, technical corrections are to 
be expected in the course of a long upswing in prices.  
Five such corrections have occurred earlier in the current 
bull market, the most recent one in November-December 
1964. This year the market moved strongly upward again, 
buoyed by excellent earnings reports and the ebullient 
business sentiment of the first quarter. Over the whole 
upswing, however, the price advance has considerably 
exceeded gains in earnings, so that the ratio of prices 
to earnings rose from 15 in the fall of 1962 to 18 times 
estimated earnings for 1965 in mid-May. This is well 
below the end-of-1961 relationship, but it is fully as 
high--in fact, somewhat higher--than the ratios reached 
toward the ends of earlier business expansions, in 1960 
and 1957.  

Therefore, it is not surprising that investors have 
shown increased nervousness this year as the stock price 
rise continued. The recent slowing in the business advance, 
uncertainties about the international situation, and 
sensitivity to statements, rumors, and other factors-
all have induced some investors to play it safe and sell.  
To date, however, the decline has been led by investment 
grade rather than speculative stocks, and on relatively 
moderate average trading volume. Stock market credit is 
in good shape, and institutional buyers, with their 
constant press of new funds, have become increasingly 
important factors in the market. The price-earnings ratio 

has already fallen one full point, to 17, and, given 
the basic differences cited, the odds would seem to be 
against a sharp cumulative sell-off such as occurred in 
1962.

-26-



6/15/65

In the bond market, the calendar of new publicly
offered corporate issues had already been running heavy, 
with volume up 40 per cent from last year in the March-May 
period. This larger volume was being moved only with 
some difficulty, even before the two big bank offerings 
were announced. At this point, the market broke and 
yields rose around 10 basis points to the highest level 
since the summer of 1961, when new offerings were also 
unusually large. In addition, continuing high dealer 
inventories and an apparent slackening of bank demand in 
the municipal market brought an upward adjustment in 
tax-exempt yields, also by roughly 10 basis points.  
Government bond prices have changed little thus far, 
perhaps mainly because there has been no evidence of a 
volume market at slightly lower prices and because 
dealers are able to carry their still substantial holdings 
of the 4-1/4's and other issues at a small net profit.  

We can expect a continuing large volume of new 
corporate offerings, though with some seasonal slackening, 
in view of rising capital expenditures and the probable 
current leveling in earnings and internal cash flow.  
But there has been no diminution in the flow of invest
ment furds, except possibly for bank buying of municipals, 
and the volume of mortgage funds demanded and supplied 
seems still to be slackening. Therefore, the upward yield 
adjustment in capital markets is likely to be limited, 
though new shocks could certainly have a further impact.  
Whether the Government market will join in the adjustment 
depends importantly on whether dealers will be able to 
distribute the 4-1/4's in a gradual and orderly manner.  

In the Treasury bill market, in addition to a 
continuing good demand from public funds, corporations, 
and other buyers, recent strength also reflects the 
limited supply of bills available to the public. In May, 
the total of bills held by the public declined by nearly 
$700 million, as compared with increases or only small 
decreases in the same month of other recent years. This 
mainly reflected purchases for the Federal Reserve 
Account, but there will also be a substantial decline in 
June as the tax bills mature. An unusually high Treasury 
cash balance suggests that there is no need for new 
financing in the immediate future, and the cut in Bank 
rate has given some in the market confidence that a some
what lower level of bill yields will be tolerable from 
a balance of payments point of view.

-27-



6/15/65

The relative shortness of bill supply has persisted 
all year, and downward pressures on yields would doubtless 
have seen stronger had it not been for large-scale selling 
by commercial banks. Bank liquidation of bills through 
April amounted to $3.1 billion, and we estimate that 
net sales may have amounted to another $600 million in 
May. Reflecting this continued liquidation, and also 
a decline in net purchases of other securities, bank 
credit in May again increased at an annual growth rate 
of only about 8 per cent, well below the first quarter 
and slightly less than the average for 1964. Bank loan 
expansion also has moderated considerably since the first 
quarter, and business loans, though still rising 
vigorously in April and May, appear from the weekly 
reporting bank fugures to have shown somewhat less 
strength in late May and early June. The important 
comparison in such loans is over the tax date, of course, 
for which no information is yet available.  

More moderate growth in bank assets has been matched 
on the liability side by smaller exansion in private 
deposits. Despite continuing sizable net sales of CDs 
by the New York City banks, total time and savings deposit 
growth slowed in May to a rate well below the 12-1/2 per 
cent average for 1964. As for private demand balances, 
the May decline appears to have been an aberration, and 
already had been recouped by a sharp rise in late May 
and early June. As of the first week in June, however, 
the money supply was less than 1 per cent above the 
December average, and even with substantial increases 
in the next month or two, growth since year-end would 
remain well below the apparent, increase in money trans
actions.  

Given the recent moderation in the banking figures, 
the uncertainty in securities markets, and the evident 
exposure of the Government bond market, an unchanged 
monetary policy seems fairly clearly indicated at this 
time. To adopt a more restrictive policy could risk 
serious market disturbances, which seems unnecessary in 

view of the slower pace of bank credit and monetary 
expansion already realized. Nor does it seem to me that 
the financial indicators clearly call for an easing in 

policy as yet, especially in view of other domestic 
economic considerations discussed by Mr. Brill.  

At the same time, this does appear to be an appro
priate occasion for the Committee to consider giving more

-28-



6/15/65

formal recognition to the possible provision of reserves 
through operations in longer-term markets, as is implied 
in the last parenthetical phrase of a:ternative A of the 
staff's draft directives. 1/ Downward pressures on bill 
yields may well be reasserted once the tax date is past, 
and the Government bond market is, I think, in a vulnerable 
position. Only a small proportion of the reserves 
needed over the next four weeks could be accommodated by 
purchases in the longer-term market, but these amounts 
could potentially have an important conditioning effect 
in both short and longer maturity areas.  

In any event, an unchanged monetary policy would 
seem currently to call for net borrowed reserves of 
around $150 million and continued firmness in those money 
markets closest to the reserve adjustment process. I 
do not think that the term "money market conditions" 
should be taken to encompass the whole range of instruments 
traded at this time. If bill rates do continue in the 
curent lower range, this could carry some other money 
market rates, such as on finance company paper and 
bankers' acceptances, down a bit as well.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of paments: 

It is now clear that the United States will have a 
payments surplus in the second quarter of 1965. The "flash 
report" for May, compiled yesterday, shows a surplus of 
about $90 million on the conventional "regular trans
actions" basis. This brings the preliminary April-May 
total to $230 million. And there was a further surplus 
during the first 9 days of June, according to weekly 
figures. We should be prepared for the possibility of 
weekly deficits later this month when Large new foreign 
security issues are scheduled, but they are unlikely to 
wipe out the surplus for the quarter as a whole.  

The figures for the balance settled by official 
transactions will be similar to the conventional ones, 
since net changes in foreign private balances in this 

1/ The two alternative drafts of the directive prepared by the 
staff are appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-29-



6/15/65

country have been small so far this quarter. And net 
seasonal influences on both balances are also small at 
this time of year.  

Thus, as a result of events already largely past, 
newspaper readers seem assured of a steady flow of good 
news about the U.S. balance of payments for some weeks 
to come. They have already learned of the March and 
April surpluses. They will learn in due course of the 
May surplus, and perhaps even of a June surplus. The 
preliminary second-quarter figures, to be published in 
August and then refined in September, will be by far the 
most cheerful in 8 years. They will no doubt set off 
resounding echoes at the IMF annual meeting of the 
unexpected praise for U.S. policies that has recently 
graced the BIS annual report.  

Yet I am afraid that I and my colleagues in the 
Division of International Finance must continue to croak 
Cassandra-like warnings in the weeks ahead. It is not 
merely that one swallow does not make a summer. The 
point is that we cannot yet be sure that we have seen 
a swallow at all, in the form of any lasting turn for 
the better. There have been so many strictly temporary 
influences working in our favor, as noted in the staff 
comment on the third question 2/ on today's agenda; and 
there have been so few evidences of any underlying 
improvement. Mere waning of temporary influences--quite 
apart from seasonals--could plunge us back into deficit 
by the end of the year unless underlying improvements 
do take hold.  

One striking new indication of the magnitude of 
recent temporary influences is provided in detailed 
balance of payments figures to be published in the June 
Survey of Current Business in about 2 weeks. These 
figures will show that U.S. direct investment outflows 
rose to $820 million (seasonally adjusted) in the fourth 
quarter of last year, and to an even more startling $1 
billion in the first quarter of 1965. Thus, U.S. corpora

tions pushed out $1.8 billion of direct investment capital 

in 6 months, nearly 70 per cent more than in the preceding 
6 months. Clearly, they were acting in anticipation of 
a possible imposition of controls or special taxes.  
Clearly also, they can temporarily cut their outflows a 

2/ Certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, 
and staff comments on them, are given at a later point in these 
minutes.

-30-



6/15/65

good deal in the current quarter and in several later 
quarters without this indicating any underlying change 
in the previous uptrend of U.S. direct investment 
outflows. In the direct investment sector, we simply 
cannot know for months how the trend is going.  

Merchandise trade is another sector where we have 
been in the dark for months. Fortunately, we can hope 
for a trend reading here fairly soon, as the dock 
strike recedes into the past. A tentative reading from 
data through April is disquieting. April exports, 
while still reflecting effects of the port-strike 
catchup, were already off considerably from the March 
peak, and more so than imports, contrary to earlier 
hopes. As a result, the trade surplus for the period 
from December through April--a period during which 
strike effects might have been expected to wash out-
was less than $5-1/2 billion at an annual rate, compared 
with $7 billion last fall. Exports in these 5 months 
were only 2 per cent larger than a year earlier, 
presumably owing to some slackening of demand from 
Europe and perhaps also from less developed countries, 
Imports meanwhile were up 10 per cent on the year, 
having bulged in response to enlarged inventory demands 
here and perhaps also as a result of keener competition 
from abroad.  

Obviously, trade trends will bear very close watching 
in the next few months. So also, I think, will the 
distribution of the payments deficits and surpluses of 
foreign countries. As noted in the green book 3/, the 
payments surpluses of continental European countries 
diminished sharply in March-April. But temporary 
factors were operating there as here. And Italy and 
France have continued to run substant:al surpluses, 
while Japan and Britain continue to show payments 
weaknesses. As Mr. Coombs noted, we have just received 
very disappointing U.K. trade figures for May, with 
imports up to a new high and exports down a little.  

A key question for international adjustment this 
year will be whether Britain and Japan, in addition to 
the United States, can strengthen their positions 
while surpluses diminish in such countries as France and 
Italy. If, instead, Britain and Japan continue to 

3/ The report "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
by the Board's staff for the Committee.

-31-



6/15/65

experience difficulties, they may have to turn to us for 
assistance, and may have to pursue policies that will 
significantly depress world trade, including our exports 
to them and to less developed countries. We must hope 
that adjustments in international trade will come 
largely via renewed expansion of demand in the surplus 
countries (and maintenance of expansion elsewhere).  
Since data for the summer months are usually unreliable 
because of difficulties in allowing for seasonal 
influences, it may well be autumn before we can judge 
whether this hope is being fulfilled.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(1) Business conditions--How do business developments since the 
interim steel wage settlement alter the prospects for sustainable 
economic expansion? 

Expansion in business activity has slowed somewhat in the 
six weeks or so since the interim steel wage settlement, confirming 
earlier expectations, but on present evidence it appears that the 
current pace is likely to be maintained. Most of the slowing 
reflects the decline in auto sales from the exceptionally high 
rates earlier in the year. The decline in auto sales seems to 
have halted, however, with May sales about equal to those in 
April. Moreover, consumer spending for nondurable goods recently 
has risen appreciably.  

Busiress accumulation of inventories is apparently con
tinuing at a rate not much below that in the strike-threat period.  
Steel output has continued high and user inventories have not yet 
been reduced. Order backlogs in the industry suggest that, after 
allowing for seasonal changes, high operating rates and large 
inventories will be maintained through early summer. Auto output 

is also continuing at a high level even though sales have 
declined.  

Latest surveys of business capital spending plans indicate 
that expenditures for plant and equipment will rise more rapidly 

over the second half than in the year to date, and surveys of 
consumer buying plans indicate a continued high level of demand for

-32-



6/15/65

autos and other durable goods. While the effects of the prospective 
excise tax cut and increased Social Security payments cannot be 
estimated with any precision, they should, of course, operate to 
buttress consumer demands. Thus, both recent and prospective 
developments suggest continued economic expansion over the summer 
months, although at a slower pace than in early 1965. Sustain
ability of the expansion beyond the summer depends importantly on 
the sharpness of the prospective inventory adjustment in the steel 
industry, and on whether growth in aggregate final demands will 
keep pace with the large additions to industrial capacity now in 
train.  

(2) Prices--What do recent wage negotiations, changes in farm and 
nonfarm prices, and proposals for excise tax cuts portend for the 
course of prices over coming months? 

Industrial price increases in recert months, concentrated 
mostly in markets for metals and metal products, have continued to 
reflect selective demand pressures relative to limited supplies, 
rather than generally rising production costs. Unit labor costs 
in manufacturing have moved lower, as gains in productivity have 
continued to outrun rising wages. The aluminum wage settlement, 
while above the Administration guideposts based on national pro
ductivity changes, was below the estimated productivity increase in 
the industry. This suggests that the aluminum price increases--both 
before and after the wage settlement--reflected principally strong 
demands rather than the pressure of labor costs. The slower pace 
of economic expansion in prospect over coming months should serve 
to limit and keep selective any further industrial price increases.  

The recent rise in food prices also reflects changing 
demand-supply relationships, particularly in meat products. Reduced 
production of meat at a time of rising incomes is being reflected in 
a surge in ment prices, which are likely to continue upward to a 
seasonal peak in the summer. Further rises in meats alone could 
raise the total consumer price index by as much as .5 per cent.  

The proposed excise tax reductions on a variety of goods 
and services would provide a partial offset to the index-raising 
effect of meat prices. The impact on the consumer price index, if 
all tax cuts were passed on to consumers, could be as much as .5 
per cent. Further reductions for autos through January 1, 1969, 
could amount to an additional .2 to .3 per cent in the index.

-33-



(3) Balance of payments--How close was the United States to balance 
in its international transactions in April and May, after allowing 
for influences that may be considered temporary? 

Preliminary data indicate that the United States had payments 
surpluses in both April and May, averaging perhaps $50-$100 million 
per month on either the conventional "regular transactions" basis 
or the "official settlements" basis. Net seasonal influences are 
very uncertain, but adjustment would perhaps diminish the surplus 
in these months.  

Effects of the voluntary programs for restraint of capital 
outflows, both by banks and others, were very substantial in the first 
few months of the programs, producing sizable reflows of corporate 
liquid funds in March and April and net repayments of bank credit 
in April. Meanwhile, new issues of foreign securities exempt from 
the I.E.T., which are expected to increase in later months, remained 
relatively small through May. Strictly temporary favorable influences 
of these kinds, together with the unwinding of the port-strike tie
up in merchandise trade, may have swung the balance toward surplus 
by more than $200 million a month in April-May, so that without 
them there might have been a sizable deficit, particularly on the 
conventional basis of measurement.  

Fragmentary evidence suggests that U.S. corporations may have 
repatriated additional amounts of liquid funds in April, perhaps 
around $100 million. If there were further reflows in May, they 
probably were smaller, since corporations are approaching the goals 
set for them in this sector. Also, indications that corporations 
made sizable advances to direct investment subsidiaries in the early 
months of 1965, covering future needs, suggest that direct investment 
outflows since the voluntary restraint program began may have been 
below normal.  

U.S. banks reduced their outstanding credits to foreigners 
by about $150 million in April. For all banks together, this left 
scope within the VFCR targets for a renewed net outflow that could 

average $30-$40 million a month during the rest of the year.  

New issues of foreign securities sold to U.S. residents in 

April-May were only $80 million a month, about $50 million below 
the average rate expected for both the first half year and the year 
as a whole. Particularly heavy offerings of about $300 million are 
scheduled for June.

6/15/65 -34-



6/15/65

As to merchandise trade, further progress was made in April 
in clearing export and import shipments held up by the port strike.  
The catch-up to be made by exports was greater than for imports, 
and the trade surplus was still swollen in April, perhaps by as 
much as $50-$100 million, despite an unexpectedly large drop in 
exports. A similar relationship probably prevailed in May.  

While the merchandise trade position has been unusually 
favorable in a strictly temporary sense because of the strike after
effects, the underlying cycl.cal trends, now beginning to be discernible 
with the April statistics, appear to have been a leveling off in 
exports and a further rise in imports--the latter reflecting enlarged 
inventory demands for steel and other materials. This recent 
unfavorable development in U.S. foreign trade may prove temporary, 
in a longer time perspective, but it is too early to venture a 
judgment on this.  

(4) Bank credit--How are banks adjusting to the combination of reduced 
marginal reserve availability, slower saving deposit growth, and 
less strong loan demand that has prevailed since the first quarter? 

Banks are adjusting to changes in supply and demand condi
tions in part by seeking funds more aggressively in money and 
capital markets and in part by shifts in investment policy. Earlier 
in the year, banks, were able to accommodate peak loan demands ana 
add substantially to their holdings of municipals with funds provided 
by the exceptionally large inflows of time and savings deposits and 
liquidation of short-term Government securities. Beginning in 
March, inflows of time and savings deposits slackened, and more 
recently, so have loan demands. With marginal reserve availability 
also reduced, and with the bill yield remaining below the discount 
and Federal fund rates, banks have continued to liquidate short-term 
Governments, but in May, they also sharply reduced the rate of 
acquisition of municipal and agency issues.  

A few large banks, particularly in New York City, adjusted 
to heavy actual and anticipated loan demands and to sizable basic 
reserve deficits by aggressively issuing CDs. In New York City, as 
a result, time and savings deposits increased in April and May at 
an even faster rate than in the first quarter; borrowings at the 
Federal Reserve have been reduced to nominal levels; and banks have 

switched from being heavy net purchasers to small net sellers of 

Federal funds. In contrast, in reserve cities outside New York, 

the outstanding volume of CDs has changed little; borrowings, 

recently around $375 million, have been about double the first 
quarter level; and banks have been heavy net purchasers of Federal

-35-



6/15/65

funds. These differences are partly explained by indications 
that loan demand has been less strong outs.de New York and that 
issuance of CDs (by non-prime banks) may have been inhibited to 
some extent by interest rate ceilings and other factors.  

(5) Interest rates--What are the principal factors that recently 
have raised interest rates in the capital markets and lowered 
yields on Treasury bills, and how do these developments appear 
to be influencing the near-term outlook for long- and short-term 
interest rates? 

To some extent, recent increases in corporate and municipal 
bond yields and declines in Treasury bill rates have reflected 
seasonal pressures, which tend to work in opposite directions at 
the two ends of the yield spectrum at this time of year, but other 
factors have reinforced seasonal influences. The current widened 
yield spread now appears likely to persist, for a time at least, 
barring unexpected increases in the supply of bills or other 
securities or a change in monetary policy.  

On the supply side, short-term Treasury securities 
available to the public are being reduced by the largest net 
repayment of Federal debt for any second quarter since 1957.  
Substantial Federal Reserve purchases of bills have also reduced 
the supply available to the public. At the same time, demands 
for short-term securities by public funds and corporations have 
been heavy, with corporate demands augmented by preparation for 
tax payments on the exceptionally high corporate earnings so far 
this year. Temporary investment of proceeds from heavy capital 
market financing, repatriation of liquid funds from abroad, and 
transfers of funds from the stock market also have been factors 
in the recent demand for short-term securities. Net bill sales 
by banks and by foreign accounts have only partly satisfied 
these demands.  

Such downward pressures on Treasury bill rates were 
accentuated by the recent reduction in the British Bank rate, 
following which the outstanding U.S. 3-month bill declined 
almost 10 basis points to around 3.80 per cent. The market 
appears to have adjusted to a lower bill rate range, at least 
over the near term, than was believed sustainable earlier in 
the spring.

-36-



6/15/65

During the period when bill rates eased there was 
some slight reduction in dealer lending rates at New York 
banks, reflecting in part their changed basic reserve position 
(discussed above under Question 4), but other short-term rates 
have remained firm. The unusually large spread between Treasury 
bill rates and other money market rates that now prevails will 
no doubt inhibit further declines in bill rates and may exert 
some upward pressure.  

The recent rise in corporate and municipal bond yields 
has been associated with a bulge in capital market financing in 
the second quarter. Such a bulge is not unusual at this time 
of the year; in fact total new security offerings, stocks and 
bonds together, were significantly larger in the second quarter 
of last year. But particular pressures have been exerted on yields 
this year by the sharp rise in the share of total offerings repre
sented by corporate bonds--particularly publicly offered issues-
and by an apparent cut-back in the share of new municipal issues 
being taken by banks.  

Looking ahead, the immediate supply of municipal offerings 
is expected to decline moderately. And there is as yet no evidence 
of any large individual offerings for this summer similar to the 
Treasury's advance refunding and the public power issues which 
enlarged the summer calendar a year ago. On the other hand, 
underwriters anticipate a heavy continuing volume of new offerings 
of corporate securities through the summer. This expectation is 
supported by projections of corporate sources and uses of funds 
showing rising investment outlays and dividend payments in the 
face of an expected level of profits below the very high first 
quarter rate. Moreover, a relatively large supply of U.S.  
Government securities maturing in over 5 years--almost $700 
million as of June 10--remains in dealer hands, and a heavy 

supply of Federal Agency issues has come or soon will be coming 
to market.  

(6) Money market relationships--Assuming a continuation of current 
monetary policy, what range of money market conditions, interest 
rates, reserve availability, and reserve utilization by the banking 
system might prove mutually consistent during coming weeks? 

Continuation of current monetary policy, with net 
borrowed reserves averaging around $150 million, is not likely 
to be accompanied by any significant change in domestic interest 
rates during the next few weeks, barring a shift in interest

-37-



6/15/65

rates in leading financial centers abroad or a sudden change 
in investor psychology. In this environment, Treasury bill 
rates could continue low relative to other money market rates.  

After the mid-June tax and dividend pressures, a number 
of market influences may be tending to exert downward pressure 
on bill rates. Among these are a probable post tax-date re
surgence in corporate demand, reinvestment demands following 
maturity of the June tax bills (the volume outstanding is 
substantially in excess of the amount expected to be used to 
pay tax liabilities), and sizable System buying for reserve 
purposes in late June and early July. Working in the other 
direction, a return to a more usual position of basic reserve 
deficiency by New York City banks would put upward pressure 
on dealer loan rates and, to some extent, on bill rates.  

On balance, it appears that in the absence of any 
significant change in the level of net borrowed reserves, the 
3-month bill rate will remain in the 3.78 - 3.90 per cent 
range that has prevailed over the past month, with the odds 
seeming to favor the middle or lower end of the range. Bill 
rates in this range obviously will not be transmitting upward 
pressures to long-term rates, but current congestion in the 
corporate and municipal markets will tend to keep long-term 
rates at least around present levels over the near term.  

Under the money market and marginal reserve avail
ability conditions postulated above, total bank credit 
expansion in the months ahead would probably be no larger, 
and perhaps somewhat smaller, than the 8 per cent rate of 
April-May and the year 1964 as a whole. With respect to money 
supply, data for early June indicate a sharp rebound after the 
sharp May decline. Even with bank loan expansion moderating, 
further substantial growth in the money supply is likely over 
the summer months, as excise tax reductions and retroactive 
Social Security payments result in a more than seasonal re
duction in the Treasury's cash balance. The rise in private 
demand deposits over the next month or two is likely to be 

substantially in excess of a 4 per cent annual rate, since 
the influence of some of the factors that led to the slight 
decline in these deposits through May has waned.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement:

-38--



6/15/65

Despite the current jittery state of the stock 
market and the appreciable drop in stock prices in 
recent weeks, the underlying business situation con
tinues to develop about as expected. Business is 
strong, though growth is not quite so rapid as in the 
first quarter, and prospects for further significant 
expansion over the balance of the year remain good.  
Though available production figures for May are mixed, 
retail sales moved up sharply. Strong consumer buying 
intentions and the latest reading of business spending 
plans for plant and equipment support an optimistic 
appraisal of the months ahead. It seems to me much too 
early to conclude that the capital spending surge has 
gone too far and is due for some readjustment next year.  
The drop in unemployment in May to 4.6 per cent was 
especially gratifying in view of the unusually rapid 
growth of the labor force since the beginning of 1965.  
(I am aware that here our research people have come to 
a conclusion different from that of the Board's staff.) 

The price situation continues to give cause for 
concern. The overall industrial wholesale price index 
moved up again in May, and the predominance of specific 
price announcements on the upside indicates that pro
ducers feel the atmosphere contirues to be favorable 
to testing markets. An example is the series of in
creases for aluminum products following the recent 
labor contract settlement. Moreover, the settlement 
itself has revived fears of a spreading pattern of wage 
increases in excess of the Council of Economic Advisers' 
guidelines. In taking a somewhat longer-run look at 
movements in industrial wholesale prices, it is apparent 
that the index has been on a mild but persistent up
trend for two years, following a four-year period of 
gentle decline. While increased nonferrous metal 
prices have been an important factor in this rise, this 
is by no means the full story. Our analysis indicates 
that two-thirds of the increase in the index in the 
past year, and three-fourths of the increase since 
September, reflects higher prices for items other than 
nonferrous metals. Consumer prices probably moved up 
even faster in May than in April--although the July cut 
in excise taxes snould provide some partially offsetting 
decline on a one-shot basis.

-39-



6/15/65

Preliminary statistics indicate that our international 
transactions showed a small surplus in May. There are 
indications that bank loans to foreigners declined, and 
reports suggest that one important factor in this drop 
was the sale by several large New York banks to their 
foreign branches of parts of their loan portfolios in 
order to get below their 105 per cent quotas. Without 
such temporary factors as restraint in bank lending 
abroad and in corporate investments in foreign money and 
deposit narkets, our balance of payments would probably 
have shown sizable deficits in both April and May.  

There seems to be little doubt now that the rate of 
growth of bank credit has dropped back from the very 
rapid first-quarter pace to roughly the 8 per cent annual 
rate that has been typical of the current expansion.  
Business loan demand, both actual and projected, however, 
continues strong and broad-based, although a little less 
buoyant than it was. The slackening of bank credit growth 
during the past two months has to some degree reflected 
increasing pressure on the liquidity position of the 
banking system. The dwindling holdings of Government 
securities continue to be liquidated and loan-deposit 
ratios are still rising. Recent data on the quality of 
credit give no clear indications of any significant 
deterioration. Although the money supply declined during 
May on a daily average basis, it rose toward the end of 
the month; and in viewing the virtual absence of growth 
in the money supply during the first five months of 
this year, I think we must give considerable weight to 
the unusual rise in Treasury deposits during this period.  
The effects of this build-up may be reversed by the 
normal unwinding of Treasury balances after June 30.  

In considering policy, I think we can regard the 
business situation and outlook as clearly favorable; 
and it seems to me that such weakening of sentiment 
among some analysts as has occurred has been mainly an 
over-reaction to the slowing from the abnormal first 
quarter rate of expansion. While we cannot overlook 
the possibility that the stock market's performance it
self could be a significant adverse influence, I doubt 
very much whether we can regard it in this light today.  
In the meantime, the balance of payments problem, 
although continuing to show marked statistical improve
ment in response to the President's voluntary restraint

-40-



6/15/65

program, is still extremely serious. There is no 
evidence as yet of more basic forces working toward 
equilibrium, and this accentuates the disturbing 
character of the stepped-up pace of price advances 
in the last few months and the very real risk of added 
wage and price pressures in the coming months. In a 
sense, time is running out, since it will be harder 
and harder to finance deficits without gold losses, 
and the voluntary restraint program cannot be expected 
to be effective indefinitely. The domestic economy 
seems amply able to withstand a somewhat firmer policy; 
and it is by no means clear that we have succeeded in 
slowing the pace of bank credit growth to appropriate 
levels.  

Under these conditions, I think the Committee should 
move toward a slightly firmer policy, symbolized perhaps 
by an increase in borrowing from the Reserve Banks and 
by net borrowed reserves fluctuating on both sides of a 
$200 million average, rather than around $150 million.  
I would expect swings on both sides to be rather wide 
and am merely using these figures as illustrative of 
some slight policy change. In view of the combination 
of factors creating downward pressures on bill rates 
and the doubtfulness of a near-term reversal of these 
pressures, despite the June tax and dividend dates, it 
would p-obably be unwise to set any particular goal in 
terms of the bill rate. The Treasury's high balance 
naturally hampers it in any move to increase the supply 
of bills. However, I would hope that we could see a 
gradual upward rate trend develop, partly because it 
would provide valuable psychological support for the 
voluntary restraint program.  

The directive should be modifie to reflect a 
slightly firmer policy, if the Committee agrees that 
such a move is desirable. The staff's alternative B 
seems quite satisfactory.  

Mr. Shuford said the most recent data showed that the national 

economy had not been advancing at the unusually rapid rate of last 

winter. He believed that such a change had been desirable; depend

able continued growth required a return to the rate of the past two

-41-



6/15/65 -42

or three years. The recent progress of employment and production 

had been possible despite the more restrictive fiscal situation and 

the sluggish behavior of the money supply. It seemed fortunate to 

him that neither fiscal nor monetary conditions had been any easier.  

As for the near future, Mr. Shuford continued, it now 

appeared that the fiscal situation would be easier in the second 

half of the year. Accordingly, it seemed to him that for the time 

being the Committee might well keep monetary policy much as it was.  

He would expect that posture to involve moderate growth in reserves, 

bank credit, and the money supply. As the Treasury reduced its 

balances with the commercial banks and as the new seasonal adjust

ment factors were adopted, he believed it would be seen that there 

had been some monetary increase. In his judgment a failure of the 

money supply to show some increase over the next few months would 

be undesirable.  

As for interest rates, the recent weakness of bill rates 

seemed to Mr. Shuford to have been due to an unusual demand, and 

partly seasonal in nature. He thought some strengthening in bill 

rates might be expected.  

Mr. Shuford said he had been inclined to the view that the 

country was experiencing an excessive total demand for goods and 

services, evidenced in part by stronger wholesale prices. He also 

had thought it would be undesirable for total demand to continue to



6/15/65 -43

increase at the rate of early this year. Now, however, while the 

threat of price rises had not abated, he considered it appropriate 

to continue recent moderate policies and to see what the next few 

weeks revealed. He did not believe that the international situation 

required any other policy at this time.  

Mr. Shuford did not favor a change Ln discount rate at 

present and he found alternative A of the staff drafts of the 

directive satisfactory. He recognized the observations that Mr. Partee 

had made with respect to the parenthetical final clause of that 

draft, but, while he did not have strong feelings on the matter, he 

would be disposed to exclude the clause in view of his position of 

favoring no change in policy.  

Mr. Bryan said that the pace of economic activity in the 

Sixth District seemed to be well maintained. The most eloquent 

figure was that revealing a continued reduction in the rate of 

insured unemployment; the figure fell to 2.4 per cent in the latest 

report, for April--not a banner month in itself by any means.  

Mr. Bryan did not detect from the reports of Reserve Bank 

and branch directors that there had been any marked deterioration 

of business sentiment in the District. However, there did seem 

to him to be less ebullience in sentiment nationally, and some slow

down in the rate of national economic advance. Accordingly, speaking 

in qualitative terms, he would advocate no change in policy at this



6/15/65 -44

time, esecially in view of existing uncertainties, which might 

be partly psychological in character. He advocated no change in 

the discount rate, and he doubted that there should be any con

siderable change in the free reserve target. Instead, speaking in 

quantitative terms, he advocated a continuation of net borrowed 

reserves in the $150-$200 million range for the short term.  

Mr. Bryan remarked that he would comment on only two of the 

questions posed for this meeting, relating to prices and the 

balance of payments. As the Committee knew, he had for some time 

taken a dim view of price developments. The staff at the Atlanta 

Reserve Bank told him that the development of new plant capacity, 

the wage guidelines, the decline in unit labor costs, and the fact 

that price increases had been selective should be reassuring. The 

facts were, he thought, quite plain, as some of them had always been.  

The wage guidelines were essentially meaningless, and elements of 

Government policy fully attested to the fact that they would become 

even more meaningless. The classic creeping inflation of the 

consumer price index was now being compounded by a rapid movement 

in the manufacturers' wholesale price index, which was up on a 

three-months basis at an annual rate of 2.8 per cent. The con

sumer price index, which would have an upward trend even if the 

wholesale index were entirely stable--as it had during periods 

when the wholesale index in fact had been wholly stable--had to



6/15/65 -45

ride on the back of the wholesale price increases and reflect not 

merely its own upward slant but the increase in wholesale prices as 

well. Accordingly, he looked for a combination of factors of either 

the cost-push or demand-pull variety--probably both--to increase the 

rate of price increases. The thought of what that could do to the 

American dollar in a brief span of, say, twenty years, was extremely 

disturbing.  

Mr. Bryan remarked that he had come to the conclusion that 

the policies of the Government made inflation ultimately inevitable.  

He had one other comment--the so-called "selective" price increases 

were exactly the kind of increases that consumers would not be able 

to resist.  

With respect to the balance of payments, Mr. Bryan noted 

that the Committee was confronted with good news of surpluses. But 

when those surpluses were cut down to size by obvious adjustments, 

it was clear, he thought, that the country's payments position was 

not in as gooc shape as one would like to assume. Quite obviously, 

the voluntary restraining program was setting up countervailing forces 

that would have their effect. It should be remembered that tying 

foreign aid dollars to onshore purchases of American goods, while 

it would be too much to describe as useless, did not--for what were 

now obvious reasons--produce the dramatic results that had been 

hoped for. He was frankly of the opinion that in the end measures



6/15/65 -46

other than the voluntary restraint program would have to be taken, 

measures that would be distasteful. Among such measures, he thought, 

sooner or later there inevitably would have to be an extraordinarily 

large reduction in the nation's nonmilitary grants-in-aid program.  

Mr. Bopp reported that reserve pressures on Third District 

member banks had increased markedly thus far in the second quarter, 

relative to those prevailing in the first quarter. On a daily 

average basis, reserve city banks incurred a basic reserve deficit 

in the second period over twice that which prevailed in the first 

quarter ($88 million vs. $42 million), and in the past three weeks 

those pressures had intensified even further ($144 million on a 

daily average basis). Pressures on country banks also had increased 

with borrowing at the discount window for the latest reporting 

period reaching the highest level since mid-1960.  

The pressures had been intensified, Mr. Bopp said, by a 

relatively strong loan demand in the second quarter, superimposed 

on a leveling in time deposits and a sharp downturn in recent weeks 

in the level of demand deposits. Reserve pressures at the reserve 

city banks had been funneled primarily into the Federal funds market, 

with average daily borrowings in the second quarter almost double 

those in the first.  

On the labor relations front, Mr. Bopp continued, a dis

cussion with an outstanding authority this past week elicited his



6/15/65 -47

feeling that the steel settlement would not be quite so generous 

as that in the aluminum industry. However, that authority thought 

the companies would be anxious to avoid a strike--and perhaps pay 

a little more to do so--in order to place Mr. Abel in a solid 

position and thus hopefully bring greater stability to labor 

relations in the industry. He was somewhat pessimistic over 

prospects for longer-term success of the guidelines, feeling that 

costs of fringe benefits were underestimated in figuring the guide

lines and that the guidelines in general rested on too narrow a 

base of agreement between Government, business, and labor.  

Turning to policy, Mr. Bopp said that the moderate restraint 

now prevailing appeared appropriate to the unfolding economic 

situation, characterized as it was by a slowdown from the very 

rapid growth of the first quarter. Although upward pressures on 

wholesale prices had become evident in recent months, he continued 

to be impressed by the moderate and selective nature of pressures 

in the industrial sector. He was encouraged also by the improved 

unemployment picture, although his encouragement was tempered by 

the recent slowdown in the rate of growth of the labor force--a 

situation which might reflect decreasing growth in job opportunities-

and by prospects for a large summer influx of teenagers into the 

labor market. A weighing of the merits of further restraint at 

this time also had to consider the facts that rates of growth in



6/15/65 -48

money and bank credit already had declined and that there existed 

some congestion in markets for corporate and municipal securities 

as well as some concern over the future of common stock prices.  

Given those factors, and also considering the apparent continued 

success of the voluntary restraint program, he would make no change 

at present in the general posture of nonetary policy. He favored 

alternative A of the staff drafts of the directive, including the 

final clause.  

Mr. Hickman commented that the pace of business activity 

was in the process of leveling off, as the discussion in the green 

book clearly indicated. The slackening of the business advance 

in April provided a hint of the types of readjustment the economy 

would probably undergo later on this year. On the other hand, the 

figures for May could turn out to be deceptively buoyant, as readjust

ments in steel and autos had been delayed.  

Mr. Hickman noted that auto sales, seasonally adjusted, had 

declined for four successive months, but production remained high 

and inventories were establishing new records. Steel production 

rebounded in late May, and to judge by early portents June might be 

equally strong. After several weeks of decline, incoming orders 

were moving up once again, according to confidential reports 

received from steel companies in the Fourth District. Steel 

inventory accumulation was renewed in May, partly because of the



6/15/65 -49

fear that the steel industry would take a strike rather than accept 

the settlement in the aluminum industry. Mr. Wernick's analysis in 

the appendix of the green book was particularly helpful in evaluating 

the present wide gap between labor demands and the steel industry's 

ability to meet those demands.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that additional light on changes in 

the business climate was provided at a joint meeting last Thursday 

of the directors of the Cleveland Reserve Bank and the Cincinnati 

and Pittsburg branches. For the first time in many months, the 

industrial directors expressed uncertainty and nervousness about 

the business outlook, for reasons apparently not directly related 

to the stock market slump. Several directors noted that rising wage 

rates in the current expansion had been offset, in unit labor costs, 

by an even stronger rise in volume. Those directors were apprehen

sive lest a downturn in volume, coupled with rigid wages and other 

costs, might result in a drastic squeeze on profits, which in turn 

might trigger a decline in capital spending. It was noted that the 

most recent Commerce-SEC survey of capital spending showed no upward 

revision from the previous survey, and thus failed to confirm the 

earlier optimistic McGraw-Hill release.  

The recent softening of the 91-day bill rate could be explained 

as a conjuncture of special circumstances, Mr. Hickman said. For 

one thing, liquid tax and dividend funds of corporations apparently



6/15/65 -50

increased more than seasonally this year, reflecting exceptionally 

high first quarter profits. Also, the demand of public funds for 

short-dated securities had continued unabated. In addition, the 

recent Treasury advance refunding had reduced the supply of short

term issues in dealers' hands. At the same time, long-term markets 

had become congested due to the large volume of corporate and 

municipal securities being brought to market and the open-end nature 

of the advance refunding, which resulted in larger subscriptions to 

the 9-year bond by dealers and speculators than could be absorbed 

by regular investors. The massive advance refunding lengthened the 

maturity of the debt by a month or two, but it had less fortunate 

effects on prices and yields of Government securities. Thus, once 

again, the System had been placed in the undesirable position of 

trying to bail out the dealers in the long-term market, while trying 

to prop up yields in the short-term market. Unfortunately, there had 

been only mixed success thus far.  

Mr. Hickman went on to say that the present limited flexi

bility of monetary policy also stemmed in part from the fact that 

the Committee had not done all that it should have last summer and 

late last year. He then had felt that greater restraint was needed 

to moderate the unsustainable pace of the business advance, and had 

recommended such restraint. Because the Committee had not moved then, 

it was less free to move in the opposite direction as the level of 

business activity showed signs of turning down.



6/15/65 -51

Within the present environment of business and financial 

uncertainty, Mr. Hickman recommended that for the directive the 

Committee adopt the staff's alternative A, calling for no change 

in policy, but he would instruct the Manager to resolve all doubts 

on the side of ease. Within the context of alternative A, he recom

mended that borrowings, on average, be allowed to drift down to about 

$400 million and that net borrowed reserves be permitted to subside 

to about $50-$100 million. He added that the objective stated in 

the last clause of alternative A might be difficult to achieve over 

the next four weeks and for that reason it probably should be deleted.  

In that connection, Mr. Hickman said, he would like to remind 

the Committee that $3.2 billion of tax anticipation bills were due 

to mature on June 22. He would recommend that the Treasury, despite 

its large cash balance, consider issuing additional short-dated 

securities, preferably a strip of bills.  

Mr. Maisel said he was in general agreement with the basic 

staff presentation indicating that the expansion in business activity 

had slowed. It was clear from the index of industrial production, 

as well as from most other current series, that the rate of expansion 

had fallen.  

Two most important conclusions might be drawn from the recent 

period, Mr. Maisel observed. First, prior levels of more adequate 

monetary reserves did not lead to an excessive expansion in the



6/15/65 -52

economy. Price pressures in spheres related to expansions of overall 

demand were minimal. Most increases could be related directly to 

special situations such as in agriculture and beef prices and were 

not such as to be responsive to monetary policy.  

Secondly, Mr. Maisel continued, the present levels of pro

duction and current trends were following very closely the forecasts 

made at the end of last year. If the current and projected trends 

continued, percentage utilization of plant capacity and the labor 

force would decline. There would still be a considerable gap between 

actual production and the potential GNP for the economy. At least 

$30 billion or more of potential goods and services would not be 

produced this year. He believed that it would be improper to tighten 

money when the prospects for the future showed no likelihood of 

undue pressure on resources but rather a shortfall of demand below 

capacity.  

As he had indicated at the last meeting, Mr. Maisel said, 

in situations such as this, when no clear movements had occurred, 

he preferred to avoid changing the policy statement. He hoped, 

however, that as a result of its discussion today the Committee 

could agree that net borrowed reserves during the next month would 

move back closer to the Committee's initial concept under the current 

policy directive. That would mean that net borrowed reserves should 

approach more nearly $100 million than their current levels.



6/15/65 -53

In order to return the directive as close as possible to 

its initial form and to make certain that it was clear that no basic 

change had been directed, Mr. Maisel would prefer alternative A.  

However, in the first sentence he would retain the phrase proposed 

for deletion, namely, "although at a somewhat slower pace," which 

qualified the reference to continuing expansion of the domestic 

economy. He agreed that more of the additional reserves could be 

supplied through purchase of coupon issues, but felt that the 

addition of the last parenthetical phrase could be misinterpreted 

as indicating a tighter general policy. Therefore, he would omit 

that phrase.  

Mr. Daane said that like Mr. Maisel he agreed with the basic 

staff presentation but perhaps interpreted it a little differently.  

He understood the staff to be saying quite clearly that recent 

developments on the domestic economic and financial scene as well 

as in the U.S. balance of payments suggested the maintenance of the 

status quo with regard to monetary policy. As Mr. Brill had sug

gested, the Co.mmittee should stand pat until it could see how the 

various present cross-currents were sorted out. In the current 

atmosphere of uncertainty, and with the sort of psychology that 

seemed to be prevailing--as evidenced by the over-reaction to 

Chairman Martin's recent remarks at Columbia University--it was 

particularly important that there be no change in policy, overt or 

otherwise.



6/15/65 -54

If one looked beyond the factor of business sentiment, 

Mr. Daane continued, one found reinforcement for the view that 

policy should not be changed. The rate of domestic economic ex

pansion had slowed down somewhat, although the pace of both recent 

and prospective expansion was still substantial. In the domestic 

financial area, bank credit and monetary expansion also had slowed 

from the unsustainably rapid rates of the early months of the year.  

The stock market decline probably had been the most noteworthy 

event since the last meeting of the Committee. While he would not 

try to forecast stock prices, it seemed to him that the decline 

reflected a reaction from the market's own long-sustained rise 

to record highs more than a basic fear of imminent economic 

reversal.  

Mr. Daane found the April and May figures for the balance 

of payments to be encouraging, although he agreed that in and of 

themselves they did not mean the problem was solved. At the moment, 

however, the payments situation did not call for any increased 

monetary restraint despite the recent decline in bill rates. Recent 

bill rate levels had not been an accurate indicator of conditions 

in the money market; other money market measures indicated that 

conditions had remained quite taut. In any case, the recent decline 

in bill rates apparently had not prompted any significant short-term 

capital outflows.



6/15/65 -55

Current conditions in bond markets, like those in the 

stock market, also suggested the wisdom of holding fast to the 

current course of monetary policy, Mr. Daane said. Corporate and 

municipal bond yields had risen in reflection of increased flota

tions. Although thus far the rise had not affected the long-term 

Government market, that market was still threatened by a relatively 

large overhang of dealer holdings of bonds and by a low level of 

retail demand, 

To Mr. Daane such circumstances added up to an economic 

situation that did not warrant a change in monetary policy in either 

direction. Whether one emphasized the underlying economic situation 

or, as he would, the prevailing general uncertainties, the answer 

was the same. Neither the rates of domestic business and financial 

expansion, which were reduced, nor the balance of payments situation, 

which was improved, called for more restraint. On the other hand, 

they did not call for less restraint. In view of the continuing 

precarious state of the balance of payments, domestic conditions 

should clearly call for more ease before the Committee actively 

sought it. He still believed that relative price stability was 

the key to the eventual solution of the U.S. balance of payments 

problem, and he shared Mr. Bryan's concern over price developments.  

In his judgment, the Committee should continue to seek price 

stability, although he recognized the difficulties of achieving it.



6/15/65 -56

Mr. Daane favored alternative A for the directive. While 

he clearly would be sympathetic to conducting operations as far as 

possible in the coupon area to avoid putting downward pressure on 

bill rates, he did not believe it was necessary to include the final 

clause in the directive.  

Mr. Mitchell indicated that, like some others, he felt a 

certain amount of uneasiness about the business outlook. He thought 

it was not going to be easy to keep the economy expanding, and that 

the difficulties were likely to increase with time. The decline in 

stock prices had jolted confidence, and in his opinion if it con

tinued it definitely would have some effect on spending plans. The 

inventory situation also was somewhat alarming. The continued 

growth in steel stocks was unfortunate, and inventories seemed to 

be getting a bit out of hand in other areas.  

The Committee's real objective, Mr. Mitchell said, was to 

promote as full utilization of the nation's resources as possible, 

in an environment of reasonably stable prices. With the uncertain 

business outlook and present state of psychology, he thought that 

monetary policy at this time should be directed more to the problem 

of resource utilization than to that of price stability.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he found himself in agreement 

with Mr. Hayes on the points that the balance of payments situation 

appeared better than it actually was and that a basic cure was not



6/15/65 -57

in sight. However, the voluntary restraint program was never 

expected to be a permanent solution to the problem, but rather was 

intended to buy time for the development of other solutions. That 

was exactly what the program was accomplishing; it was providing a 

breathing spell, which was all that could be expected of it.  

Mr. Mitchell preferred alternative A for the directive.  

However, he thought that it would be appropriate at this time to 

delete the rather sterile clause at the end of the first paragraph 

reading, "while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, 

bank credit, and the money supply." In place of that clause he 

would simply say "while accommodating resumption of growth in the 

money supply." There had been no increase in the money supply or 

in its demand deposit component through May of this year, he noted, 

but the staff anticipated an increase in June as Treasury deposits 

were drawn down. He thought it would be desirable for the Committee 

to be on record as favoring such an increase; a five-month inter

ruption in money supply growth was long enough.  

Mr. Mitchell added that he would omit the last clause of 

the second paragraph. The Account Management had performed re

markably well recently, giving proper regard to conditions in both 

the bill and bond markets, and the Manager had indicated that it 

was his intention to buy coupon issues during the coming weeks, as 

implied by the clause in question. Omitting the clause would give



6/15/65 -58

a little more emphasis to reserve objectives and less to bill rate 

fluctuations.  

Mr. Shepardson said he agreed in large part with the staff 

analysis of the domestic economy, except that he felt more concern 

about the price situation than the staff had indicated. He was 

disturbed by the continuing, and apparently accelerating, advance 

of prices--not only from the standpoint of the domestic economy 

but also because price stability was a vital factor in achieving 

improvement in the balance of payments. Some of the causes of the 

currently favorable payments statistics were temporary, and the 

underlying situation was still one of great concern.  

Notwithstanding the indications of less ebullience in the 

economy, Mr. Shepardson observed, the balance of payments and price 

situations inclined him toward a further slight firming of policy, 

as indicated by alternative B of the draft directives. However, 

certain other considerations suggested alternative A. Those were 

the overall uncertainties and the general state of psychology 

existing at the present time, and the fact that a slightly firmer 

policy now probably would not have significant implications for 

longer-run balance of payments prospects. As had been stated 

repeatedly, a fundamental solution to the balance of payments 

problem would have to come largely from sources other than monetary 

policy. His position was close to the line between the two



6/15/65 -59

alternatives. On the whole, however, despite the factors inclining 

him toward alternative B, he felt that it .ight be preferable to 

adopt alternative A today.  

In Mr. Shepardson's judgment the last clause of alternative 

A was unnecessary; the Manager presumably would continue to operate 

as he had recently. As to Mr. Mitchell's suggestion for replacing 

the final clause of the first paragraph with a statement on resump

tion of growth in the money supply, Mr. Shepardson noted that the 

money supply often fluctuated in the short run as a result of a 

variety of factors not related to monetary policy actions. It 

was true that the money supply, narrowly defined, had not grown 

recently, but time deposits had continued to increase at a signifi

cant rate and so had total bank credit. He considered the 

original phrase appropriate and would leave it unchanged.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

Domestic business activity seems to have been in 
the process of shifting gears--downward to a slower but 
hopefully more sustainable rate of economic expansion.  
I judge this slowdown is undeniable--the only point for 
debate concerns how much. Some may feel the deceleration 
of demand is sufficient to call for a little pre
cautionary anti-recession planning at this juncture.  
My own feeling is that such concern is not yet necessary.  
I think current levels of demand are likely to prove 
adequate to sustain the economy through the summer, 
particularly with the impetus of major steel inventory 
liquidation apparently deferred until fall and some 
added fiscal stimulus scheduled this summer. We shall 
need to keep a careful watch over developments this 
fall and winter, however, for a considerable variety



6/15/65

of influenes could then be combining to exert more 
significant deflationary pressure on the economy.  

I think these overall prospects for business 
activity are not sufficiently strong to either engender 
or sustain a general price spiral. At the same time, 
I do recognize that some recent price increases have 
been occurring. I am not so troubled about the live
stock price advance, for such increases usually give 
rise to market supply responses that soon provide a 
natural correction. The aluminum wage and price 
increases, however, are typical of the kind of mark-ups 
we can yet experience in some industries, even though 
the worst of demand pressures on resources may already 
be behind us. I think we are already evolving the 
kind of environment of market demands that will 
constrain this type of price action, and so I would 
not favor any further monetary tightening as a 
gesture of resistance. On the other hand, I would 
not want to take any major easing step, at this 
particular time, that might tend to give succor to 
business and labor inclinations to try for big 
administered wage and price increases.  

This analysis of the domestic business situation 
leads me to advocate a policy of "no change" in the 
monetary sphere. Such a policy seems equally 
appropriate to national and international financial 
developments. Our international payments have been 
about in balance for three months now. How temporary 
that improvement may be only time can tell for sure.  
But I do not believe such temporary improvement would 
be rendered more permanent by tightening monetary 
policy further now.  

In the domestic financial sphere, bank loan and 
deposit expansion have slackened significantly. While 
these magnitudes continue to fluctuate considerably 
over short spans of time, I think the changes in the 
six or seven weeks since late April are distinctly 
more moderate than previously in the year. I believe 
our policy at this meeting has to take into account 
such a slowing down in bank performance. When that is 
done, I believe the logical conclusion is that, under 
current demand conditions, the monetary policy adopted 
at the end of the first quarter is about as restrictive 
as should be tried.

-60-



6/15/65

Thus, on all counts I end up favoring a monetary 
policy of "no change" between now and the next meeting 
of the Committee. Accordingly, I would approve the 
alternative A directive as drafted by the staff--but 
deleting the final parenthetical phrase worrying about 
the bill rate. As analyses presented to this Committee 
have repeatedly demonstrated, the bill rate has not 
been a reliable indicator of general money market 
conditions this spring, and it also seems increasingly 
less pertinent as a basis for comparing international 
rate differentials. I take its latest decline to 
reflect, perhaps as much as any other single factor, 
temporary buying interest of a hedging nature by investors 
who have been made cautious for a time by the uncertain
ties in long-term debt and equity markets. As we found 
out on previous occasions, the most tnerapeutic 
treatment for this kind of buying is to allow the 
resultant lowering of bill rates to exert its natural 
and gradual deterrent effect, and consequently I 
propose deleting the final parenthetical phrase.  

I would also suggest that in the first sentence of 
the directive where we refer to the continuing expansion 
of domestic economy, we retain the words "although at 
a somewhat slower pace" and add "than in the first 
quarter." This would seem to be in line with the actual 
situation reflected in the analyses of current economic 
data.  

Mr. Robertson added that he agreed with Mr. Hickman that 

the Manager of the Account might be directed to resolve doubts on the 

side of ease. He also agreed with the suggestion of Mr. Mitchell 

that the Committee might well use this opportunity to delete the 

phrase it had used for so long in the directive--"while accommodating 

moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 

supply." He would substitute the phrase, "while accommodating

growth in the money supply."

-61-



6/15/65 -62

Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business continued 

to improve, although at a slower pace than earlier in the year.  

Employment apparently was rising at about a seasonal rate, but 

insured unemployment continued to decline more than seasonally.  

Contract awards rose to a new all-time high in April after a 

mediocre first quarter. Retail trade increased moderately in May, 

as indicated by a new high in department store sales and favorable 

reports from retailers on the Richmond Reserve Bank's survey panel.  

Survey respondents in general were less optimistic than five 

weeks ago, but manufacturers describing current developments in 

their own industries showed that distinct improvements had occurred 

since the previous round of reports. The evidence included recent 

increases in factory orders, shipments, employment, and hours.  

A special questionnaire on prices paid, included in the latest 

survey, showed that about two-thirds of the respondents were now 

paying more for materials and for factory and office supplies, 

while nearly three-fourths reported prices up for machinery and 

equipment. From one-half to two-thirds anticipated additional 

increases in the near future in those same prices, and three

quarters expected wage increases. Nearly nine out of ten believed 

that prices would rise in the months immediately ahead in the 

national economy as a whole, but in their own industries only half 

of the respondents thought that price increases were imminent.



6/15/65

The interim wage settlement in steel reduced somewhat the 

pressure under which the economy had been operating, Mr. Wayne 

commented. The smooth and mild adjustment which took place after 

the settlement indicated substantial basic strength and a stable 

equilibrium in the economy. The small increase in defense 

expenditures which had already occurred, and the prospects of much 

larger increases, should help support economic activity in the 

second half of the year. Economic strength was indicated also 

by the high level of manufacturers' new and unfilled orders, the 

continuing high levels of business investment plans and consumers' 

buying intentions, some renewed strength in construction 

especially in the residential sector, and the record level of retail 

sales in May. Two potentially troublesome developments, however, 

were the high level of consumer and mortgage debts with their 

rapid increases in recent months, and the growing upward pressures 

on wages and prices.  

Upward price pressures were likely to continue, Mr. Wayne 

said. The wage settlements in the can, aluminum, and rubber 

industries had already been reflected in the selective price in

creases and carried disturbing implications for the steel 

settlement. The southern textile industry was making its third 

wage increase of 5 per cent within 18 months. Those increases 

probably reflected a decision to pass on profits resulting from



6/15/65 -64

"one-price cotton" in wages rather than prices. Short supplies of 

several major farm commodities should keep farm prices on the rise.  

The increases in farm prices as well as those in metals and other 

industrial raw materials could push through to the retail level.  

Finally, increased Government spending for defense and welfare 

would add to demand.  

The recent modest improvement in the balance of payments 

was encouraging to Mr. Wayne. The available evidence suggested, 

however, that most or all of that improvement stemmed from the 

working of the voluntary foreign credit restraint program or from 

temporary influences such as the unwinding of the dock strike 

situation. Thus, the basic problem of the balance of payments 

was still unresolved and in view of the probability of new strains 

on the international financial system in the next few months, that 

must remain a matter of deep concern to the Committee.  

Loan expansion had slowed somewhat in the second quarter, 

Mr. Wayne observed, but there was little evidence that the growth 

of bank credit had been restricted by monetary policy. Banks had 

now developed so many ways of mobilizing reserves and of shifting 

reserves among banks that the effect of traditional credit 

restraint measures was considerably diluted.  

In the policy domain, it seemed clear to Mr. Wayne that 

the rate of financial expansion definitely slowed in April and



6/15/65 -65

May, accomparying a similar reduction in the rate of business 

expansion. The abnormally low bill rates and net sales of Federal 

funds by New York banks, among other things, would suggest that 

the slower financial growth was the result of lower demand rather 

than reduced reserve availability.  

As for proper policy for the next four weeks, it seemed 

to Mr. Wayne that the overall situation did not require any 

additional restraint at this time in view of the slight reduction 

in rates of growth in both business and financial areas in the 

past two months. Accordingly, he would favor continuing present 

policy with a recommendation to the Desk, in supplying reserves, 

to use all possible methods to avoid depressing the bill rate.  

Alternative A seemed appropriate to him. The proposed addition 

to the concluding sentence seemed unnecessary; he would leave 

that matter in the hands of the Manager.  

Mr. Clay said that under present circumstances it would 

appear best to continue the monetary policy of the last three 

weeks. The transition in the domestic economy from the surge of 

the first quarter had brought a more moderate pace of activity.  

While it was expected that the economy would continue to advance 

in the months ahead, there was no assurance that the present 

transitional phase had been completed. In any event, the pace of 

future advance would be slower than early in the year. While



6/15/65 -66

there had been some firming of industrial prices, it had been on 

a selective basis. Moreover, the slower rate of business advance 

should help to limit upward price pressures, particularly in view 

of the continuing expansion in industrial capacity.  

Changes in both economic activity and in special situaticns 

affecting the first quarter also had brought a slower rate of growth 

in bank credit and in its business loan component, Mr. Clay noted.  

It remained to be seen whether still further adjustments might be 

under way in the rate of bank credit expansion.  

Evaluation of current developments relative to the inter

national payments problem obviously was very difficult, Mr. Clay 

continued. The voluntary credit restraint program had brought 

substantial gains in the last three months, but there was a 

question as to what proportion of those early gains were relatively 

easy to accomplish. Granting the limitations of such a program, 

it appeared probable that there would be significant continuing 

gains. Without arguing that that program would solve the U.S.  

international payments problem, it did afford additional time to 

develop new avenues to deal with the problem and currently 

facilitated the continuation of present monetary policy.  

Mr. Clay believed that money market conditions and reserve 

availability should be continued within the range of recent weeks.  

If Treasury bill rates should rise relative to other short-term



6/15/65 -67

open market rates, that would be entirely acceptable, but reserve 

availability should not be restricted in .n attempt to force 

upward movement of Treasury bill rates. In view of the bill rate 

level, operations should be conducted in longer maturities as 

feasible to reduce pressure on bill rates. The present sensitivity 

of longer-term interest rates should make it possible to carry out 

such operations.  

Alternative A of the draft policy directive appeared 

satisfactory to Mr. Clay, and he thought it would be appropriate 

to include the last phrase, on minimizing downward pressures on 

Treasury bill rates. Presumably the latter would come within the 

general money market conditions and reserve availability of recent 

weeks, however.  

Mr. Scanlon remarked that he was in general agreement with 

the comments the staff had prepared on the questions suggested 

for consideration at this meeting. As far as the Seventh District 

was concerned, substantial declines in ou:put of steel and autos 

in the second half of 1965 had been taken for granted since the 

start of the year. Now that the first half was ending and those 

declines were closer at hand, they appeared to be playing a 

larger role in current thinking about economic prospects. That 

was somewhat surprising in view of the fact that output estimates 

for both of those industries had been raised since early this year.



6/15/65 -68

Local steel analysts now anticipated production at a new 

record of 128 million tons of steel ingots in 1965, Mr. Scanlon 

reported. Cutput was expected to decline about 10 per cent in the 

third quarter, and about 16 per cent in the second half. The usual 

July plant-wide shutdowns had been eliminated by the major producers 

as orders for steel had accelerated again in recent weeks, perhaps 

indicating renewed concern about a possible strike. The increase 

in orders had been rather general and, surprisingly, included the 

auto industry, which had been believed to have ample stocks of steel.  

Capital goods producers in the Seventh District continued 

to report increases in order backlogs, Mr. Scanlon observed.  

Inventories of components were said to be moderate and producers 

of "stock" components, who normally experienced declines in orders 

about six to nine months before machinery producers, were still on 

a rising trend. There continued to be a strong interest in locations 

for new industrial plants. A factory locating service, headquartered 

in Chicago, reported a very strong demand for its services.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that evidence on employment trends, 

personal saving, and retail sales indicated no substantial change 

from the favorable picture of recent months.  

Credit outstanding at District banks had expanded at a 

moderate pace since the end of April, Mr. Scanlon continued. Loans 

rose by about the same amount as a year ago, with a large portion



6/15/65 -69

due to borrowing by finance companies. Business loan growth had 

continued at the slower pace evident in April. The major Chicago 

banks had not acquired any additional funds through CDs, and their 

outstandings remained in the narrow range that had prevailed since 

the beginning of the year. They had reported some loan contraction 

and their investments were also cown somewhat. While two banks had 

been rather heavy buyers of Federal funds, another bank had main

tained a substantial net selling position since late April. Those 

large banks in Chicago had borrowed very little at the discount 

window, although other District banks had stepped up their borrowing.  

A. to policy, Mr. Scanlon thought the System should provide 

the normal seasonal amount of reserves in the weeks immediately 

ahead. He recognized that this would pose serious problems for the 

Manager, who, he thought, had to be given substantial latitude in 

which to operate. Mr. Scanlon certainly would not retreat from the 

position that had been attained in recent weeks; as a matter of 

fact, he would resolve doubts on the side of firmness. However, 

he would not change policy under current conditions, and he found 

alternative A of the directive drafts acceptable but would delete 

the final phrase.  

Mr. Galusha remarked that he would report first on 

agricultural prices in the Ninth District, and, in particular, on 

livestock prices. While the index of District crop prices was



6/15/65 -70

below its year-ago level, the index of livestock prices was up 

sharply from last year and from mid-April as well. For livestock 

producers that was heartening, although, of course, it was 

unlikely that the recent increase in livestock prices, being 

largely the result of reduced supplies, would result in a dramatic 

increase in District farm income.  

Ninth District personal income was virtually unchanged in 

April, Mr. Galusha said. That constancy concealed a variety of 

minor offsetting changes, however, including an interesting increase 

in wage and salary disbursements of manufacturing firms. On the 

whole, the outlook for the District's nonagricultural economy 

appeared favorable. An impressive increase in output apparently 

was recorded in May, with durable goods producers seemingly leading 

the way. Moreover, businessmen seemed to be optimistic about the 

third quarter of 1965. The Minneapolis Bank's most recent opinion 

survey suggested that a considerable majority of businessmen were 

expecting further increases in output and employment and, surprisingly 

enough, in profits. The great majority of the survey respondents 

continued to report no price changes for their products, but some 

were reporting higher raw materials prices.  

Mr. Galusha commented that the new cars sold in such large 

quantities recently would be on the road this summer, if travel 

bookings were any indication. The increase in reservations at



6/15/65 -71

western National Parks had continued, and at several it was now 

impossible to get reservations for July and August.  

Mr. Galusha noted that the Reserve Bank recently had made 

an informal survey of the consumer and trade credit situation. The 

respondents reported that the totals outstanding of consumer and 

trade credit had increased considerably in recent months, but that 

they were, perhaps surprisingly, not at all concerned. To date 

there evidently had been no increase in default experience, 

although it might be too early to expect such a development. On 

a related point, the credit deterioration evident in the agricultural 

sector earlier in the year had been relieved somewhat by the 

improvement in the livestock situation.  

District member bank credit increased in May, Mr. Galusha 

remarked, but on a seasonally adjusted basis it apparently declined.  

Also, the rise in total credit fell far short of the sharp expansion 

recorded in May 1964. At reporting banks total credit actually 

fell a bit in the past month, so the increase was experienced by 

nonreporting banks. The latter, it appeared, were now in a fairly 

tight position, with their average loan-deposit ratio higher now 

than at any time in the period from 1960 to date. Reporting banks 

were only slightly better off; their position appeared to be tight 

in large part because they did not experience the usual May 

increase in time deposits, but a decrease. On the whole, then,



6/15/65 -72

District member banks appeared to be under some pressure, and it 

was doubtful that they were still aggressively searching out new 

loans.  

In Mr. Galusha's view monetary policy, defined in terms of 

the average level of free reserves, should remain about as it had 

been of late during the coming several weeks. He saw little reason 

for changing policy, and certainly none for increasing monetary 

restraint. He thought the decline in the bill rate was not a cause 

for alarm and noted that the recent reduction in the British Bank 

rate was of considerable significance in that connection. The 

domestic outlook seemed to him to be for moderate growth over the 

remaining part of 1965, and for a rate of growth of demand no 

greater than the rate of increase of capacity. Whether growth 

would be sufficient to keep the unemployment rate from creeping 

up during the summer and fall, he did not know. Recent price 

increases might be disturbing but he believed that sharp increases 

had remained rather selective--too selective to warrant application 

of further general monetary restraint. And such widespread creep 

in prices as there had been of late was a reflection not so much 

of the current economic situation as that of the recent past. Nor 

did recently-struck labor bargains seem sufficient to warrant action 

at this time. In particular, they did not seem to be indicative 

of a sharp jump in the rate of increase of money wages. In sum,



6/15/65 -73

Mr. Galusha favored no change in monetary policy and alternative A 

for the directive.  

Mr. Swan reported that in May the rate of unemployment 

dropped in California--the only District State for which data were 

as yet available--as it had in the nation, but still continued well 

above that of the country as a whole. The level of private housing 

starts declined sharply in April following improvement in February 

and March. While a one-month development of that type was not 

necessarily significant, in view of the earlier improvement it was 

worthy of note as indicating that weakness in the housing area 

had not disappeared.  

The District's weekly reporting banks had shown a less 

rapid rise in loans than those in the country as a whole for most 

of the year to date, Mr. Swan said. However, in the three weeks 

ending June 2 the increases in both loans and total bank credit at 

District banks were much more rapid than nationally, and they also 

were much greater than in the District a year ago. District banks 

were under considerable reserve pressure, and their borrowings 

from the Reserve Bank continued at a relatively high level.  

Mr. Swan remarked that, along with others, he was impressed 

by the recent slowdown in the pace of national economic activity 

and by the slackening in the growth of bank credit. Price increases 

were a real cause for concern, but among industrial commodities



6/15/65

they still were largely confined to metals and metal products, 

and the increase in meat prices was primarily a result of reduced 

supply. While the factors producing the recent improvement in 

the balance of payments might be temporary, the facts remained that 

the U.S. currently was experiencing a continuing surplus and that 

immediately unfavorable developments were lacking.  

Those considerations, Mr. Swan continued, along with the 

decline in the stock market and the uncertainties generated thereby, 

as well as the current congestion in capital markets, all indicated 

to him that the Committee's policy should not be changed.  

Consequently, he favored alternative A of the draft directives.  

He would go along with Mr. Robertson's suggestion that the domestic 

expansion should be described in the first sentence as proceeding 

at a slower pace than in the first quarter. As to Mr. Mitchell's 

suggestion, there was some attraction in the proposal to change 

wording that had been used for some time. Nevertheless, he would 

not want to confine the reference in the final phrase of the first 

paragraph to the money supply. For one thing, there were shifts 

in the money supply resulting from factors beyond the Committee's 

control, such as changes in Government deposits. Secondly, the 

Committee remained interested in accommodating moderate growth of 

bank credit and the reserve base. As to the parenthetical phrase 

at the end of the second paragraph, he did not think it belonged

-74-



6/15/65 -75

in the directive. As others had noted, the Committee could rely 

on the Manager to conduct operations in the manner indicated.  

Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh District 

generally were very strong, and the prevailing mood was of 

confidence and optimism. According to the Reserve Bank's estimates, 

the production index for the District probably rose two percentage 

points in the past month, partly because of an increase in crude 

oil production. Construction contract awards had moved up 

substantially and employment was slightly higher. Retail trade, 

as reflected by department store sales, had increased, and auto

mobile sales were unchanged at a high level.  

Agricultural conditions had improved, Mr. Irons continued, 

and generally were good. Developments with respect to livestock 

prices were highly encouraging to livestock people. Heavy, wide

spread rains had helped range conditions.  

Mr. Irons went on to say that loan demand at District banks, 

while not as strong as in the first quarter, was still strong, and 

total loans were at a high level and rising slightly to moderately.  

There had been an increase in demand deposits but the volume of 

CDs outstanding had declined.  

District banks apparently were under some reserve pressure, 

Mr. Irons said, and they were becoming reconciled to the necessity 

of buying deposits rather than getting them gratuitously. Banks



6/15/65 -76

had been heavy net buyers of Federal funds, with purchases running 

about $750 million per week and sales about $500 million.  

Borrowings from the Reserve Bank were not particularly excessive.  

The large banks tended to rely mainly on the Federal funds market, 

coming into the discount window only when necessary. Some of the 

smaller banks, however, were borrowing.  

The national situation seemed to Mr. Irons to be one of 

strength, and the outlook was favorable for further expansion 

although at a rate below that of the first quarter. There had been 

some noticeable edging up of prices. Defense expenditures and 

business outlays for plant and equipment could be expected to 

increase, and consumer spending was heavy. From all reports, 

businessmen were optimistic.  

Mr. Irons doubted that the basic international situation 

had improved much, if at all. The balance of payments appeared 

better as a result of the favorable consequences of the voluntary 

credit restraint program, but whether the gains made would be 

held remained to be seen.  

Given those domestic and balance of payments situations, 

Mr. Irons said, the choice between the policies described by 

alternative A and B for the directive was a close one. At the 

same time, the differences in the policies called for by the two 

alternatives did not strike him as being highly significant. In



6/15/65 -77

view of the uncertainties that existed at present, and of the fact 

that the economy was undergoing a transition from its earlier 

unsustainably high rate of expansion, he was inclined to make no 

change in policy at this time but, rather, to favor a continuation 

of conditions in the ranges that had existed during the past three 

weeks. He would like to see net borrowed reserves in the area of 

$150 million or above--he certainly would not want to have them 

worked down to lower levels--and would expect borrowings to be 

in the $450-$500 million range. He would accept alternative A for 

the directive, with the understanding that it called for no 

lessening of the degree of firmness from that existing in the past 

few weeks, and no overt strengthening from that degree. If there 

were to be deviations, he was inclined to Mr. Scanlon's view that 

they should be in the direction of firmness rather than ease.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that he could make a capsule description 

of economic conditions in New England by reporting that strengthening 

manufacturing activity was being translated into widespread 

strength in employment, income, spending, and credit generation.  

In April, for the first month in a considerable time span, the 

seasonally adjusted index of manufacturing production for New 

England matched the year-to-year gain in the national index, which 

was 8.4 per cent. Credit for that achievement had to go to the 

nondurable industries of textiles, apparel, and leather, each of 

which gained several percentage points from March to April.



6/15/65

In the financial sector, Mr. Ellis said, perhaps the most 

notable--and still unexplained--development was that all District 

banks outside Boston had just completed their fifth consecutive 

week of negative free reserve positions, joining the Boston banks 

in a debtor position the latter had held since February (except 

for a two-week zero position in April). Despite that tightness, 

member bank loan positions had continued to expand in the three 

weeks ending June 2, with each category except business loans 

showing plus signs.  

Turning to the policy issues highlighted by the staff 

questions and comments, Mr. Ellis said that the issues posed by 

the first three questions were so interwoven that he would consider 

them as a composite. In his judgment the wording of the third 

question tended to direct attention too narrowly to the preliminary 

and obviously distorted developments of the first two months of 

the voluntary foreign credit restraint program, months in which 

the initial effects of that program were registered. Perhaps it 

was inevitable that the Committee should lean most heavily on very 

recent data in seeking to project what was ahead, but it was 

necessary to dwell simultaneously on longer-range and more basic 

factors. He complimented the staff on the fact that in its 

comments it had avoided the trap of exclusive focus on short-term 

considerations. One of the most troublesome of the long-range

-78-



6/15/65 -79

factors was the possibility that continued upcreep of domestic 

prices would take some of the edge off of this country's competi

tive position in export markets. And the immediately past and 

forthcoming wage negotiations on balance would strengthen the 

trend of price advances.  

The prospects for sustainable economic expansion undoubtedly 

were brightened by a return to the "ordinary" boom conditions of 

last fall, Mr. Ellis remarked, in contrast with the first quarter 

credit explosion. To paraphrase a remark of Mr. Brill's, things 

were not as bad as they could have been, but might become so.  

Still unanswered was the question of the potential cumulative effect 

of long-continuing expansion of bank credit in excess of real growth 

rates.  

Concerning the areas of bank credit, interest rates, and 

money market relations, Mr. Ellis commented that each area might 

be registering the cumulative effect of a long-continuing high rate 

of bank credit expansion, and of an active and long-continuing 

joint effort by the System and the Treasury to support short-term 

interest rates. Past relationships suggested that a net borrowed 

reserve level of $150 million traditionally had been associated 

with lower short-term rates. The gradual decline in Treasury bill 

rates in the past six weeks probably confirmed the view that a 

bill rate of 3.90 per cent or higher was not consistent with net



6/15/65 -80

borrowed reserves of $150 million. On the other hand, commercial 

bank holdings of Treasury bills had been so reduced that a further 

lowering of reserve availability might very well be found not to 

promptly release bills in a volume that would materially affect 

short rates. As an additional complication to the unknown 

amount of repatriated capital lodged in the bill market, there 

now was the probability that a substantial volume of funds withheld 

from the stock market was temporarily lodged in the bill market 

awaiting more permanent commitment. To the extent that some 

investors were anticipating future increases in long-term bond 

rates, it was probable that they were holding funds in bills while 

awaiting clarification of the outlook.  

As he looked to the immediate future, Mr. Ellis said, he 

saw two forces in the market that were likely to depress short-term 

bill rates in addition to those he had mentioned. First, in July, 

traditionally, bill demand was strong and :he Treasury conducted 

a financing. Absent that financing because of the strong Treasury 

cash position, rates were likely to sag. Secondly, before the 

Committee next met seasonal factors, including currency outflows, 

would require injection of $1.1 billion of additional reserves.  

Mr. Ellis went on to say that it was stimulating to 

speculate on the advantages of meeting the seasonal reserve needs 

by a reduction in reserve requirements, and face the happy prospect



6/15/65 -81

of later reabsorption by sales of bills. In the absence of such 

an approach, his personal choice would be to continue intermittent 

purchases of coupon issues as available; to meet the seasonal need 

as much as possible by repurchase agreements; to adopt a net 

borrowed reserve target range centered on $200 million; to expect 

borrowings to range from $500 to $600 million; and to be reconciled 

to the prospect that even with such an approach bill rates might 

shade off a few points further.  

His discussion had centered around rate prospects, Mr. Ellis 

continued, but it was premised on a recognition that, while weekly 

and monthly gyrations tended to obscure the basic strengths, the 

excessive rate of credit expansion of the first quarter had 

dropped back in April and May only to an annual rate of 8 per cent.  

While that rate was somewhat less than earlier, in his judgment it 

was still excessive at a time when GNP was growing at an annual 

rate of 4.7 per cent. His analysis was that the fever had subsided 

but the temperature remained high; and his conclusion was that 

medication should be continued in the form of further probing 

toward firmness. Accordingly, alternative B of the staff drafts 

was his choice for the directive. However, if alternative A was 

adopted, he would hope that the concluding phrase of the first 

paragraph would not be confined to the narrowly defined money 

supply, neglecting the reserve base and bank credit.



6/15/65 -82

Chairman Martin commented that there appeared to be a 

large measure of agreement in the views that had been expressed 

today. In his judgment there had been no significant change in 

the economic situation since the previous meeting of the Committee, 

except possibly with respect to psychology; many people who had 

been over-confident a few weeks ago now were less so. That was 

not necessarily a good thing, but it was not necessarily bad.  

With respect to policy, he was in complete agreement with the 

judgment that the suggested alternative A was the preferred 

directive for the next four weeks, while the Committee awaited the 

opportunity to make a better assessment of conditions.  

The Chairman added that he became concerned whenever he 

heard comments such as those that had been made in the discussion 

today about resolving doubts on the side of ease or firmness.  

Such comments, of course, were made from time to time to reflect 

shades of difference in views on policy. In his judgment, 

however, the objective should be for the Manager to make no mis

takes at all and not to deviate in either direction.  

As to the comments on the money supply, the Chairman said, 

he had to admit that his understanding on that subject was not as 

full as he would wish; the more he thought about it the less 

confident he was that he understood all of the elements of money 

supply determination. In any case, he thought that the three



6/15/65 -83

measures--the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply-

provided a better basis for policy formulation than the money 

supply alone, and he did not favor Mr. Mitchell's suggestion that 

the concluding phrase of the first paragraph of the directive be 

confined to the latter.  

Chairman Martin then noted that some members had suggested 

retaining the phrase indicating that the domestic expansion was 

proceeding at a slower pace. While he did not consider the matter 

to be of great importance, he would prefer Mr. Robertson's 

suggestion--retention of the present clause and addition of the 

words, "than in the first quarter." The statement then would be 

more precise. He did not favor including in the second paragraph 

of the directive the final parenthetical clause shown in the 

suggested alternative A.  

Mr. Hayes noted that the phrase "but with gold outflows 

continuing" had been deleted from alternative A but retained in 

alternative B. The facts were not changed by the policy decision 

of the Committee, he said, and if the statement would be warranted 

under the policy indicated by alternative B he thought it belonged 

in alternative A also, 

In response to Mr. Mitchell's question about the prospects 

for gold outflows, Mr. Coombs said there was likely to be another 

sizable reduction in U.S. gold holdings by the end of this month.



6/15/65 -84

As he had indicated earlier, France probably would buy at least 

$50 million of gold in June, and there also might be purchases by 

other countries.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked if the staff would explain the 

rationale underlying the deletion of the phrase in question from 

alternative A and its retention in alternative B.  

Mr. Noyes responded that there was no question about the 

facts; there had been some gold outflow recently and some was still 

in prospect. At the time the draft was drawn up, however, it 

appeared that the rate of outflow would be somewhat less this 

month than it had been earlier. The staff had felt that members 

who favored further firming would do so partly because some outflow 

was continuing, and therefore would want to refer to that fact in 

the directive. Accordingly, the reference was retained in alternative 

B. It was omitted from alternative A, on the other hand, because 

it was thought that members favoring no change in policy would tend 

to place primary emphasis in their thinking on the reduction in the 

rate of outflow, and might consider the reference to be no longer 

appropriate.  

Several members indicated that they thought the reference 

in question should be retained in the directive even if the decision 

was to make no change in policy.



6/15/65

The Chairman then proposed that the Committee vote on a 

directive based on alternative A, but incorporating the phrase 

relating to gold outflows, including the statement that the 

domestic expansion was continuing at a slower pace than in the 

first quarter, and omitting the final parenthetical clause.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate continuing expansion of 
the domestic economy, although at a somewhat slower 
pace than in the first quarter, and maintenance of 
earlier improvement in our international balance of 
payments, but with gold outflows continuing. In 
this situation, it remains the Federal Open Market 
Committee's current policy to reinforce the voluntary 
restraint program to strengthen the international 
position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence 
of inflationary pressures, while accommodating moderate 
growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 
supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 

operations over the next four weeks shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining about the same conditions 
in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks.  

Mr. Hayes said that, while his inclination toward further 

firming was clear from his earlier comments, he had voted in favor 

of the directive because he thought that under present conditions 

there was much to be said for unanimity in any policy action the

-85-



5/15/65 -86

Committee might take. Messrs. Ellis and Shepardson commented that 

they wanted to associate themselves with Mr. Hayes' statement.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, July 13, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Assistant Secretary



CONFIDENTIAL (FR) ATTACHMENT A 

June 14, 1965.  

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive 
for Consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee 

at its Meeting on June 15, 1965 

Alternative A (no change in policy) 

The economic and financial developnents reviewed at this 
meeting indicate continuing expansion of the domestic economy and 
maintenance of earlier improvement in our international balance 
of payments. In this situation, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's current policy to reinforce the voluntary 
restraint program to strengthen the international position of 
the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, 
while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, bank 
credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
over the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to main
taining about the same conditions in the money market as have 
prevailed in recent weeks (, while minimizing such downward 
pressures on Treasury bill rates as may develop).  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate continuing expansion of the domestic economy 
with some upward pressure on prices, a large expansion of bank 
credit thus far this year, and maintenance of earlier improvement 
in our international balance of payments, but with gold outflows 
continuing. In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market 
Committee's current policy to reinforce the voluntary restraint 
program to strengthen the international position of the dollar, 
and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, by moderating 
growth in the reserve base and bank credit.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to attaining 
slightly firmer conditions in the money market.


