









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of :he Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 12, 1965, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balderston 
Daane 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Irons, Alternate Member

Messrs. Hickman and Clay, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Patterson, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Garvy, Holland, Koch, 

Taylor, and Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors



10/12/65 -2

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board cf Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hilkert and Heflin, First Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia 
and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Eastburn, Mann, Jones, Tow, Green, and 
Craven, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Sternlight, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis 

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange ma:ket conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies 

for the period September 28 through October 6, 1965, and a supplemental 

report for October 7 through 11, 1965. Copies of these reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the gold stock would remain unchanged again this week for 

the eleventh week in a row. On the London gold market, the price 

had been allowed to move up to nearly $35.17 on September 30 in an 

effort to delay or discourage Chinese buying. Since then the Russians 

had appeared as heavy sellers and the price had been marked down 

sharply to $35.10 this morning.



10/12/65

As a result of Russian sales totaling $218 million last 

week, Mr. Coombs continued, the Gold Pool had been able to liquidate 

completely its deficit of $170 million and to retain another $47 

million in reserve. As the Pool had paid back gold previously 

drawn from the various countries, the U.S. Stabilization Fund had 

benefited to the extent of somewhat more than $84 million. Unless 

the United States received other gold orders in addition to a 

prospective sale of $35 million to France, it should be able not 

only to get through October without having to show a reduction 

in its gold stock, but might end the month with nearly $90 million 

of gold in the Stabilization Fund.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs said, sterling continued 

to be the center of attention as it moved up above par for the first 

time in more than two years. That move through the parity level 

was deliberately engineered by the Bank of England, one day before 

the scheduled announcement that the U.K. had run an actual balance 

of payments surplus during the second quarter of this year. That 

favorable news had helped to sustain the rate above par since then, 

although the inflow of dollars to the Bank of England had pretty 

well dried up during the past five market days. The market appeared 

to have been awaiting the trade figures for September, which were 

released this morning. The new figures showed no gain in exports 

but an appreciable dip in imports, with the result that the trade 

deficit was reduced by $62 million. Since the operation in support



10/12/65 -4

of sterling was launched on September 10, the Bank of England had 

taken in a total of about $560 million, and further gains might well 

be registered this week.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether the British had indicated their 

intentions with respect to repayment of their drawings on the swap 

line with the System. Mr. Coombs replied that the British plans 

in this connection were not yet firm, but he assumed that they 

would be punctilious about repayments, using a substantial part--perhaps 

50 per cent or more--of their reserve gains each month to reduce 

their debt to the System. There was an important psychological 

advantage to be gained from showing additions to reserves, of course, 

and they would be balancing one objective against the other.  

In response to a question, Mr. Coomos said that the British 

had drawn the whole $750 million available under the swap with the 

System, starting in June and making further drawings in July and 

August. Their first drawing, of $275 million, already had been 

renewed and they were likely to renew all or part of the second 

drawing of $250 million that would mature soon, 

Mr. Mitchell then asked whether there was any way of knowing 

the extent to which the earlier strength in the technical position 

of sterling had already been dissipated.  

Mr. Coombs said he thought that some of the technical 

strength had been dissipated by the rise in the sterling exchange



10/12/65 -5

rate. He personally would have preferred to see the rate move 

up somewhat more slowly. On the other hand, the short positions 

in sterling had been so enormous--perhaps on the order of $2 or 

$3 billion--that substantial further flows to Britain could be 

expected if the British did not relax their efforts and if there 

were no unfavorable developments in the news. With good luck 

those flows could easily continue throug the year end. Sterling 

would then move into its seasonally strong period, so that the 

flows might continue into the spring months.  

In response to a question by Mr. Hickman, Mr. Coombs said 

the British had been considering the advantages and disadvantages 

of allowing the exchange rate to continue to rise. Each rate 

increase drew in additional funds but if they let rates continue 

up they would soon run out of space and might suffer some reaction.  

His own thinking was that for the time being they might hold the 

rate somewhere between $2.8010 and $2.8040 and not try to ratchet 

it up further. It was important, he felt, to avoid pushing the 

rate up to an artificial and unsustainable level.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
September 28 through October 11, 1965, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



10/12/65 -6

Mr. Coombs then requested Committee approval of renewal 

for another three months of the $100 million swap arrangement with 

the Bank of France, which would mature on November 10, 1965.  

Renewal for a further period of 
three months of the $100 mi lion swap 
arrangement with Bank of France, as 
recommended by Mr. Coombs, was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that it might be necessary to renew 

a $40 million equivalent swap drawing on the National Bank of 

Belgium, maturing November 10, 1965; a $25 million equivalent 

drawing on the Netherlands Bank, maturing November 12, 1965; and 

a $7.5 million swap of guilders against marks, with the Bank for 

International Settlements, maturing November 1, 1965. In each 

case these would be first renewals.  

Renewal of the two drawings and of 
the guilder-mark swap, each for a further 
period of three months, was noted without 
objection.  

Mr. Coombs then remarked that a $250 million drawing by 

the Bank of England on the System, to which he had referred earlier, 

would mature on October 29, 1965, for the first time. He hoped 

the Committee would be prepared to approve its renewal, in whole or 

in part, if the Bank of England should so request.  

Possible renewal for a further period 
of three months of part or all of the $250 

million drawing by Bank of England under 
its standby swap arrangement with the System 
was noted without objection.



10/12/65

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee the regular weekly report of open 

market operations and money market conditions for the week ended 

October 6, and a supplemental report summarizing highlights of the 

entire period from September 28 through October 11, 1965. Copies 

of the reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

At the time of the Committee's last meeting two 
weeks ago, the money market was in motion, with short
term interest rates pushing persistently higher despite 
very sizeable System purchases of Treasury bills. In 
sympathy with developments in the short end, longer-term 
interest rates were also tending higher, following a 
period around mid-September when longer markets had 
regained some stability after an upward rate movement.  
In pursuit of the Committee's objective to maintain 
current money market conditions, the Account Management 
continued its substantial purchases of Treasury bills 
for several additional days, more than offsetting the 
absorption of reserves through market factors and con
tributing significantly to the stabilizing of short rates 
that has developed in about the past ten days.  

The nigh point of bill rates came shortly after the 
Committee's last meeting--around September 29-30--as the 
market looked forward to the regular auction of three- and 
six-month bills the following Monday and the auction of 
$4 billion of tax anticipation bills the day after that.  
By September 30, rates began edging down--but at first 
this mainly reflected scarcities in the wake of heavy 
System buying, while the underlying atmosphere continued 
rather skittish. Thus, dealers bid quite cautiously in 
the regular weekly auction on October 4, and were particularly 
hesitant about taking on the six-month bill which is close 
in maturity to the March tax bill.  

Noticeably greater confidence returned to the 
market by Tuesday, October 5, and there was fairly



10/12/65

good bidding for the tax bills at lower rates than 
had been anticipated in the market a few days earlier.  
With tax and loan deposits expected to be worth perhaps 
40-45 basis points for the March bill and some 25 or 
more basis points for the June issue, banks acquired 
the bills at average rates of about 3.78 and 3.94 per cent 
respectively, while trading in the secondary market began 
in the 4 20 to 4.24 per cent area for each bill. Thus 
far, secondary distribution of the bills has been 
proceeding smoothly in the generally more stable market 
atmosphere of recent days. Dealers' positions in bills, 
which were sharply depleted in advance of the tax bill 
auction, rose by about $1.1 billion last Wednesday 
and Thursday as the dealers willingly absorbed a portion 
of the tax bills taken by banks in Tuesday's auction.  
As far as we can tell, banks still hold a large part of 
their tax bill awards and there nay be additional efforts 
to sell these into the market, particularly as the 
Treasury calls on its tax and loan deposits. In turn, 
the dealers' appetite for these and other bills will 
depend inportantly on the course of corporate and other 
demand for bills in ensuing weeks. While distribution 
is thus proceeding well up to now, there is still some 
distance to be traveled.  

In yesterday's regular bill auction, the three- and 
six-month issues were sold at average rates of about 4.01 
and 4.18 per cent, respectively, up 3 and 5 basis points 
from two weeks ago. I should mention with respect to the 
six-month bill that yesterday's bidding was quite strong, 
and we learned late yesterday afternoon that the System 
received only a partial award on its tender to get those 
bills. For the three-month bill the rate rise from two 
weeks ago is quite modest considering that we are now 
dealing with a January bill rather than a late December 
issue. The upward rate adjustment in the six-month area 
reflects the increased supply of bills in that maturity 
area as a result of the tax bill sale. The outstanding 
three- and six-month bills closed at bids of 3.98 and 4.17 
per cent (bid) yesterday, down from highs of 4.05 and 4.21 
per cent during the two-week period. The one-year bill, 
which has become rather scarce in the past two weeks, was 
bid at 4.15 per cent at the close yesterday, down from a 
high of 4.24 per cent on September 29, and below the 4.20 
per cent level of two weeks ago. In general, then, rates 
are about back at the levels of two weeks ago, and in a



10/12/65

much steadier market atmosphere. The market remains 
susceptible, however, to sudden snifts in sentiment, 
in the event of new economic, financial, or other 
developments.  

Virtually all of the System's operations in the 
past two weeks involved outright purchases or sales of 
Treasury bills. While at the time of the last meeting 
it appeared that some part of the current reserve need 
could appropriately be met through purchases of coupon 
issues and short-term repurchase agreements, it devel
oped as the period moved along that the Committee's 
rate and reserve objectives could be best served by 
concentrating on outright bill purchases. Toward the 
end of the interval, unobtrusive outright sales or 
redemptions of bills were arranged, to absorb currently 
and prospectively redundant reserves.  

In moving readily to supply reserves to the market 
thrcugh substantial Treasury bill purchases, a somewhat 
more comfortable tone has emerged in the money market.  
The availability of Federal funds has increased and 
some sizable trading has taken place at 4 per cent or 
below, although most trading has continued at 4-1/8 
per cent. Estimated net borrowed reserves in the week 
ending October 6 were down very sharply--to only $40 
million--but this would convey an exaggerated impression 
of easing as an unusually high amount of excess reserves 
was held at country banks and was inaccessible to the 
central money market. Borrowing from the Reserve Banks, 
in fact, was little changed from the preceding week when 
net borrowed reserves were over $200 million. This week 
borrowing appears to be running a little lighter.  

Longer-term markets tended to move sympathetically 
with the shorter area during the recent period--first 
moving lower in price and then recovering to show little 
net change for the period. Investor activity was light, 
but with dealers seeking to keep positions fairly close 
to "even" in a period of uncertainty over the likely 

course of interest rates there was some tendency for 
even modest investor interest to produce sizable day
to-day price changes. A case in point is the 4-1/4 
per cent Treasury bond of 1992, which closed two weeks 
ago at 99-2/32 bid, touched a low of 98-22/32 on 
September 29, and closed yesterday at 99-12/32.



10/12/65

There was little net price change in the corporate 
and tax-exempt bond markets during the period, but a 
somewhat more confident atmosphere emerged in these 
areas, too. The near-term supply of rew corporate 
issues is now rather modest, but some sizable State and 
local offerings will come in the next few weeks and the 
extent of commercial bank appetite for additional tax
exempt holdings is something of a question mark.  

The next item on the Treasury financing agenda is 
the refunding of November 15 maturities--of which some 
$3.3 billion is publicly held. Advisory groups will 

meet with the Treasury on October 26 and 27, with terms 

probably to be announced on the latter day. Current 

market yields pretty much dictate an offering in the 

shorter-term area. The Treasury may seek at the same 

time to raise some additional cash--and in any case a 

cash borrowing would be needed soon after the November 15 

payment date for the refunding.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 

and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 

the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities and bankers' acceptances 

during the period September 28 through 

October 11, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distribu:ed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Noyes made the following statement on economic conditions: 

The current performance of the economy continues to 

be best characterized, it seems to me by the word "strong"-

without much qualification one way or the other. Both an 

inflationary surge and an adjustment that would stall our 

forward momentum remain possibilities for the future, but 

it is very hard to show that either of these unpleasant 

prospects is imminent.  

A survey of recent movements in the broad aggregate 

measures of output, production, employment, and prices

-10-



10/12/65

indicates that the situation leaves little to be desired.  
In almost every case the figures have moved in accord 
with the most optimistic expectations. GNP in the 
third quarter will probably be up at least as much as 
was generally anticipated--a $10 billion increase to 
$675 or $676 billion seems as good a guess as any at 
this point. The global unemployment figure confounded 
the experts by breaking through the 4.5 per cent level 
to 4.4 in September, and other labor market data generally 
confirm this strong showing. Industrial production, in 
the aggregate, seems to be about on track--with the 
September figures moderately depressed by the combined 
effects of the steel settlement and hurricane Betsy.  
While the calculations have not been completed, it 
appears likely that the production index will be down 
about one percentage point. Retail sales were also off 
a little, due mostly to a decline in seasonally-adjusted 
auto sales that may well stem from the difficulty of making 
precise seasonal adjustments during the model change-over 
period. At the same time, the broad indexes of both 
wholesale and retail prices have shown little net change.  

With all the talk of inflation and of price advances, 
it is important to remember that average prices of whole
sale industrial commodities are only about 1.5 per cent 
above year-ago levels and non-food commodities at retail 
are up only .5 per cent. This may be more than any of 
us would like, but it is an enviable record against our 
own historical experience or that of other countries.  

As I have had occasion to say many times in the last 
four years, it is hard to find much fault with the performance 
of the economy--the question is how best to maintain that 
performance. There was complete unanimity among the 
distinguished academic consultant who were here last week 
that this was the question, despite their differences as 
to the answer.  

For this Committee, essentially the same question can 
be restated in more complex form. If we look behind these 
broad aggregates which have moved in such a satisfactory 
way, is there evidence that distortions or imbalances have 
developed which could be halted or reversed by action on 
the part of the Federal Reserve to attain money market 
conditions different from those which have in fact come 
about and now prevail? Would either firmer or less firm 
money market conditions enhance the chances of prolonging, 
and hopefully perpetuating, healthy expansion? And, if so, 
how much of a change is appropriate?

-11-



10/12/65

The case for moving actively to ease some of the 
pressure that has recently developed in money and 
capital markets seems to me to be the hardest to 
support. Granting that we still have some unemployed 
and underemployed resources, it is doubtful that we 
could reduce that margin more rapidly than we have 
been, without serious danger to the price structure and 
the sustainability of the expansion. Both business and 
consumer expenditure plans are buoyant. Hence, the case 
for easing seems to me to rest heavily on the possibility 
of a fairly imminent unwinding of the inventory positions 
that have been built up in the last twelve months or so.  
As you all know, this has worried me for some time and 
it still worries me, but I can find no convincing evidence 
that the people who actually hold the inventory share 
my concern.  

Setting aside rates of expansion in financial 
magnitudes themselves, as coming within the purview of 
Mr. Brill's subsequent remarks, the case from the 
nonEinancial side for a tighter policy also seems to me 
to fall short of persuasiveness. There are unquestionably 
imbalances in our present expansion, but it is hard to 
demonstrate that they are more likely to be corrected if 
credit is less readily available. Bear in mind that I 
am not speaking here of financial markets themselves, 
but of the basic relationships between production and 
consumption of various types of goods and services. An 
example is the disparity in the expansion of output as 
between business equipment and consumer goods, which 
shows up so dramatically on production index charts.  

Some tempering of the rate of expansion in business 
equipment production and some acceleration in production 
of consumer goods would seem essential to balanced growth 
in the period ahead. But it is not apparent, at least to 

me, that tighter credit would contribute to this sort of 

adjustment. I have also looked hard for some evidence 
that the pattern of resource utilization is being 
distorted by inflationary expectations. If this were 

happening, it would, in my judgment, make the strongest 

case for a more restrictive policy, but I am unable to 

find any convincing evidence that it is happening now.  
In fact, the results of a recent McGraw-Hill survey seem 
to deny it explicitly.

-12-



10/12/65

Thus, I would conclude that recent developments in 
the nonfinancial sectors do not in themselves provide 
sufficient grounds for a change in policy, one way or the 
other.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Over the past month or so market interest rates have 
bounced around quite a bit, responding in part to seasonal 
ebbs and flows of funds and in part to rumors, official 
statements, semi-official interpretations of official 
statements, and fears of new official actions or statements.  
In this context, it has become fashionable for some observers 
to describe the state of financial markets as nervous, and to 
attribute the generally higher level of interest rates now 
prevailing to "market expectations." In the limited time 
available this morning, I would like to present an altex
native interpretation. Specifically, I would advance two 
hypotheses: 

(a) That a substantial degree of monetary restraint 
already exists, and that the higher range within which 
interest rates are now fluctuating is the result primarily 
of recent and prospective supply-demand relationships, not 
only or even mainly dependent on expectational factors; 

(b) That even under the present stance of policy with 
respect to availability of reserves, upward pressure on 
rates is likely to persist, and probably to intensify.  

Turning to the first of these hypotheses, that substan
tial restraint already exists, let me retrace a bit of 
financial history. Earlier this year, the level and 
structure of interest rates was partially shielded from the 
impact of burgeoning private credit demands by several 
factors. The increases in time deposit rates following 
the late 1964 increase in Q ceilings inundated banks with 
funds in the first two months of the year; even after 
slipping a bit in the spring, time and savings deposit 
inflows remained high. Second, banks accommodated their 
private customers by consistent and large reductions in 
their holdings of Government securities. Over the first 
half of the year, banks liquidated almost $4 billion of 
Government securities--6 per cent of their portfolios of 

these issues. Third, banks worked down their excess 
reserves a bit and went into debt to the Fed substantially,

-13-



10/12/65

with borrowings rising from $300 million in January to 
about $500 million by mid-year.  

In addition to these maneuvers to find the resources 
to accommodate customer loan demands, banks were aided by 
the System's expansion in nonborrowed reserves, which grew 
over the first half of the year at about the same rate as 
in 1964. And the Treasury helped moderate rate pressures 
by reducing the marketable debt substantially; the nonbank 
public didn't have to absorb many Government securities, 
on net, over this period.  

Even so, private credit demands outpaced supplies of 
funds, and there was a gradual diffusion of restraint 
through most financial markets. It showed up in rising 
rates on Federal funds and CDs at the short end, and in 
increases in corporate and municipal bond yields at the 
long end. Increasingly as the year progressed, there were 
reports of bank rationing of credit and of more restrictive 
nonprice terms on bank loans.  

Over the summer, supply-demand relationships tilted 
further in the direction of restraint. Private credit 
demands remained strong, partly because the steel wage 
negotiation developments encouraged further inventory 
accumulation and partly because of continued strength in 
consumer spending and corporate capital investment. Banks 
had to scramble for funds, and while they were able to 
garner a larger share of the savings flow--at the expense 
of other savings institutions--the Fed became a less 
accommodating source of funds. Nonborrowed reserves 
actually declined over the summer months. Borrowings 
didn't rise much, as increasingly banks felt that they 
had worn out their welcome at the discount window.  

To accommodate customers, banks had to continue to 
liquidate Governments, but now there was less of an offset 
from Treasury operations. Expanding revenues permitted 
the Treasury to stay away from the market for new money, 
but it was not able to retire debt at the pace of the 
first half year.  

In this context, it is no wonder that interest rates 

reacted strongly when the Treasury returned to the market 
for its fall seasonal cash needs, with prospects of 
additional financing requirements occasioned by military 

developments in the Far East. And it is no wonder that 
bank lending oFficers have been reporting to us significant 

tightening in lending policies.

-14-



10/12/65

My second hypothesis is that the financial situation 
is not likely to ease; if anything, upward rate pressures 
are likely to intensify under present conditions of 
reserve availability, even if economic activity continues 
to expand at only a moderate pace. There is not a simple 
relationship between GNP and financial flows, particularly 
in the short run. Changing structure of expenditures and 
the state of liquidity of spending sectors--as well as 
shifts in expectations--can create financial pressures 
that have no immediate counterpart in goods and services 
markets. So far, business loan demand has been maintained 
at surprising strength, rising about as rapidly in September 
as in August, even with industrial production declining as 
steel inventory liquidation got underway. Plant and 
equipment expenditures are continuing to rise, while 
internal generation of funds appears to be leveling off 
and liquidity is already reduced. All in all, corporate 
financing demands are likely to continue strong. Consumer 
credit expansion should also continue if auto sales hold 
their recent pace. And Federal financing demands over 
the balance of the year will be substantial, even without 
unexpected military drains, for the Treasury is now running 
closer to the wind with its cash balance. A conservative 
summing of prospective credit needs suggests that actual 
supply-demand pressures in financial markets are likely 
to be stroger over the next few months than they were this 
summer and fall.  

What would be the appropriate stance of policy, if the 

above analysis of present and prospective financial 
conditions is correct? Mr. Noyes' appraisal of prospects 

for the real economy--in which I concur--suggests to me 

that it would be reasonably safe to accommodate at current 

rates the credit demands likely to accompany this sort of 

activity outlook. The odds now favor some tranquility in 

the real sector of the economy. We've gotten through a 

period of extraordinary demands with nothing worse than 

a price creep. Short of introduction of a major military 

spending program, it's hard to see anything on the horizon 

that would significantly accelerate this price creep.  

Symptoms of over-ebullience may emerge--the stock market 

shows signs of becoming one--but, by and large, business 

and consumer spending plans seem predominantly on the strong 

but cautious side.

-15-



10/12/65 -16

I agree also that there are some important elements 
of imbalance in the economy, particularly as between 
capacity and final demands, but I fail to see how a general 
tool like monetary policy could correct these structural 
imbalances without slowing an expansion that is not excessive 
in the aggregate. Over the near cerm, considering the 
favorable prospects for further noninflationary expansion, 
the pressures already extant in financial markets, and the 
financial pressures looming ahead, it would not seem 
appropriate to me for the System to intensify financial 
restraint, 

Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Brill whether he thought the current level 

of the prime rate was affecting the pattern of flows in credit markets.  

Mr. Brill replied that it was quite likely that businesses 

were favoring bank borrowing over capital market financing because 

of the change in rate relationships. But the volume of capital market 

financing had increased recently and long-term rates had already 

risen. If business demands were diverted away from banks they were 

not likely to be satisfied in the capital market at current rate 

levels.  

Mr. Daane asked whether Mr. Brll thought it would be possible 

to maintain the current degree of rigidity and artificiality in the 

interest rate structure in view of the financial pressures now 

existing and the intensification of those pressures that he (Mr. Brill) 

foresaw.  

Mr. Brill replied that rates undoubtedly would be pushed 

upward unless the System accommodated the expected credit demands.  

In a sense, the present rate structure might be considered to have



10/12/65 -17

been artificially produced by the System's policy with respect to the 

provision of reserves; both total and nonborrowed reserves had 

declined during the summer months.  

Mr. Hayes then asked whether Mr. Brill would agree that the 

prime rate, which had not changed since 1960, was an example of an 

artificial interest rate. Mr. Brill commented that banks had been 

shading interest charges upward even though the prime rate had not 

changed. The overall average rate on bank :oans seemed to have 

remained generally level because of the increasing use of bank loans 

by prime customers.  

Mr. Hickman noted that the declines in total and nonborrowed 

reserves in August and September and the recent increases in interest 

rates had been associated with roughly stable levels of net borrowed 

reserves and borrowings. He asked whether Mr. Brill thought those 

trends would continue if net borrowed reserves and borrowings were 

maintained at about current levels.  

Mr. Brill replied that he thought the upward trend in interest 

rates was likely to continue. The reserve relationships to which 

Mr. Hickman had referred might be reversed if there was a change in 

the structure of bank liabilities involving a shift from time to 

demand deposits, but that seemed unlikely. The burden of his inter

pretation, however, was that a continuation of present policy with 

respect to net borrowed reserves probably would result in higher 

interest rates.



10/12/65 -18

Mr. Maisel then asked what factors underlay the decline in 

nonborrowed reserves during the summer when marginal reserves had 

been about unchanged.  

Mr. Brill said he did not have any ready explanation for that 

development, but he thought the recent sharp decline in Government 

deposits was a factor. Mr. Holmes agreed. He added that the total 

and nonborrowed reserve figures were seasonally adjusted and he 

strongly suspected that imperfect allowance for seasonal factors 

would be part of the explanation.  

Mr. Hickman concurred in the view that the change in Government 

deposits was important. He noted that the Treasury had remained out 

of the market earlier in the year when, in his judgment, it should 

have been borrowing, and now was belatedly coming in.  

Mr. Brill remarked that there had been some sentiment in favor 

of Treasury borrowing during the summer but a decision against it had 

been made because developments in Vietnam had suggested to the market 

that Federal spending might be rising rapidly. No one then was quite 

clear as to what was going to happen tc miliiary spending, and there 

was some feeling that a financing operation, particularly at a time 

when the Treasury's balance was quite large, would mislead the market 

with respect to the Treasury's expectations on that score.  

Mr. Swan suggested that one factor serving to explain the 

reserve developments Mr. Maisel had mentioned might have been the



10/12/65

large gains in time deposits in July and August, which permitted a 

given volume of reserves to do more work. Mr. Balderston commented 

that he thought the time deposit change was an important part of the 

explanation.  

Mr. Hersey presented the following statement on the balance 

of payments: 

Straws in the wind that can tell us something about 
month-to-month variations in the balance of payments look 
on the whole more auspicious today than they did two weeks 
or six weeks ago. To mention a few: the August export 
total looks very encouraging; the August (as well as the 
July) impcrt figure is low enough, even when qualified and 
corrected, to suggest that the leveling out--or slower rise-
which we had expected might occur in U.S. imports in the 
second half year is going to occur; new Canadian security 
issues in the United States, though large in September, will 
be relatively small in the weeks ahead; and, finally, the 
available weekly data on reserves and liquid liabilities to 
foreigners suggest a considerably smaller "regular transac
tions" deficit in September than in August.  

It is quite impossible to build up a consistent picture 
of the whcle and the parts of our payments position in any 
one month from straws in the wind like these. Years of 
experience with monthly ups and downs leave us no sensible 
choice but agnosticism about the meaning of monthly figures.  

For the third quarter as a whole, the still imcomplete 
data on settlement items suggest a seasonally adjusted 
deficit of perhaps $300 to $350 million on the "regular 

transactions" basis. A quarterly deficit of this size would 
be of the same order of magnitude as the deficit in the 
first half of 1965--which, blown up to an annual rate, was 
$1.3 billion.  

On the "official settlements" basis, the deficit in 
the first half was at an annual rate of $0.9 billion. This 
was less than on the other basis mainly because military 
export advance receipts are to be counted as reducing the 
"official settlements" deficit rather than financing it.  

But in the third quarter, even without assuming any more 
net advance receipts on military sales, the "official 
settlements" balance may turn out to have been a surplus--

-19-



10/12/65

perhaps of $100 million or more. Here, in the third quarter, 
the difference between the two bases was due mainly to a 
very large buildup of foreign commercial banks' balances 
in the United States (including those of U.S. bank branches).  
This inflow was associated in part with the more-than
seasonal easing of the Euro-dollar market in August, and 
it was associated also, no doubt, with the movements out 
of sterling that were still taking place on a large scale 
at that time. In September, with recovery in the sterling 
market and tightening in the Euro-dollar market, there seems 
to have been a net withdrawal of foreign commercial bank 
balances from the United States, though perhaps no more than 
would be seasonally normal in September. In September, 
therefore, unlike August, the "official settlements" balance 
may have been once more a deficit, seasonally adjusted; and 
on the whole that is the likely prospect for the coming 
months too.  

We might sum up the evidence for the third quarter by 
saying that, apart from a slowing down in the repatriations 
of liquid funds and bank credit as the voluntary programs 
got a litle older, and apart from side effects of the 
sterling situation, changes in the U.S. payments position 
since the spring do not seem to have been particularly 
significant. The abnormal surplus of the second quarter-
and of July and August on the "official settlements" basis-
is over, and deficits seem to be still the order of the day.  

But I cannot avoid drawing some comfort from the July 
and August export figures. To me they seem an irdication of 
continuing underlying strength in our export position, simply 
because I cannot find any special reasons in the demand 
situations, in other countries why our exports should have 
been turning up this summer. Looking ahead, too, the world 
demand picture looks at least as strong as it did a few 
months ago. A decline in British imports may still be in 
the offing, but at least the first corner has been turned 
in the return of confidence without a sharp contraction in 
activity. The rapid rise in German imports will eventually 
taper off, but there are increases in Japanese and French 
imports still to come as offsets.  

So the next couple of months' U.S. export figures will 

be something to look for eagerly. We shall also have to 
watch whether U.S. bank credit outflows will or will not 
build up more than seasonally in the fourth quarter--as they 

could without passing the target.

-20-



10/12/65

If some further moderate net improvement in the payments 
position should materialize, what would be its implications 
for policy? The chief implication, as I see it, would be 
to restore and strengthen hopes that a lasting adjustment 
of the payments position may be achievable via a combination 
of current account improvement as we maintain price stability 
and moderation of capital outflows as domestic demands rise, 
without our having to set our feet on the slippery roads of 
permanent capital controls or of an interest equalization 
tax broadened beyond its present scope. For Federal Reserve 
policy specifically, the implication would be to validate and 
justify the weight that has been given to balance of payments 
objectives in the long-run strategy of policy. But the 
short-run tactics of policy, it seems to me, ought to be 
completely unaffected by moderate changes in the payments 
position. Whatever monetary policy can do for our external 
payments equilibrium is something that can best work itself 
out over an extended period of time, with the help of a 

domestic economic expansion that is inflationless and 

recessionless. On this reasoning, short-run decisions to 

modify monetary policy should continue to be based simply on 

an appraisal of the domestic situation, without much attention 

to short-run variations in the payment, position.  

Today, this conclusion is all the more relevant since 
the moderate improvement in the payments position of which I 
have been speaking is still a gleam in the eye, not a live 
fact.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed a 

question suggested for consideration by the Committee, and comments 

thereon. These materials were as follows: 

Money market relationships.--Assuming a continuation 

of current monetary policy, what range of money market 

conditions, interest rates, reserve availability, and 

reserve utilization by the banking system might prove 

mutually consistent in coming weeks? 

Treasury bill rates have retreated somewhat from the 

peaks reached at the end of September. Bill rates had 

adjusted upward in the latter part of that month when the 

market first reacted to the announcement of a $4 billion 

Treasury tax bill auction in a period of taut money market

-21-



10/12/65

conditions, and against the background of expectations of 
continuing strong credit demands and rumors of a discount 
rate increase. The subsequent decline in rates represented 
a response to a sharp drop in dealer bill positions occa
sioned by large-scale System and renewed corporate buying 
and some easing of pressures on central money market banks.  
The demand for the new tax bills in the secondary market 
was somewhat better than expected.  

Assuming net borrowed reserves in the neighborhood of 
$100 to $150 million in the coming three weeks, the 
outstanding 3-month bill, which was at 4 per cent at the 
market close on Friday, may be expected to be within a 
3.95-4.10 per cent range. Any slackening of public demand 
for bills would likely push rates upward from current 
levels partly because the System will be a net seller in 
the next two weeks and partly because dealer positions 
have been rebuilt, largely through purchases of the new 
tax bills from banks.  

Yields on U.S. Government bonds have moved downward 
in sympathy with bill rates in recent days, while corporate 
and municipal yields have tended to stabilize. If short-term 
rates remain relatively stable and the corporate new issue 
calendar remains light in October, long-term yields are not 
likely to adjust upward further in the period immediately 
ahead. However, in the U.S. Government securities market 
investor demand still appears light and in the municipal 
market the calendar seems to be building up again. In 
general, both bill and bond markets still have an underlying 

cautious tone and remain susceptible to unfavorable jolts 
to market psychology.  

The upward interest rate movements in recent months 

have been associated with a reduced rate of bank credit 

expansion. In September business loans increased at about 

the same rate as in July and August, but acquisitions of 

municipal securities were sharply reduced, and security 

loans were liquidated in substantial volume. Total and 

nonborrowed reserves, seasonally adjusted, declined slightly, 

and banks obtained fewer funds through time certificates 

of deposit in September than in the previous two months.  

Rapid growth in bank credit, which resumed in the first 

week of October, may be stronger over the next few weeks

-22-



10/12/65

than in September or August, as banks retain and use for a 
time the additional U.S. Government deposits associated 
with the recent tax and loan account financing. Business 
loan demand may continue to be moderated by further 
liquidation of the earlier build-up in loans to metals and 
finance companies, but underlying credit demands are 
expected co remain strong.  

If bank credit does grow more rapidly in October money 
supply expansion may also continue rapid, although consid
erably slower than the 12 per cent annual rate of increase 
in September when there was a much larger than seasonal 
decline in U.S. Government deposits. For the demand deposit 
component, a growth rate of 4 to 5 per cent continues to 
be the most likely expectation. With longer-term bill rates 
pressing against CD rates, it is likely that time and savings 
deposit expansion will slow somewhat frm the average rate 
of over 16 per cent of the past 3 months.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments ard 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

The business situation has not changed since our last 
meeting, and the outlook remains strong far into 1966.  
Even though the reduction of steel inventories will 
undoubtedly depress various business indicators for some 

weeks more, other expansionary forces in the economy are 

clearly s:rong enough to more than offset this particular 
drag on the advance. On the price front, nothing has 
occurred in the last two weeks to increase our worries 

that inflationary pressures may be building up. Such 

pressures as exist continue to be moderate. As we look 

further ahead, however, growing shortages of skilled labor 

constitute an important threat to price stability. Although 
expected additions to plant capacity may more or less keep 

pace with rising industrial output, the general business 

climate is certainly more conducive to price increases than 

to declines; and even the 1.5 per cent rise in industrial 

wholesale prices in the past year cannot be accepted with 

complacence.

-23-



10/12/65

This concern over prices and costs seems to be 
particularly warranted by the unsatisfactory state of 
our balance of payments and the prospect that we may have 
trouble keeping the U.S. trade surplus up to its present 
level in view of the likelihood that imports will be 
strongly stimulated by the domestic business expansion.  
As I stressed two weeks ago, the basic payments problem 
is highlighted by our inability to come close to equilib
rium in 1965 despite the initial success of the campaign 
to place artificial barriers in the way of most types of 
outward capital flows. Doubtless more could be done to 
damp down direct investment, and this may help in the short 
run; but the effort to reach ultimate equilibrium without 
the need of artificial barriers will, in my judgment, call 
for a strong concerted effort including an appreciable 
contribution by monetary policy.  

Since we met here two weeks ago both President Johnson 
and Secretary Fowler have gone on record with ringing 
assurances to the assembled Fund-Bank Governors that the 
United States will move vigorously to bring its payments 
into balarce. Failure to perform on this promise would 
place the international standing of the dollar in very 
serious jeopardy; and the central bank of the country cannot 
escape an important role in that performance.  

In the field of bank credit, as in that of prices and 
costs, the very latest data do no: suggest any recent 
deterioration in the situation. There may have been some 
slowdown in September, but short-term swings in these 
statistics mean very little. To me the important point 
is that bank credit has advanced over the past six months 
at about the 8 per cent rate which has been typical of the 
1961-64 period and which the Committee has attempted 
unsuccessfully to slow down on several occasions in the 
last couple of years. Business loan demand in general has 
been strorg and is expected to remain so throughout the 
fourth quarter. Banks are responding to liquidity pressures 
and heavy loan demand by stiffening loan terms and by 
selective interest rate increases. Several major New York 
banks feel that market conditions would amply justify an 
increase in the prime rate, which has not moved since 1960; 
but in the light of their belief that such an action would 
meet strong political opposition, they are in effect 
adopting a method of rationing that discriminates against 
small borrowers. Open market interest rates of all 
maturities have moved up considerably in the past month or so.

-24-



10/12/65

While exaggerated market expectations may have contributed 
to the high levels reached about two weeks ago, it seems 
clear to me that the main cause of the rise has been the 
strength cf business and of current and prospective credit 
demands. The money market continues to be in a somewhat 
unsettled state because of uncertainties about interest 
rate developments, compounded by confusing reports of 
official pronouncements on this subject.  

Looking ahead, I think we have a real basis for concern 
about potential inflationary pressures, against a background 
of cumulative large increases in bank credit and a serious 
international payments problem that leaves us little margin 
for assuming inflationary risks. For the moment, we are 
perhaps estopped from any policy change until the market 
has had a little more time to digest the latest Treasury 
offering of tax anticipation bills; but this should not 
take long. In view of recent market developments, little 
room remains for action through open market operations, and 
an increase in the discount rate would seem the most appropriate 
method of signalling a move toward greater firmness in monetary 
policy and validating the firming that has already occurred 
in market rates.  

The only questions in my mind involve timing and the 
size of the discount rate increase--and there is some inter
relationship between timing and size. As to timing, the 
Thursday after next (October 21) would seem to offer the 
last suitable opportunity for quite a while, provided the 
market does not experience more trouble than is evident to 
date in distributing the tax anticipation bills. With the 

November refunding to be announced on October 27, and with 
the Treasury likely to be raising addit.onal needed cash in 
late November, it may well be early or mid-December before 
we shall again be free to move; and even then there may be 

some natural reluctance to make a policy change so close to 

the period of year-end pressures.  
Another reason for prompt action is to dispel the 

unfortunate but widespread notion that the System has lost 

control of monetary policy. Furthermore, interest rates 

on CDs are perilously close to the ceilings under Regulation Q, 
so that the System may find itself, on very short notice, in 

a position where raising of the ceilings is required to prevent 

a problem of considerable gravity for the banks--especially 
those outside of the main money centers. Under more normal 

conditions it might be well to raise the ceilings promptly, 

regardless of whether a discount rate change is imminent,

-25-



10/12/65

if only to dispel the notion that the two actions must 
always be simultaneous. But in the present state of the 
money and capital markets, an increase in Regulation Q 
ceilings without a discount rate move might cause increased 
uncertainty and nervousness. Finally, prompt discount rate 
action would avoid possible difficulties in the event that 
the U.K. authorities should later on be contemplating a 
rate reduction just when we were considering an increase.  

If we do act next week, there is much to be said for 
making the increase 1/4 per cent. For one thing, the 
period between the completion of the recent bill financing 
and the November refunding will be very short indeed, and 
a rise of 1/2 per cent might require rather sharp market 
adjustments and could create a very shaky market atmosphere 
and some sense of having been badly misled by recent official 
pronouncements. There might also be considerable difficulty 
in obtaining much public or political support for the larger 
move, in view of the absence of very recent data pointing 
to an acceleration of price increases or of credit expansion.  
A 1/4 per cent increase next week, on the other hand, might 
be relatively acceptable politically--or so I would hope-
and would just about keep pace with recent market rate 
movements--thus suggesting that money and capital markets 
might well stabilize, with only modest further upward rate 
adjustments.  

The strongest argument against such a small near-term 
move is that anything less than 1/2 per cent, which we have 
thought of in the past as a minimum "normal" increase when 
we are at the 4 per cent level, might seem very halfhearted 
in the eyes of foreign holders of dollars who look to U.S.  
monetary policy to contribute significantly to a bettering 
of our international position. Indeed, I think a 1/2 per 
cent increase is fully justified if we look only at interna
tional factors. But as I have already indicated, the market 
situation is not now favorable for so large an increase-
and we might well have much better ecoromic justification 

for a 1/2 per cent rise two months from now than today, in 
terms of clear-cut domestic statistics on business and 

credit. Hence, in my judgment, a 1/2 per cent move must 
probably be delayed till at least early December.  

I am not sure which of these courses should be pursued, 
nor which would be favored by my Bank's directors; and I 

shall await with interest an expression of views by other 

members of the Committee.

-26-



10/12/65 -27

As for open market operations, I should think we should 
instruct the Manager to confirm a:out the degree of firmness 
that developed in the money market in September, with the 
understanding that if a discount rate increase is carried 
out before our next meeting, considerable leeway for the 
Manager will be desirable.  

As far as the directive is concerned I would be willing 
to accept alternative B, perhaps with the word "confirming" 
substituted for the word "reinforcing." 1/ 

Mr. Ellis remarked that while a considerable variety of new 

monthly data had become available for New England since the meeting of 

the Committee fourteen days ago, they revealed no material deviatior 

from the pattern reported in recent meetings. Business activity in 

New England continued to expand in an atmosphere of confidence.  

As also reported earlier, Mr. Ellis said, New England banks 

continued to reflect customers' preference for accommodation at banks 

rather than in the capital market. In order to provide for their 16 

per cent year-to-year growth in total loans in the past year, District 

weekly reporting member banks had expanded their negotiable certificates 

of deposit by 40 per cent in a market where rates had pushed close to 

the Regulation Q ceiling, In that process, loan-deposit ratios had 

advanced from a year-ago average of 70 per cent for all New England 

member banks to 75 per cent today, four points above the national 

average.  

1/ The two alternative directives prepared by the staff are appended 

to these minutes as Attachment A.



10/12/65 -28

For Boston banks, Mr. Ellis continued, the average loan-deposit 

ratio had reached 77 per cent, with individual banks, of course, 

pushing higher. For the last several months, one of those high-ratio 

banks had each day been a net buyer of Federal funds at a level 

averaging 64 per cent of its required reserves. Of course, that 

"borrowing" by itself consistently exceeded the 100 per cent of 

capital plus 50 per cent of surplus limitation, entirely aside from 

the fact that that bank also had unsecured notes outstanding.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis remarked that the 

shortened interval since the Committee's previous meeting increased 

the appropriateness of concentrating attention on the problem of 

specifying the money market relationships that would be considered 

to be consistent with a general monetary policy objective of "no 

change." Two weeks ago the Committee had directed the Account Manager 

to conduct operations "with a view to maintaining about the current 

conditions in the money market." Unfortunately, the "current 

condition" prevailing at that time included a large element of 

apprehension ard expectation that short-term interest rates, which 

had already moved up several points in the preceding few days, were 

destined to move further, perhaps propelled by a discount rate action.  

The very existence of thoseexpectations and apprehensions blocked a 

clear appraisal of the underlying relationships. The central 

question was, and continued to be, essentially that posed by Mr. Brill 

today; namely, whether the basic strength of the economy, as translated



10/12/65 -29

into increasing credit demands, could be best maintained by accelerated 

injections of reserves to forestall interest rate increases. Or should 

the Committee seek to limit reserve creation to the rate so far 

achieved in 1965--even if market demand so outpaced that rate as to 

lead to interest rate increases in a market where freely fluctuating 

rates were expected to play an essential economic role? 

In Mr. Ellis' judgment, the Committee failed two weeks ago 

to give the Manager guidance of the clarity to which he was entitled, 

and in consequence it had no framework within which it could properly 

praise or criticize his performance. Nevertheless, on the assumption 

that the simple arithmetic of the events in the past two weeks did 

not conceal more than it revealed, he was inclined to approve the 

Manager's resolution of the issues insofar as he (Mr. Ellis) understood 

them. The simple arithmetic reported by the Manager revealed that in 

the last four days of the week in which the Committee last met the 

Manager bought $741 million of Treasury bills on a cash basis. He 

thereby converted the average net borrowed reserve figure for the 

week of October 6 from $260 million projected at the start of the week 

into an expectation of approximately $65 million that finally resulted 

in a published net borrowed reserve figure of $40 million. By injecting 

reserves, the Manager, of course, also supplied reassurance of no 

change in policy. Apparently many of the funds stayed in New York 

banks because those banks ended the week without borrowing--for the



10/12/65 -30

first time in 19 weeks--and they sold Federal funds from strong basic 

positions. In an atmosphere of much banker and official discussion 

about the prime rate, and on the eve of the auction of $4 billion tax 

anticipation bills, bill rates steadied and dealers made substantial 

sales.  

Mr. Ellis was prepared to accept such a course of events as 

having usefully taken some of the excessive speculation out of market 

discussions and as an antidote to the previous two weeks of aberration 

on the high side of a net borrowed reserve target of $150 million.  

At the same time, he urged on the Committee the necessity of clar

ifying for the Manager its choice between limiting interest rate 

advances or limiting the rate of reserve creation if credit demands 

became so intense that such a choice was forced upon the Committee.  

He referred not to the temporary pressures of market speculation, but 

to the underlying pressures of credit demands too intense to be 

satisfied without accelerated creation of reserves.  

For his own part, Mr. Ellis said, he accepted the necessity 

for temporarily abandoning reserve targets from time to time in order 

to dispel exaggerated--and sometimes poorly informed--market specula

tion. As a basic objective, however, he urged a "no change" policy 

expressed in terms of reserve targets. By that he meant a net 

borrowed reserves target centered at $150 million and borrowings 

exceeding $500 million, with an expectation that Federal funds would



10/12/65 -31

hold at 4-1/8 per cent, and that short-term bill rates would hold 

in the 4.00-4.10 per cent range unless market demands built so as 

to move rates slowly upward. He would not intervene to impede slow 

upward rate movements reflecting underlying forces.  

As for the comments on money market relationships that had 

been distributed by the staff, Mr. Ellis noted that the question asked 

for views on mutually consistent money market conditions "assuming a 

continuation of current monetary policy." The second paragraph of 

the comments described some possibly consistent conditions if the 

Committee would accept a slightly lowered and narrowed net borrowed 

reserve target range of $100-$150 million, compared with recently 

accepted target ranges centered at $150 million. Successive re

definitions of "no change" of that sort could in fact move the 

Committee considerably in its policy posture.  

Mr. Ellis said he found neither draft directive adequate in 

meeting even the minimum of directive clarity. Alternative B called 

for "reinforcing the firmer conditions in the money market that 

developed in September." That statement failed on two counts 

First, those firmer conditions were excessive and speculation-based, 

and should not be reestablished. Second, they had already been 

corrected and no longer existed to be reinforced.  

Alternative A, Mr. Ellis continued, had the fault of assuming 

that the conditions prevailing since the last meeting could be



10/12/65 -32

meaningfully averaged and that such an average could in fact serve 

as a "no change" guideline to the Manager. In the Manager's words, 

the money market had been in motion; since the last meeting sharp 

reserve injections had reversed the upward trend of market rates, 

provided the New York banks with net free reserves, held down dealer 

loan rates, and relieved dealers of high inventories of bills. That 

could hardly be characterized as "no change" in the sense that it 

should be continued.  

As a minimum amendment, Mr. Ellis said, and to provide a 

clear and consistent choice between directive alternatives A and B, 

he would suggest revisions of the concluding words of both second 

paragraphs. For alternative A he would propose calling for operations 

". . . with a view to maintaining a firm tone with stable conditions 

in the money market." For alternative B he would suggest ". .. with 

a view to achieving a firmer tone with stable conditions in the money 

market." His own preference was, of course alternative B. However, 

he would postpone discount rate action until market rates tightened, 

if in fact they did.  

Mr. Irons remarked that in the Eleventh District during the 

past two weeks there had been relatively little change in economic 

conditions, which continued strong. Most of the indicators had shown 

strength or slight expansion, including construction contract awards, 

employment, and department store sales. Unemployment had moved down



10/12/65 -33

to about 3.2 per cent, and shortages of some types of labor probably 

were developing.  

In the financial area, Mr. Irons said, bank loans had risen, 

particularly loans to consumers, and bank holdings of Governments 

had increased. Time and savings deposits were strong and banks had 

been active in the Federal funds market, on balance buying a substan

tial volume of funds. Borrowing from the Re.;erve Bank had been 

relatively stable and quite low, but that was because banks were 

getting the funds they needed from other sources.  

With respect to the national situation, Mr. Irons found 

himself in substantial agreement with the remarks of Mr. Noyes and 

the other members of the staff. There had been some improvement in 

money market conditions during the past two weeks, with less nerv

ousness than earlier, and developments had tended to confirm the 

somewhat higher rate pattern that had emerged. The national economy 

certainly was strong and on the whole continued to reflect expansionary 

tendencies. Some of the uncertainties with which the Committee recently 

had been concerned remained--for example, with respect to inventories 

and prices--and there undoubtedly were imbalances in the economy.  

On the whole, however, there was little evidence that such problems 

posed serious dangers at this time, and some might be absorbed in the 

workings of the market.



10/12/65 -34

Mr. Irons said that he would prefer to maintain present 

conditions in the money market at this time. The Committee had 

been exerting some pressure on the market and had some responsibility 

for contributing to the recent degree of firmness. He would not 

like to see a notably firmer posture now, and he would not favor a 

change in the discount rate at present. His thinking with respect to 

money market conditions ran in terms of a Federal funds rate around 

4-1/8 per cent, the Treasury bill rate moving around 4 per cent, and 

borrowings around $500 million. He would attach less importance 

to trying to maintain some fixed figure for net borrowed reserves.  

He hoped such reserves would fluctuate around $150 million, but if 

they were influenced by changes in the distribution of reserves or 

by other special developments, he would not want those developments 

to prevent attainment of the more basic objectives.  

Mr. Irons favored alternative A of the draft directives.  

Although he had not had much opportunity to consider Mr. Ellis' 

proposed amendment to that directive, he thought it would be acceptable 

to him.  

A discussion then ensued of the possible implications for 

open market cperations of the directive language Mr. Ellis had 

proposed, and also of several alternative formulations that were 

advanced. In the course of this discussion Mr. Holmes responded 

to a number of questions. He indicated that he thought market



10/12/65 -35

conditions were firm and relatively stable at the moment, with a 

tendency, if anything, for rates to move somewhat lower, although 

that tendency might prove temporary. He would interpret Mr. Ellis' 

proposed language for alternative A (". . with a view to maintaining 

a firm tone with stable conditions in the money market") as calling 

for maintaining market rates at about their present levels, with 

fluctuations, perhaps, of a few basis point in either direction.  

His interpretation of the proposed alternative B language (" . .  

with a view to achieving a firmer tone with stable conditions in 

the money market") was that it would call for a gradual and orderly 

movement of interest rates to a higher level. The inclusion or 

exclusion of the words "a firm tone" in alternative A might affect 

his interpretation somewhat under certain possible conditions; for 

example, a Federal funds rate around 4-1/8 per cent would seem to 

be implied by :hose words, but such a rate might not prove consistent 

with stability in other money market conditions.  

Mr. Wayne said that he would much prefer the word "orderly" 

to "stable" in Mr. Ellis' formulation of alternative A, in order 

to provide the Manager with necessary flexibility; "stable" implied 

an undesirable degree of rigidity. Mr. Holmes observed that he 

thought there was a real, if fine, distinction between the two words, 

agreeing that "orderly" connoted somewhat more movement in the 

market than "stable."



10/12/65 -36

Chairman Martin commented that he did not favor one suggestion 

that was advanced--to call for maintaining the "existing" tone in 

the money market--on the grounds that market conditions sought should 

not be pin-pointed as those existing at a particular moment in time.  

In his judgment the most important question arising out of the 

discussion was that Mr. Wayne had raised--whether "orderly" was 

preferable to 'stable." 

Following this discussion the go-around resumed with remarks 

by Mr. Swan.  

Mr. Swan said that in view of the short interval since the 

Committee's previous meeting and the fact that the economic situation 

seemed to be little changed in the Twelfth District, he would not 

comment on District developments except to note that one major bank 

had indicated that it expected to add rather substantially to its 

bill position in the near future.  

Mr. Swan agreed with the analyses of the national situation 

that had been made by Messrs. Noyes and Brill, and with their 

recommendations for policy. It seemed to him there had been no 

particular change in the business situation or in financial conditions 

from those the Committee had expected two weeks ago. In addition, 

the Treasury financing schedule had to be considered; there still 

was some distribution of the tax anticipation bills to be accomplished 

and a refunding operation lay ahead. It seemed to him that the



10/12/65 -37

Manager had performed well in dealing with the situation in the 

market, achieving some stability and a leveling off of bill rates.  

For whatever reason, attaining those objectives had required some 

reduction in net borrowed reserves in the latest statement week.  

Mr. Swan hoped that the Committee would decide to make no 

change in policy today, and that, as discussed at the previous 

meeting, it would agree to give primary consideration to the bill 

rate, and to money market rates in general, rather than to a net 

borrowed reserve target. He would favor a bill rate in the 3.95

4.05 per cent range. It would be fine if that objective could be 

attained with net borrowed reserves in the $50-$150 million range, 

but he would not be particularly concerned if a lower level of net 

borrowed reserves were to result. He was impressed by the point 

made earlier that seasonally adjusted nonborrowed reserves had 

declined in August and September, whatever questions might be raised 

about the seasonal adjustment factors. Larger injections of reserves 

than in the past two months might be required if, with time deposit 

rates pressing against their ceilings, time deposits did not expand 

much. It seemed to him, however, that the provision of more reserves 

would be quite consistent with current conditions.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he was somewhat surprised by the 

discussion today regarding the wording of the directive. At the 

previous meeting the Committee had been faced with a real problem of



10/12/65 -38

language, but today the problem did not seem so serious to him. In 

his judgment, the fluctuations in the money market in the last two 

weeks were no greater than in many earlier inter-meeting periods 

when no particular questions had been raisec. He favored accepting 

alternative A of the draft directives as originally submitted. If 

the Committee did not agree, his second choice would be to retain 

the language of the September 28 directive, which called for "main

taining about the current conditions in the money market." Although 

that language involved problems of definition, it seemed better to 

him than to call for a "firm tone" and "stable conditions"; such 

terms would add another dimension to the instructions and would 

undesirably limit the Manager's maneuverability. The staff draft, 

with its reference to conditions "since the previous meeting," 

provided a reasonable range in which the Manager could operate and, 

as he had indicated, was his first choice.  

Mr. Swan concluded by observing that he would not favor a 

change in the discount rate at this time.  

Mr. Galusha said there was nothing in recent information 

about the Ninth District to suggest that the outlook had changed.  

His guess continued to be that moderate economic expansion would 

persist through coming months. Moderation of the weather in the 

western part of the District had improved agricultural prospects 

markedly. With regard to the credit quality, the last examination 

summary continued to indicate no significant change in quality.



10/12/65 -39

Mr. Galusha remarked that if his understanding was correct 

the Committee decided at its last meeting to hold money market 

interest rates at then prevailing levels, or, in other words, to 

resist further increases, even if that necessitated reduction in the 

level of net borrowed reserves. Implicitly, the decision was to 

focus, for the time being anyway, on money market rates and condi

tions, and let net borrowed reserves find their own appropriate 

level. In his opinion the Committee should persist in that approach; 

the instructions to the Account Manager should again be phrased in 

terms of interest rates and money market conditions. Mr. Holmes had 

been able to follow the Committee's instructions last time, and if 

the Committee gave him the same sort of instructions this time, he 

should be able to do as well over the coming three weeks as he had 

in the two just past. In Mr. Galusha's opinion that was very well 

indeed.  

Apropos of the discussion on the directive today, Mr. Galusha 

said he happened to have at hand an article by a colleague from whi-h 

he would like to quote the following: 

In the field of Federal Reserve policy it is possible, 
of course, to give very precise directives to the Manager 
of the open market account. It must be recognized that 
such directives would have to be couched in terms that the 
Manager can in fact execute. They would have to be written 
in terms of the amount and issues of Government securities 
to be bought or sold, regardless of what happens to yields, 
or in terms of yields, without regard to what happens to 
the portfolio. They cannot be written precisely in terms



10/12/65 -40

of both--at the present state of our knowledge. It is 
an elementary error to suppose that they can be written 
precisely in terms of the supply of money, however 
defined, or in terms of some reserve total, be it total 
reserves, excess reserves, free reserves, borrowed 
reserves, or whatever, or in terms of the liquidity of 
the economy--whatever that may mean. The reason is 
that each of these magnitudes is influenced by factors 
over which the Manager has no immediate or direct control, 
and the present state of our knowledge is insufficient to 
predict the behavior of these other factors with sufficient 
accuracy to make appropriate allowances for changes in them.  

I confess that I have on occasion couched a directive-
or voted for a directive couched--in inappropriate terms.  
But this always has been with the knowledge that the Manager 
was present to hear all the discussion that led to the 
formulation of the directive.1/ 

Mr. Galusha went on to say that the question at issue was 

whether the Committee should continue resisting further increases in 

rates and further tightening of money markets. He believed it should.  

He favored no change in policy at this time. A sharp increase in 

interest rates had already been experienced and there was nothing 

in the present economic outlook to suggest tnat further increases 

would be appropriate.  

Nor, more particularly, did Mr. Galusha believe the discount 

rate should be increased now. Perhaps what some who advocated dis

count rate action had in mind was making an increase in the prime rate 

possible--or necessary. There was no denying that the prime rate was 

out of line, and if that rate had been increased earlier the Committee 

1/ The quotation is from a lecture by Mr. Bopp, entitled "Confessions 
of a Central Banker," published in the volume, Essays in Monetary 
Policy in Honor of Elmer Wood (University of Missouri Press, 1965).



10/12/65 -41

would be more aware than it was of how much monetary restraint it 

had already effected. If it could be guaranteed that an increase 

in discount rates would produce only an increase in the prime rate 

there would be less reason to oppose such action. But that would 

be unlikely. All of the available evidence suggested that when 

discount rates were increased, money markets tightened and money 

market rates rose. It was no good trying to hide behind the phrase 

"technical adjustment." For one thing, money market rates were not 

anything like substantially above present discount rates. And that 

being so, increases in discount rates could not constitute other 

than further monetary restraint.  

In conclusion, Mr. Galusha said, he would like to say a few 

words about "natural forces," which were mentioned at the previous 

meeting of the Committee. There could be no doubt that such forces 

affected interest rates, but that did not absolve the Committee of 

responsibility. The Committee's task was to determine whether it 

should resist or reinforce whatever natural forces were operating, 

as, most emphatically, it could.  

Mr. Galusha added that he favored alternative A of the direc

tive in its original form. However, he would not object to Mr. Ellis' 

suggested revision. The Manager was cognizant of the whole context 

of today's discussion and could be expected to operate in terms of 

the Committee's consensus whatever specific language might be included 

in the directive.



10/12/65 -42

Mr. Scanlon commented that the past two weeks had produced 

further evidence of the vigorous tempo of Seventh District activity.  

The machinery and equipment industry continued to report strengthening 

demand for their products. Chicago steel producers reported that new 

orders had begun a surprising increase in the past 10 days. Local 

analysts had raised their estimates of output for the fourth quarter 

and now expected that output in the quarter might drop only 15 per cent 

below the third quarter. Little decline in steel employment in the 

District was contemplated in the near future, partly because of the 

need to make up deferred repairs and maintenance on hard-pressed 

equipment. Since August virtually all announcements of price change 

had been increases, with very few decreases reported.  

In agriculture, Mr. Scanlon said, there had been some damage 

to corn and soybean crops by heavy rains and cold weather, but no 

overall assessment of the importance of that damage was possible at 

this time. It was apparent, however, that there would be a sizable 

amount of soft corn and corn left in the field by harvesting machines 

and that that would cause farmers to increase purchases of feeder 

cattle. Such purchases, of course, would increase demand for feeder 

loans and would tend to depress cattle prices later on.  

The increase in business loans of major Seventh District banks 

in September was double that of a year ago and bankers expected con

tinued strong loan demand, Mr. Scanlon observed. There was some



10/12/65 -43

evidence that demand currently was less broadly based than was the 

case earlier in the year. A large share of the September increase 

was accounted for by the metals and utilities groups and might have 

been chiefly to cover temporary needs of large firms with low cash 

positions over the corporate tax date. Failure of the quarterly 

interest rate survey to reflect the higher rates that banks indicated 

they had been charging might be attributable to the unusually heavy 

volume of that type of borrowing in the survey period. The proportion 

of loans at the prime rate was slightly lower than in June.  

Whether temporary or not, Mr. Scanlon remarked, loan expansion, 

coupled with the runoff of CDs and outflow of demand deposits as tax 

checks cleared, had been reflected in a substantial increase in both 

Federal funds purchases and borrowings of major banks in both Chicago 

and Detroit over the past three weeks. Nevertheless, those banks 

did not reduce holdings of Government and municipal securities and 

their mortgage portfolios continued to expand. At current levels 

of borrowings they appeared to have very little room to maneuver 

should loan demand increase further, and unless they were able to 

increase their deposits some liquidation of longer-term assets would 

appear likely.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said, he would favor maintaining 

on average the existing firmness in the money market, recognizing 

that the objectives which the Committee cited in the form of bill



10/12/65 -44

rates, reserve targets, and Federal funds rates might not be 

mutually compatible. He gathered that the Manager currently 

regarded the bill rate as his prime objective, and he (Mr. Scanlon) 

agreed with Mr. Irons' comments on that score. He continued to feel 

that any significant additional move toward restraint would neces

sitate a discount rate change and reconsideration of the maximum 

interest rates permissible under Regulation Q. He would avoid such 

a move today and, therefore, he favored alternative A of the draft 

directives. He would not quarrel over the suggested words in the 

second paragraph, and he also could accept the paragraph in the 

directive adopted at the previous meeting with no change.  

Mr. Clay remarked that such additional information as had 

become available concerning the national economy since the previous 

meeting of the Committee did not lead to any change in his inter

pretation of the economic situation and prospects. The situation 

remained one of moderating influence from the inventory side following 

the steel strike settlement, of continuing expansion in aggregate 

final derand, and of orderly present and prospective economic develop

ments in terms of resource utilization and prices.  

The money and capital markets had given some evidence of 

relaxation from the tightness of two weeks ago, Mr. Clay noted.  

Nevertheless, there was evidence of rather delicate markets, sensitive 

to any stimulus toward further credit tightening. Under those



10/12/65 -45

circumstances, any overt move toward tightening monetary policy 

probably woulc. have a pronounced effect upon the money and capital 

markets.  

In the period ahead, Mr. Clay said, it should be the 

Committee's objective to continue essentially the current monetary 

policy. That included as intermediate goals moderate rates of 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply. It 

included as the immediate goal the maintenance of about the current 

conditions in the money market. In view of the sensitivity of the 

money and capital markets, the conditions of the money market should 

be the Manager's primary guide, with reserve availability adjusted 

accordingly, rather than looking toward any particular net borrowed 

reserve goal as the primary target.  

Alternative A of the draft directive was satisfactory to 

Mr. Clay. He felt that no change shotld be made in the discount 

rate.  

Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business continued 

upward and appeared to be gaining strength from several sources.  

Because of its heavy concentration of military and civil service 

personnel, the District would receive a somewhat stronger stimulus 

than other areas from the recent rise in the military pay scale and 

the anticipated increase in civilian salaries. The textile industry, 

operating at practical capacity under heavy backlogs and spending



10/12/65 -46

record amounts for expansion and modernization, would receive an 

additional boost from the new farm bill when the domestic price of 

cotton dropped another three cents next summer. Contract award 

values rose sharply in late summer, bringing significant new 

strength to the construction outlook. The furniture and lumber 

industries had recently displayed renewed vigor and anticipated an 

unusually busy fall season. Cigarette consumption was running 

nearly 5 per cent ahead of last year's pace, but this year's 

prospects for flue-cured tobacco growers had softened somewhat.  

Receipts to date continued substantially above year-ago levels, 

but on the basis of estimates for the rest of the season a 5 per 

cent drop in total dollar sales now seemed probable.  

Mr. Wayne favored no change in monetary policy at this time.  

He noted that attention in recent weeks had focused on the run-up 

in yields on most types of debt instruments. In view of market 

sensitivity to rumors and unexpected developments, there had been 

some concern that the markets might become disorderly, requiring 

substantial intervention by the System. Evidence of a jittery 

condition was the sharp run-up in bill rates in response to the 

Treasury's decision in the recent auction of tax bills to raise 

more new money than was generally expected and to rumors about the 

possibility of increases in the discount rate, the prime rate, and 

margin requirements. While the markets seemed to have quieted down



10/12/65 -47

somewhat, it was difficult to be sure because of the unsettling 

news of the President's operation.  

There were reasons, however, for believing that rapid price 

erosion might now be over, Mr. Wayne continued. First, the strong 

performance of sterling in the exchange market and the published 

gains in British reserves had at least temporarily removed one 

depressing factor. Second, the Administration had indicated its 

opposition to across-the-board increases in interest rates and had 

suggested that fundamental factors did not justify the advances 

which had occurred. While he did not believe that "open mouth" 

policy could determine the level of interest rates, he had observed 

that on several occasions in the last few years such statements by 

high Administration officials had had a stabilizing effect on the 

market. Thus, it did not appear likely that the Federal Reserve 

would have to intervene with a massive rescue operation.  

On the other hand, Mr. Wayne did not believe that the markets 

were in any position to withstand further tightening at this time.  

While dealer inventories of Governments had been reduced dramatically 

in the past two months, they were still large enough to precipitate 

disorderly conditions if there should be an overt shift to tighter 

policy.  

In calling for no policy change, Mr. Wayne recognized that 

the economy was presently strong, that prices might continue to creep



10/12/65 -48

up, and that the outlook for the next several months was for con

tinued expansion in economic activity. New evidence of that was 

found in the latest survey of purchasing agents which indicated 

that new orders and production were up sharply in September, that 

prices continued to rise, and that a decline in the rate of inventory 

accumulation was confined largely to steel stocks. The agents also 

noted a higher rate of capital investment. Keeping in mind the 

possibility of overheating, the Committee should also remember the 

significant amount of tightening which had occurred in recent weeks 

in the form of higher interest rates. Since rates might edge up 

further, even under present policy, he thought it was wise for the 

present to pause to assess the effects of recent developments before 

prescribing stronger medicine.  

That conclusion was reinforced by still another consideration, 

Mr. Wayne said. While the view was rapidly spreading that sterling 

was over the hump, he thought the situation was still too delicate 

to risk additional monetary restraint at this time. If an overt 

move did become necessary, hopefully the Committee would be able 

to wait until the British had had more time to consolidate and 

capitalize on their recent gains.  

Concerning the directive, Mr. Wayne preferred alternative A, 

and he could accept the amendment suggested by Mr. Ellis; but as he 

had indicated earlier he would greatly prefer the term "orderly" to



10/12/65

"stable" to give the Manager necessary flexibility. He noted 

that in the proposed amendment "maintaining" preceded "firm" and 

did not connote a change in the Committee's policy posture. The 

Committee had recognized in earlier discussions that market forces 

were moving in the direction of slightly firmer rates, and a policy 

of "no change" would permit those pressures to work out through the 

market unless disorderly conditions appeared. In his opinion that 

should continue to be the Committee's posture. A change in the 

discount rate did not appear appropriate to him at this time.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

I do not agree with those who feel that the odds are 
clearly in favor of a breakout of inflationary conditions 
this fall. We certainly have not had any spreading of 
price increases since the change in business tempo intro
duced by the steel wage settlement the first of September.  
In the absence of such evidence, we need to be very careful 
not to base our decisions on judgments that inflationary 
conditions are bound to develop, just because they have 

in past expansions. This has been a very different kind 
of expansion, with both productivity advances and profit 
levels maintained in a way that has effectively held off 
the build-up of the kind of cost-push pressures so damaging 
in some earlier cycles. I think in these circumstances 
we would be well advised to wait for facts to call for 
action rather than acting upon our own guesses as to what 
the future might hold.  

There is also another reason why I believe a policy 

of "watchful waiting" is the best counsel right now. A 

significant tightening of general credit conditions has 

unfolded over the past two months, extending into every 
major credit market according to all the indicators of 

credit terms and conditions that we have in hand. This 
tightening has not yet had time, however, to exercise 

its full influence on the real economy. In the absence 
of more overt inflation signs than I see today, I believe

-49-



10/12/65 -50

we should wait to judge the dampening influence of this 
market tightening before considering the launching of a 
second round of restrictive actions.  

With this policy in mind, I think we should make it 
crystal clear to the Manager that we do not want to see 
another flurry of market tightening such as occurred in 
the first days following the last meeting of this Committee.  
If anything, I would want him to resolve his doubts on the 
side of easing bank positions slightly, in the interests 
of precluding another sinking spell in the long-term 
markets fed by assumptions that the System is about to take 
another overt tightening step.  

To convey this policy to the Manager, I would be 
satisfied with the alternative A directive distributed by 
the staff, assuming that the language means what it says 
and does not constitute a license to permit still further 
tightening.  

Mr. Shepardson said that both the staff reports and the 

information generally available appeared to indicate continuing 

strong economic activity and an outlook for continued strength in 

the economy. His main concern was with the rate of bank credit 

expansion, which he thought was higher than could be expected to be 

maintained. If the Committee formulated its policy in terms of the 

level of interest rates it would feed in automatically whatever volume 

of reserves was needed to hold rates a, the target level. He hoped 

the Committee ould not accede to all demands for credit for the 

purpose of holding down interest rates. It would be preferable, in 

his opinion, to attempt to gauge the appropriate rate of bank credit 

expansion and, if demands for credit were greater than that, to let 

the demands be reflected in some increase in rates. He was not sure 

how the Committee could best quantify the appropriate growth rate for



10/12/65 -51

bank credit. On the whole, however, while he thought it might not 

be appropriate to retard the present rate of growth, he would prefer 

to see no rise. If the demand for credit strengthened he would 

expect to see some increase in interest rat.s. He thought that 

alternative A of the draft directives, with Mr. Ellis' suggested 

change, was consistent with such a conclusion.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the basic uncertainties in the 

outlook that the Committee had faced for the past several months 

still remained--namely, the amount of econonic stimulus that would 

be provided by the war in Vietnam and the magnitude of the inventory 

adjustment and its secondary and tertiary effects. Until those 

basic uncertainties were resolved the Committee would not know how 

much encouragement it should give to the upward thrust of the 

economy. For that reason he agreed with Mr. Noyes that there was 

no reason to change policy at present.  

Many people outside the Committee had seemed to be trying to 

make monetary policy recently, Mr. Mitchell said, by resolutions, 

statements, and market participation, and he did not like to think 

that the Committee would yield to those forces against its better 

judgment.  

His own view was that the System should not be maneuvered 

into a change in the discount rate but that such action should be 

reserved for a real crisis or clearer evidence that the announcement



10/12/65 -52

effects of a discount rate change were needed. In his judgment 

that was not the case now.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed with the view that the question today 

was whether to pursue a rate or reserve objective. His preference 

was for the former; he would attempt to maintain market rates in 

the range of 3.90 to 4.05 per cent unless that would require very 

low levels of net borrowed reserves--say, below $50 million. For 

the directive he would favor alternative A, as originally written.  

He continued to believe that M2 (currency and total deposits), a 

"proxy" variable for total bank credit, was a more useful guide and 

reference variable than the official bank credit series. The rate 

of increase in both, however, reflected the growing competitiveness 

of banks among depository institutions and market instruments. For 

that reason he thought it would be undesirable to attempt to formulate 

policy in term, of restraining total bank credit growth.  

Mr. Daane said that the decision facing the Committee today 

seemed to him to be a particularly difficult one--more difficult, 

perhaps, than it appeared to some other who had spoken. He was 

impressed with Mr. Noyes' presentation--the last he would be giving, 

in view of his plans to leave the System--and felt that it demonstrated 

clearly how much the Committee would miss his balanced judgment and 

appraisals. He agreed with Mr. Noyes today that on the economic side 

there was no conclusive evidence for a need to change policy. Thus,



10/12/65 -53

on that score, the case for any move depended more on an intuitive 

judgment that pressures were building up--if they had not already 

built up--that would be detrimental to the sustainability of the 

present expansion. His own intuition told him that that was the 

case, and for support he would point only to the ebullience of 

expectations evident most clearly in the stock market, to what 

seemed to him to be an investment boom in process, and to the 

disquieting price changes of the past year. Those price movements, 

he thought, represented a significant change from the price situation 

of the three preceding years.  

In the bank credit and financial markets area the case for 

a policy change seemed to Mr. Daane to be much stronger. The rapid 

growth in total bank credit--tempered, and perhaps disguised, only 

by declines in dealer loans and in holdings of Government and other 

securities--still seemed to him to point toward the need for some 

further moderate restraining action.  

Finally, Mr. Daane said, despite Mr. Hersey's reassuring 

remarks today, he was still concerned about the balance of payments 

situation. He frankly was worried by the fact that the United States 

was now in the negotiation stage on new monetary arrangements at a 

time when its balance of payments position was not as strong as some 

of the System's European colleagues believed. As evidence became 

public of the lack of appreciable further improvement and perhaps of



10/12/65 -54

some weakening, the System's posture would become even more 

important. Thus, while he saw nothing really new in the area of 

the balance of payments to justify a policy change, such a move 

would be helpful in the total picture.  

Having said all of that, Mr. Daane continued, he would add 

that he came out about where he had at the last meeting--with the 

conclusion that the question of timing was all important. Obviously, 

any action on the Committee's part that would call for a change 

in the discount rate should be taken only after the Treasury financing 

was completed. If the discount rate was to be changed he would prefer 

an increase at that juncture of 1/2 per cent coupled with greater 

reserve availability, similar to last November's operation. He 

would anticipate that such an action, as was also true last November, 

would not offer any deterrent to healthy expansion of the economy; 

he believed it would be helpful to financial markets and to the 

appropriate flows of funds, and also to the country's international 

posture. But perhaps it would be wiser to wait until sometime 

nearer the end of the year when the signs and portents he sensed at 

present might either have become clearer or, hopefully, have 

disappeared.  

Mr. Daane said he might add one or two comments on the 

discussion thus far. He did not understand how Mr. Ellis could 

advocate a firmer policy and yet not favor discount rate action.



10/12/65 -55

He thought Mr. Brill had made it clear that, given the anticipated 

market rate pressures, a firming of policy would make the present 

discount rate untenable.  

Secondly, Mr. Daane felt quite strongly that the Committee 

could not so readily resist basic market forces as Mr. Galusha 

evidently believed. In his judgment an effort to do so would be 

at a real cost to the System in terms of its later ability to arrest 

possible inflationary developments. The Account Management should 

not at all costs resist upward rate pressures if they developed.  

For the directive, he could accept alternative A with Mr. Ellis' 

amendment and the further modification proposed by Mr. Wayne.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that it seemed to him the Committee's 

appropriate policy course was clear tcday--the economy was on a 

satisfactory growth path and should be helped to stay on it. He 

favored no change in policy; anything else, in his view, would 

repeat past errors of reacting too fast to fears that later proved 

unfounded. He would define "no change" primarily in terms of bill 

rates, with the objective of a bill rate somewhere between 3.90 and 

4.00 per cent. Maintaining the bill rate in that range might require 

supplying owned reserves at the rate of last year and the first half 

of this year; the decline in owned reserves that had occurred in 

the third quarter had been undesirable, he thought. Maintaining the 

bill rate might also require a decrease in borrowed and net borrowed



10/12/65 -56

reserves. The Manager should feel free to let net borrowed reserves 

decline below the $100-$150 million range, if necessary. With that 

interpretation in mind, he favored alternative A as drafted by the 

staff.  

Mr. Hickman said that there was little to add to the discus

sion of recent business trends that had not already been covered this 

morning. In general, the liquidation of steel inventories was going 

forward at about the rate expected, consumer and business takings 

continued upward as anticipated, and the amount of Federal defense 

spending because of Vietnam was still unknown. Moreover, the recent 

behavior of prices--in terms of both the popular broad indexes and 

various diffusion indexes--suggested continued stability, with no 

evidence of a breakout either on the up side or down side.  

It seemed to Mr. Hickman that additional spending for defense 

would increase only moderately from now to the year end, barring 

unforeseen reversals in Vietnam. The first solid evidence of Federal 

outlays for 1956 would not be known until the budget took shape in 

December. When known expansionary factors an the Federal budget--due 

to increased social security payments, tax cuts, and higher military 

pay--were balanced against already legislated higher social security 

taxes, it would appear that an increase of $4 to $6 billion in 

additional Federal spending could be absorbed by the higher tax



10/12/65 -57

revenues expected to be generated by an expanding economy in calendar 

1966. If defense spending should go much beyond that, the situation 

would call for a reduction in other types of Federal spending, higher 

taxes, more restrictive monetary policy, or some combination of the 

three.  

Mr. Hickman still thought the Committee should be careful 

about jumping to conclusions concerning the prospective course of the 

economy. Much of the recent instability in money and capital markets 

had been based on expectations of economic and financial developments 

that had not yet been confirmed by facts. Whether those expectations 

would prove to be correct or not, only time would tell.  

Mr. Hickman believed that in an atmosphere of speculative 

change, based on uncertainty, the System should act as a stabilizing 

force. Accordingly, in the absence of definite evidence of overheating 

in the economy at this time, he recommended no change in policy. As 

he had frequently done in the past, he would recommend a more restric

tive policy--or even an easier one--if he thought it would promote 

stable growth.  

The average of net borrowed reserves of about $135 million 

over the past two weeks was about what he had recommended at the last 

meeting, Mr. Hickman said. He was not pleased by the jump in net 

borrowed reserves to above $200 million in the last week of September, 

when interest rates were rising sharply, but be assumed it reflected



10/12/65 -58

the shortage of reserves in central money market centers. In any 

event, in his opinion the market at that tim was too firm.  

A substantial amount of tax anticipation bills would have 

to be digested in the next few weeks, Mr. Hickman continued, and 

that would be facilitated by stable, or perhaps slightly lower, 

intermediate and short rates. Specifically, he would like to see 

the 91-day bill rate between 3.90 and 4.00 per cent; net borrowed 

reserves below $150 million; and bank borrowings close to $500 

million. Alternative A of the draft directives as originally written 

was acceptable to him, provided that it was not interpreted to mean 

a gradual creep towards a more restrictive policy. He did not favor 

an increase in the discount rate at this time.  

Mr. Hilkert remarked that it was becoming more and more dif

ficult to find pessimistic things to say about the Third District's 

economy. At the same time, it was increasingly easy to find evidence 

of pressures on District banks. Recently, output in manufacturing in 

the District compared favorably with national indicators, although 

steel production there had dropped faster than in the nation. Con

struction contract awards, both residential and nonresidential, had 

shown more strength in the District than nationally.  

Despite the generally favorable environment, Mr. Hilkert said, 

the District's performance had not been without some shortcomings.  

The District had arrived at the current position by a somewhat different



10/12/65 -59

route than had the nation. In the country as a whole, unemployment 

had declined because employment had increased faster than the labor 

force. About half the metropolitan portion of the District had 

followed that national pattern of expansion in 1965. The rest--not 

only the perpetual pockets of unemployment but also Philadelphia-

had expanded l,ss, and in a different way. Unemployment had declined, 

but the labor force had not grown. In other words, although unemploy

ment had dropped sharply, in about half of :he District people had not 

been drawn into the labor force. Moreover, in those same areas, 

increases in employment had been primarily in manufacturing. Growth 

of the economy had not been strong enough to spill over into secondary 

or supportive types of activity. All that would seem to imply that 

slack remained in some areas--notably in Philadelphia.  

On the financial front, Mr. Hilkert continued, all six 

Philadelphia reserve city banks had hiked rates on savings and time 

deposits and had introduced new, high-yielding savings bonds. In a 

period of one month they had picked up $33 million. The high yield 

and attractive redemption feature seemed to be producing the results 

the city banks were looking for. Contrary to some public statements, 

the banks had not been motivated by an inability to compete against 

other savings institutions in the area or against banks in other money 

centers. On the contrary, even before the recent rate hike the banks



10/12/65 -60

had been able to increase their share of total savings in Philadelphia 

and had been holding their own in comparison with reserve city banks 

throughout the nation.  

Rather, Mr. Hilkert remarked, the increase in rates was related 

more to cumulative reserve pressures and rising strength of loan demand.  

The Philadelphia Reserve Bank's latest survey of bank lending practices 

highlighted the tightening that was going on in the District, especially 

in business loans. All banks reported that loan demand was stronger 

now than three months ago. And, for the first time, there was evidence 

that the banks were shifting toward price as a rationing device. Five 

out of six banks were taking a firmer attitude on interest rates on 

commercial and industrial loans. Two-thirds of the banks were seeking 

new business loans less aggressively. They reported further tightening 

in their policies concerning nonlocal customers, the applicant's value 

as a source of business, and compensating balances.  

Other evidence of the tightening showed up in the basic reserve 

deficit, Mr. Hilkert said. The longer run drift clearly had been to

ward greater restraint--from a daily average deficit in January of 

$12 million to an average of $184 million during September. Borrowing 

over that period had increased greatly, especially in the Federal 

funds market. During January, Federal funds borrowing averaged $23 

million daily; in September, $154 million. The loan-deposit ratio 

continued upward: from 71 per cent in January to 78 per cent by the



10/12/65 -61

end of September at reserve city banks. Business loans had increased 

15 per cent since the beginning of the year. During September, they 

rose 3.2 per cent, and bankers reported that the demand would stay 

strong for the rest of the year. In recent weeks reserve positions 

had eased somewhat, but financial markets in the District, as in the 

nation, were still unsettled and sensitive to shifts in market 

psychology.  

Mr. Patterson reported two cortrasting developments in the 

Sixth District. Measures of economic activity continued to show 

increases and, in some sectors, acceleration. Steel production in 

September topped the August output, and heightened activity char

acterized many industrial sectors, judging from the gains in nonfarm 

employment. Tightness in the labor market in August brought a jump 

in the average hours worked per week, with the gains heaviest in 

Florida and Tennessee. In banking, on the other hand, there might 

have been a slowing down of loan expansion. Business loan growth at 

the weekly reporting member banks in leading cities slowed in September 

and time deposits increased less than in previous months.  

Mr. Patterson said that he would abbreviate the remarks he 

had prepared on national economic conditions because most of his 

points had already been made. He noted that the discussion at this 

meeting and the preceding one seemed to be centered on how the System 

should react to the upward pressures on interest rates. Before reaching



10/12/65 -62

a decision on that point, he would like to have better explanations 

than seemed to be available at present of the forces behind the 

recent firming of rates, and of what could be expected if action 

of a major sort should be taken to further tighten credit. If the 

higher rates resulted from technical factors, temporary changes in 

expectations, and the like, that was one thing; if they were the 

result of stepped-up demands for credit, it was another. He did 

not think there were firm enough answers for a verdict that would 

do justice to the problem. At this point, the evidence did not seem 

conclusive enough to him to justify the kind of major change in policy 

that would be involved in raising the discount rate. Until the evidence 

was clearer, therefore, he would favor following the policy set forth 

in alterrative A of the draft directive, amended to include, ".  

with a view to maintaining a firm tone in the money market." 

Mr. Shuford commented that like Mr. Patterson he would not 

dwell on econonic and financial conditions because they had been ad

equately covered this morning. As far as tne Eighth District was 

concerned it continued to follow the national pattern of economic 

strength.  

As to policy, Mr. Shuford said, he seldom attempted to look 

very far into the future and he hesitated to do so now, but his guess 

for the longer run was that it might be necessary for the Committee 

to move toward some further restraint, He also was inclined to think



10/12/65 -63

that the next move probably should involve a change in the discount 

rate, but he was not prepared to say that such action should be taken 

now. He was pleased that there had been some firming in the market 

over the last few weeks. He thought, however, that the Committee 

needed more time to assess the strength of the demand for funds at 

current rate levels before it decided to tighten further.  

For the moment, then, Mr. Shuford favored maintaining the 

somewhat firmer money market conditions of recent weeks. He certainly 

would not favor any easing. Both monetary and fiscal policy had been 

stimulative recently and the economy was operating close to capacity.  

Accordingly, he was inclined to believe that any relaxation of money 

market pressures would run the risk of prompting inflationary pressures.  

Mr. Shuford remarked that he also hesitated to try to quantify 

policy targets; as had been observed, the Manager had heard the dis

cussion at the meeting today and knew what the Committee's objectives 

were. Nevertheless, he would note that his thinking ran in terms of a 

three-month bill rate between 3.95-4.10 per cent, and a Federal funds 

rate around 4-1/8 per cent and probably fluctuating above that level.  

Under those conditions he would expect borrowings to continue in 

excess of $500 million. He would not suggest a target for net borrowed 

reserves; he agreed with those who had suggested that such reserves 

should be allowed to find their own level. He would hope that under 

the conditions described growth in the money supply would slow from



10/12/65 -64 

its recent rate. As for the directive, Mr. Shuford found alternative A 

as originally drafted more to his liking than the other suggested 

wordings because he thought it allowed more flexibility to the Manager.  

If language along the lines of Mr. Ellis' suggestion was to be adopted, 

however, he agreed with Mr. Wayne that the word "orderly" should be 

substituted for "stable." 

Mr. Balderston said he would attempt to state the case for 

reexamining present policy. He thought his position at the moment 

would be found to be close to that of Mr. Daane.  

Mr. Balderston then made the following statement: 

Satifactory as the System's monetary policy between the 
years 1961 and 1964 may appear in retrospect, it is appropriate 
to ask if the System should not now take steps to prevent 
steady business expansion from being undermined by interest 
rate distortions and by inflationary pressures. At stake is 
the continuance of the healthy expansion and the steady but 
tedious improvement of our competitive position abroad.  

A number of highly publicized wage advances, including 
those in the automobile, aluminum, steel, construction, and 
maritime industries, have added enough to labor costs to 
encourage larger and more widespread "selective" price 
advances. Wage pressures combined with Government spending 
for war and welfare activities both suggest to businessmen 
that things will cost more later on than now. In the face 
of favorable business forecasts it is inevitable that many 
should increase both inventories and plant investment.  

What are the symptoms of instability that can already 
be seen? 

(1) For some months production in excess of end use 
has caused inventories to grow.  

(2) Both actual plant investment and investment plans 
continue strong. Rising expectations are encouraging further 
marked ircreases in plant and equipment outlays, and they 
are already at a high level--up 28 per cent in the two years 
from the third quarter of 1963 to the third quarter of this



10/12/65

year, and up 12 per cent from the third quarter of last 
year. Consumer outlays for goods, meanwhile, have risen 
only about half as much--14 per cent and 6 per cent.  
Production of business equipment by August was nearly 60 
per cent above the 1957-59 average, while output of consumer 
goods was up about 40 per cent. Further widening of this 
difference would be likely to lead eventually to over
capacity and consequent sharp curtailment of equipment 
outlays, even though many outlays are for modernizing rather 
than expanding plant.  

(3) Business loan activity is exceptionally heavy.  
The annual rate of increase exceeds 20 per cent. Rising 
expectations encourage borrowers to borrow and lenders to 
lend--at rising interest rates. Bank credit expansion for 
some time has been exceeding the rise in dollar GNP and 
threatening our noninflationary economic growth.  
Security-market yields higher than rates charged to bank 
customers divert long-term credit demand from the open 
market to the banks. This structural disequilibrium in 
interest rates tends to undermine our financial stability 
by further encouraging the expansion in bank credit and 
money.  

(4) Stock market trading volume has mounted sharply 
and prices have climbed this week to historic highs. In 
September the average of 6.7 million shares was about 50 
per cent above that of August and 40 per cent higher than 
that for 1965 through August. Furthermore, recent trading 
has featured some highly volatile stocks, thus giving 
evidence of speculative participation in the market.  

(5) Last, but not least, the war in Vietnam has now 
expanded to the point where it has erased any lingering 
bearish uncertainties, and manufacturers currently expect 
it to increase Federal spending considerably at the same 

time that it impinges upon the supply of useful labor.  
What are the implications of these symptoms of 

developing instability? They have contributed to, and 
been reinforced by, the wave of heady business optimism.  

Such optimism almost always overreaches itself, and gives 

rise to overextended investment efforts and price mark-ups 

that are greater than can be sustained by the level of 

final demand. Two incentives in particular have been pushing 

up investment outlays; the desire to keep labor costs from 

rising, on the one hand, and the yearning for new markets, 
on the other. For many businessmen, an obvious way to serve 

both of these objectives has been to bild new plants close

-65-



10/12/65

to foreign markets, and the result has been a major drain 
in the direct investment account in our balance of 
payments.  

Business outlays both at home andabroad have now 
grown to the point where they are exceeding the internal 
generation of funds, and businesses are turning increasingly 
to banks and to the capital markets for financial assistance.  
So, with less reason, are many State and local governments 
whose spending proclivities have been outrunning their 
ability and willingness to tax. Abetted by the abundant 
availability of credit from banks eager to buy their 
securities, these governments have been engaged in deficit 
financing that since 1963 has exceeded the Federal 
Government's total debt increase.  

In this kind of financial environment, I submit that an 
important degree of monetary restraint is called for, both 
for domestic and balance of payments reasons. To be sure, 
we have had an appreciable degree of firming in most credit 
markets since the end of July. But ironically, that firming 
has had the least effect upon the availability ofprime-rate 
bank crecit. Yet this is the cheapest and the most open
ended source of external funds available to the large firms 
who are chiefly responsible for the great bulge in both 
domestic and overseas investment by American businesses.  

This development, I would point out, is in contrast to 
the more normal cyclical experience, in which the prime rate 
increases more than other bank lending rates. This process 
provides about the only effective resistance banks can mount 
against the loan demands of their most powerful corporate 
customers. In the current expansion, however, not only has 
there not been any such positive rate deterrent to 
prime-customer borrowing at banks, but the artificial 
stability of the prime rate in the face of rising corporate 
bond yields has provided a powerful extra incentive for 
big firms to borrow from banks, both short-term and 
long-term.  

We have to recognize that the consequence is to force 
banks to impose just that much more restriction on the 
availability of their credit to other and smaller borrowers.  
Moreover, while this discriminatory influence has been at 
work on theloan side of bank balance sheets, smaller banks 
have also been the first to find their ability to solicit time 
deposits inhibited by Regulation Q ceilings. Since smaller

-66-



10/12/65

banks generally lend to smaller borrowers, the Q ceilings 
also have worked to favor most those bank customers who 
least need assistance, and to hurt most those who are 
most in need. However well-intentioned public policy 
has been, it has served to increase the discriminatory 
impact of the degree of credit restraint presently 
prevailing. Given the stimulation of more prime-customer 
borrowing created by business ebullience, such discrimination 
is likely to increase unless remedial action is taken.  

In these circumstances, it seems to me it is incumbent 
on the System to act if the problem of timing can be solved.  
I think our most therapeutic action would be two-fold: an 
increase in the discount rate, accompanied by a similar 
increase in Regulation Q ceilings. These steps should be 
beneficial in several ways. The psychological impact of 
our higher discount rate, and attendant higher money-market 
rates, should help to calm business exuberance at home, and 
hopefully lead to reconsideration of some planning now in 
progress for still further capital investment, inventory 
additions, and price increases. Internationally, we should 
win a new measure of confidence in the dollar, and perhaps 
create interest rate incentives to investment in the U.S.  
Assuredly, most banks would follow with increases in the 
lending rates charged their best business customers, thereby 
redressing both the present rate distortions vis-a-vis 
smaller borrowers and the cost of funds in the capital 
markets. Finally, the higher Q ceilings should restore a 
range of flexibility for bank time-deposit rates, and the 
probable higher cost of time money might induce a review 
by banks of the liberality of their current lending policies.  

Fitting such actions into the skein of other official 
actions for Fall would require adroit timing and execution.  
With one Treasury financing just completed, another due to 
be announced about October 27 for payment in mid-November, 
and a third tentatively listed for late November, about 
the only times at which the System could take action would 
be either in the week of October 18 or conceivably just 
after the November refunding (November 15) and before the 
third financing around the end of November. A policy 
action about October 18, however, would appear to interfere 
less with market distribution of Treasury financings.  

If changes in discount rates and Q ceilings were made, 
they would undoubtedly generate some immediate market 
reaction. The Account Manager would need to moderate any 
extreme reactions without preventing orderly adjustments.  
It might even prove necessary for him to produce somewhat



10/12/65 -68

smaller net borrowed reserves for a few weeks in order to 
moderate bank and credit market adjustments to the higher 
rate charged for borrowed reserves.  

Chairman Martin commented that he believed in the 

deliberative processes of the System and had never tried to use 

his position as Chairman to exert one-man leadership on matters 

of policy. His position ordinarily was not crystallized until 

he had heard the discussion around the table, and as the 

Committee knew it was his practice to speak last. At this 

juncture he was concerned about creeping inflation. While the 

evidence was not clear, he thought there were many signs of 

inflation and of inflationary psychology in the economy. His 

judgment of the Committee's record differed from that of 

Mr. Maisel; in his opinion policy changes had tended to be too 

late rather than too early. One virtue of monetary policy was 

that it could be flexible, changing quickly to meet changing 

circumstances. But the Committee had a tendency to feel that it 

was best to "wait until all the evidence was in" before making 

a policy change. The difficulty was that when all the evidence 

was in it was likely to be too late. While he could not be 

certain of his judgment he thought that might be the situation 

the Committee faced now.  

Nevertheless, the Chairman thought the Committee should 

not make a policy change today. As Chairman, he had the responsibility



10/12/65 -69

for maintaining System relations within the Government--for getting 

the thinking of the President and members of the Administration, and 

for apprising them of the thinking within the Committee--and he had 

made that one of his principal concerns during the fourteen years he 

had held his present office. Last week he had given the President a 

paper expressing his personal views, which he proposed to read to 

the Committee shortly. Also, since the last meeting he had talked 

with the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, with Treasury 

officials, and with the President. They all had expressed the view 

that it would be unwise to change monetary policy now. The President 

had not taken a rigid position on the matter--he had not suggested 

that the Committee should abdicate its responsibility for formulating 

monetary policy--and the Council and Treasury officials were continuing 

to consider their position actively. At the moment, however, the 

Administration was strongly opposed to a change in policy. From the 

discussion today it was evident that the Committee itself was divided 

in its views. With a divided Committee and in face of strong Admin

istration opposition he did not believe it would be appropriate for 

him to lend his support to those who favored a change in policy now.  

At the same time, it should be borne in mind that the role of the 

System was involved: certainly he did not believe the Committee should 

become subservient to the Council of Economic Advisers or to the 

Treasury, nor that it should follow an unchanged policy at all times.



10/12/65

The Chairman went on to say that there were two facets of the 

present situation that had to be considered--the economic and the 

financial. Perhaps, as Mr. Noyes had concluded, a clear case could 

not be made for a policy change on economic grounds. But he thought 

there was a clear case on financial grounds. A policy move would 

help overcome the distortions that followed from the interference in 

the market process last year, when some banks that had announced prime 

rate increases rescinded them after the President had expressed his 

disapproval of the increases. He thought the President's action had 

been a mistake--as he had told him on several occasions--because it 

put the matter of interest rate determination into a political framework.  

In the Chairman's judgment the role of interest rate was being 

exaggerated out of all reasonable proportions. The country's foreign 

friends, while not attempting to influence decisions here, seemed to 

have been united in that opinion at the recent Bank-Fund meetings. The 

head of a large domestic corporation recently had expressed to him the 

view that a 1/2 per cent increase in interest rates might have some 

slight effect on housing and utilities but otherwise would have little 

impact on the economy and would have no implications at all for his 

company's operations.  

As was clear from the discussion at the last meeting, the 

Chairman said, the Committee was attempting to resist a trend resulting 

from market forces. He was confident that the Manager had been doing

-70-



10/12/65 -71

everything possible to carry out the Committee's instructions, 

short of destroying those forces. Perhaps the Committee should 

dampen some of the market forces, but he did not think it should 

operate in terms of the level of interest rates alone. To continue 

the attempt to keep interest rates from rising would be to approach 

the pegging operation conducted until 1951 and to restrict the flows 

of funds. He held no particular brief for bankers--for one thing, 

he thought many had exercised poor judgment in their competition 

for time deposits--but the distortions were real and one unfortunate 

consequence of them was that small borrowers were being discriminated 

against.  

At some point, the Chairman continued, it would be desirable 

to clear up that situation. He hoped that action by the Committee 

would not be delayed to the point that inflationary pressures became 

so dominant that monetary policy could do little to counter them.  

He also hoped that the debate about the role of monetary policy in 

dealing with the balance of payments problem could be shifted away 

from the question of whether the deficit COLld be entirely overcome 

by interest rate action alone. Like almost everyone else, he did 

not believe that was possible.  

Chairman Martin then read the following paper which he had 

presented to the President on October 6, 1965: 

Memorandum for The President.



10/12/65

Too much emphasis is being put on interest rates.  
The real problem is to keep funds flowing freely 

and effectively to sustain healthy progress in the economy.  
Whether interest rates move a bit higher--or a bit 

lower--is not of cardinal importance to the economy.  
What is important is whether rates are allowed to 

respond to market forces so that an effective flow of funds 
is assured.  

The trouble confronting us is that rate ceilings-
governed by policy determinations--are proving obstacles 
to the flow of funds in accordance with natural forces.  

And the most immediate obstacle is the ceiling not 

on the rate that banks may charge borrowers but on the 

rate they may pay depositors to attract funds that the 

banks need in order to expand their loans.  
Specifically, this is the way matters stand: 

In vigorous competition to attract funds 

to meet increasing loan demands, banks have 
been offering higher and higher rates for 

certificates of deposit.  

But under ceilings imposed by the Federal 

Reserve's Regulation Q, going back to 

November in 1964, banks are forbidden to 

pay more than 4-1/2 per cent to obtain 

deposit funds.  
Some of the leading financial-center banks 

are paying the top rate already, and cannot 

now go any higher to attract further funds.  

Banks with lesser standing, especially 

those outside the chief financial centers, are 

being hard-pressed even to hold present depos

its, much less to gain added deposits, since 

the ceiling puts them at a competitive dis

advantage with financial-center banks of 

higher credit standing.  

These impediments are being reflected in 

the credit distribution process in a way that 

is distinctly adverse to smaller borrowers.  

This obstacle to the attraction of funds for lending 

could be overcome by lifting the 4-1/2 per cent maximum rate 

that banks presently may pay for deposits.  

But two other things would logically be required:

-72-



10/12/65

1. A simultaneous increase in the 4 per cent 
discount rate that member banks presently must pay on 
their borrowings from the Federal Reserve, lest the 
widened disparity impel these banks to converge on the 
Federal Reserve as the cheapest possible source of funds.  

2. A greater willingness to recognize that, if banks 
find it more costly to obtain the funds needed to expand 
their loan volume, they will either (a) charge more for 
new loans, to recoup their higher costs, or (b) show less 
interest in meeting new loan demand, since that would 
entail increased risk for a smaller net return.  

The disadvantage of the course outlined would, quite 
obviously, be higher interest rates. But there would be 
these outweighing advantages: 

Far from restricting the flow of funds 
to meet mounting loan demands, the higher 
rate structure would open up a freer, more 
effective flow of funds in response to the 
most economically justified borrowing 
demands. The position of smaller borrowers 
would clearly be improved.  

With this freer, more effective flow 
of funds that are already available in 
the economy, economic growth would be 
made less dependent on a burgeoning 
stream of newly created money and--in 
consequence--made less vulnerable to 
dangers of inflationary developments 
that would end growth, and bring recession.  

While these dangers can be debated--one 
is always confronted by the statistics that 
are not there--rising expectations, evidenced 
in financial markets and real investment, 
and price warnings suggest slightly higher 
irterest rates would prove beneficial to 
sustaining and stretching out the expansion.  
And our present balance of payments picture 
suggests the further advantage of needed 

reinforcement of the voluntary program in 
the manner outlined.  

The Chairman then said that he hoped the Committee members 

would continue to concentrate on the problem and on the many 

imponderables in the economic situation. Perhaps the chief question

-73-



10/12/65 -74

concerned the size of the Federal budget, which would remain uncertain 

until more was known about the probable impact of the hostilities in 

Vietnam. How much stimulus Vietnam would give the economy was still 

conjectural, but he was inclined to think it was likely to be larger, 

rather than smaller, than the current guesses. In any case, the 

possibility of a "fiscal drag" in 1966 under discussion a short time 

ago seemed to have been completely eliminated. As had been noted, 

if the Committee made no policy change now the question probably 

would have to be carried over until late in the year.  

Turning to the question of the directive, the Chairman 

commented that Mr. Ellis' observations on the matter of clarity 

were well taken. The passage Mr. Galusha had quoted also was much 

to the point; at times the Committee had to choose between interest 

rate and reserve targets and could not have it both ways. He 

continued to feel that "money market conditions" could not be 

defined in specific terms. For today's directive, he could accept 

alternative A as suggested by the staff or with the amendments 

proposed by Mr Ellis and Mr. Wayne. Subjective interpretations of 

words were involved, but to him the implications of the amended 

language were no different from those of the original draft.  

Mr. Hayes said that he had some question about using the 

term "orderly conditions" in the directive because of the Committee's 

standing policy to prevent disorderly conditions. Moreover, he 

was particularly dubious about the desirability of introducing



10/12/65 -75

the term today, after the threat of disorderly conditions had 

faded. Several members concurred in Mr. Hayes' statement.  

Mr. Young commented that similar points could be made 

with respect to the term "stable conditions." He proposed that 

the directive simply call for "maintaining a firm tone in the 

money market." 

Mr. Mitchell asked whether Mr Holmes would interpret the 

language Mr. Young suggested as calling for no change in policy.  

Mr. Holmes replied that he would, on the understanding that there 

might still be considerable variation among the various elements 

making up the complex of money market conditions.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity has expanded further in a continuing climate 
of optimistic business sentiment and firmer financial 
conditions, and that our international payments have been 
in deficit on the "regular transactions" basis since 
midyear. In this situation, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's current policy to strengthen the 
international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and 
the money supply.



10/12/65

To implement this policy, and taking into account the 
Treasury financing schedule, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining a firm tone in the money market.  

In voting favorably, Mr. Ellis said he would like to quote 

a few lines from the same authority as Mr. Galusha had: 

... I admit that interpretation would be easier and more 
useful if every directive were straightforward and precise.  
I agree that maximum effort should be devoted to achieving 
this result.  

Chairman Martin then said that he thought it would be 

desirable to move forward with the study of the dealer market in 

Government securities that the Committee had discussed in August 

of this year. If there were no objections he would appoint five 

persons from the System to the Steering Committee for the study.  

He would expect them to be joined by officials of the Treasury, 

including Secretary Fowler (ex officio) and Under Secretary Deming 

to serve actively.  

No objections being heard, Chairman Martin named Messrs.  

Daane, Ellis, Hayes, and Mitchell to the Steering Committee, and 

himself as Chairman.  

Chairman Martin then noted that members of the staff had 

been discussing possible means for improving some of the reports 

prepared at the Board for the Committee's use. He invited Mr. Brill 

to comment.  

Mr. Brill said that the staff had received informal comments

-76-



10/12/65 -77

from some Committee members about deficiencies in certain documents 

prepared by the staff prior to each meeting, including the green 

book 1/ and the questions and comments. With respect to the latter, 

for example, it had been said that the questions had fallen into a 

rut, with little change from meeting to meeting in the issues raised; 

and that the comments were received too late to be of much use to 

the members in preparing for the meetings. Among the criticisms of 

the green book were that it often involved "number reading" rather 

than analysis, and that it had inadequate scope and perspective, 

focusing on details rather than on the overall picture. Also, both 

documents were said to be insufficiently forward-looking.  

He might say, Mr. Brill continued, that the staff welcomed 

such criticism; it liked to know whether or not it was being as 

helpful as possible to the Committee. Also, the staff not only was 

inclined to agree to some extent with those criticisms but could 

add a few of its own. In defense, however, he would note that it 

was extremely difficult to be profound, detailed, global, and 

penetrating every three weeks, given the rates at which the economic 

situation changed and at which new data became available. Nor did 

the staff feel that it was able to provide a full interpretation 

of all the links in the economic process. A System-wide investigation 

of those links was now underway, and he thought the System was about 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions."



10/12/65 -78

as far along in such research as was the economics profession generally.  

Academic economists who had participated in some of the staff work 

agreed that the System's research into linkages was moving along at 

a good pace. However, the research was far from complete.  

As to the criticism that the questions had fallen into a 

rut, it seemed to Mr. Brill that as long as the Committee's policy 

discussions focussed on the same issues--such as prices, inventories, 

interest rates, and so on--it was appropriate for the staff to 

continue to pose questions in those areas. The question-comment 

procedure had been introduced at the suggestion of Mr. Robertson 

and of some staff members, and for a time it seemed to have been 

employed to some extent as a framework for the Committee's delib

erations. That had been less true recently, although some Committee 

members evidertly believed the procedure still was useful.  

After considering alternative means for adapting procedures 

to meet such criticisms, Mr. Brill said, the staff would like to 

suggest a change in procedure for the Committee's consideration.  

The proposal was to combine the green book and the questions, using 

the latter as the framework for much of the analysis presented in 

the green book. The green book would not be limited to comments 

on the questions; other background information not directly pertinent 

to the policy issues posed would still be included. Also, comments 

on the usual final question, relating to the interrelationships among



10/12/65 -79

money market variables, would continue to be distributed at the 

latest possible moment because of the volatility of the elements 

involved. He was not sure the procedure would work, but perhaps 

it was worth exploration. He would like to know whether the 

Committee thought such a procedure would be more helpful to it 

than the present one.  

Mr. Wayne said that, as one who had made some criticisms, 

he would favor experimentation with the suggested new procedure.  

His criticism had been directed to the fact that the questions 

had tended to become routine and in the main were no longer 

discussed by the Committee. Thus, there was a loss of connection 

between the staff comments and the Committee's deliberations, and 

the practice of including the questions and comments in the 

minutes lent mre weight to the staff's responses in the historical 

record than he thought was desirable. He was not critical of the 

green book, which he considered useful.  

Mr. Scanlon concurred in Mr. Wayne's remarks. Since the 

questions and comments were being used less by the Committee they 

had become a needless burden on the staff. He also would applaud 

the green book, and he favored the proposed experiment.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that he felt much as Messrs. Wayne and 

Scanlon did. He would stress from his viewpoint the green book was 

more useful than the questions and comments, and while he saw no



10/12/65 -80

objection to the experiment he would hope that it would not involve 

much curtailment of the present scope of the green book.  

Mr. Mitchell said he thought the reason the questions had 

become sterile was that they often were not closely related to the 

issues that in fact most concerned the Committee in its discussion 

at the meeting. He was not sure whether the staff could predict 

accurately the issues the Committee would focus on, but if it was 

possible to dc so and to work analyses of those issues into the 

green book he would favor such a course. In his opinion the green 

book had an excessive amount of verbalization of figures that could 

be obtained from tables. But he thought it had established itself 

as an extremely useful document and he would not want to lose any 

of its valuable content. Also, he would favor an effort to make 

it available earlier than at present.  

Mr. Hickman said he thought the green book had been substan

tially improved over its earlier form, but there was room for further 

improvement. It was somewhat uneven; some parts contained helpful 

analysis, but some were less useful. He was a little concerned 

about the proposal to incorporate the questions and comments into 

it; that might result in the omission of materials on important 

subjects that should be before the Committee every time, such as 

developments in GNP and prices, and international conditions. Since 

he was not sure that the proposed experiment would work out well,



10/12/65 -81

he would favor an effort to bring the weaker parts of the green book 

up to the level of the most useful parts.  

Mr. Maisel said he thought the green book should be organized 

around a series of standard questions, standard tables, brief com

mentaries, and analytical appendixes. Much of the material now 

presented in full paragraphs could be compressed to advantage into 

single sentences. He would hope that the analytical appendixes 

covering nonrecurrent subjects would continue.  

Mr. Galusha said he found the green book tremendously useful 

and hoped that it would not be curtailed materially. To the extent 

that the questions were related to the subjects that the Committee 

actually discussed they also had been highly useful to him and to 

his staff in preparing for the meetings. Their main value was in 

pinpointing emerging issues.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thought this discussion 

would be of some help to the staff in working out new procedures.  

Mr. Brill noted that the staff might find it desirable to 

spend some time in experimenting with possible formats.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, November 2, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Mr. Hayes noted that both this meeting of the Committee and 

the next meeting were scheduled for days that were holidays in some



10/12/65 -82

of the Reserve Districts. He said that he hoped in working out 

next year's schedule, the Secretariat would keep in mind the 

holidays that were observed in the various Reserve Districts.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 11, 1965 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on October 12, 1965 

Alternative A (no change) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that overall domestic economic activity has expanded 
further in a continuing climate of optimistic business sentiment and 
firmer financial conditions, and that our international payments have 
been in deficit on the "regular transactions" basis since midyear.  
In this situation, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's 
current policy to strengthen the international position of the dollar, 
and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodat
ing moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 

supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the Treasury 
financing schedule, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
about the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed since 
the preceding meeting.  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that overall domestic economic activity has expanded 
further in a continuing climate of optimistic business sentiment, and 
that our international payments have been in deficit on the "regular 
transactions" basis since midyear. In domestic credit markets demands 
have been strong and interest rates have been under some upward pressure.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current 
policy tc move further to strengthen the international position of the 
dollar, and to counter the emergence of inflationary pressures, by 
moderating somewhat the pace of growth in the reserve base, bank 
credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account the Treasury 
financing schedule, System open market operations until the next meeting 
of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to reinforcing the 
firmer conditions in the money market that developed in September.


