









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 31, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 
Mr. Irons, Alternate for Mr. Bryan 
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, and Clay, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne and Swan, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Garvy, and Holland, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors



8/31/65

Mr. Patterson, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Sanford, Mann, Ratchford, Brandt, Jones, 
Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Rothwell and Duprey, Economists at the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting 
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 
August 10, 1965, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Mar

ket Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period August 10 through 25, 1965, and a supplemental report for 

August 26 through 30, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford 

said that the U.S. gold stock should be unchanged for the current 

statement week, the fifth consecutive week without any change. The 

Stabilization Fund was acquiring $50 million of gold today from the 

United Kingdom, which would bolster the quite low holdings of the 

Fund, and within a few days the U.S. should be receiving its share



8/31/65 -3

of a moderately sizable distribution of gold from the gold pool 

operations in August. The only September order for gold received so 

far had been from Austria, for $12.5 million. At the moment it 

appeared that French takings might be quite moderate in September 

because of that country's apparently moderate gain of reserves in 

August.  

In the London gold market, Mr. Sanford continued, turnover 

continued generally heavy until about mid-August. On August 17, how

ever, the Communist Chinese finished their buying, for the time being 

at least, with a total of $55 million which, together with $45 million 

they had purchased earlier, gave them a total of $100 million of gold 

acquired this year. Also, the announcemert of the Russian wheat pur

chases and their subsequent actual sales of gold--amounting to nearly 

$100 million--greatly dampened the speculative demand for gold. After 

reaching nearly $35.19-1/2 earlier in the month, the fixing price 

dropped as low as $35.10-5/8 by the 20th. Subsequently, it had tended 

up again--today it was $35.1209--as demand picked up once more. As 

it had for some time, the demand reflected the general uneasiness con

cerning sterling and developments in Vietnam. The gold market now was 

reporting rumors that Russian sales might be resumed this week, which 

seemed plausible in view of the size of the $450 million Russian

Canadian wheat deal.  

The foreign exchange markets continued to be highly nervous 

regarding sterling, Mr. Sanford observed. The better United Kingdom



8/31/65 -4-

trade figures for July evoked only passing recognition and sterling

came on offer prior to each weekend. However, the weekend offerings

became decidedly less as August progressed. Contrary to the worst

expectations for the latest long weekend (Bank Holiday), the selling,

which had developed in moderate degree last Thursday (August 26), did

not carry over into Friday. Nevertheless, the month's support opera-

tions had made substantial inroads into British reserves. In order

to offset some of the month's losses the Bank of England had availed

itself of the remaining $225 million under its $750 million swap

facility with the System, drawing $60 million on August 24 and $165

million on August 27. Furthermore, a $140 million overnight purchase

of sterling on a covered basis from the Bank of England was being

made today for Treasury and System account--$100 million for Treasury

account and $40 million for System account. That operation would be

reversed tomorrow. Without those transactions the figure for the

August U.K. reserve change, which would be released on September 2,

might well have been a decline of over $450 million, of which about

half was suffered in the first week of the month.

Among the other principal currencies, Mr. Sanford continued,

the Canadian dollar had been in heavy demand in connection with the

forthcoming Canadian wheat shipments to Russia, and the Bank of Canada

had acquired some $125 million of U.S. dollars during this period.

The immediate impact of those acquisitions on reserves had been

reduced somewhat by forward swaps. On the continent, the Dutch



8/31/65 -5

guilder was initially strong in connectior with uneasiness regarding 

sterling, and the System absorbed $25 million from the Netherlands 

Bank on August 11 with guilders drawn under the swap facility with 

that Bank. The next day the System resumed selling three-month for

ward guilders to the market through the intermediary of the Nether

lands Bank. The extent of such forward sales--$1.3 million equiv

alent--was limited, as the inflow of funds into the Netherlands 

tapered off and the Dutch money market eased. The System also acti

vated its swap arrangement with the Bank of Italy by drawing $100 

million equivalent of Italian lire to absorb dollars from that Bank, 

which had been gaining heavily in recent weeks. The System also 

absorbed $55 million from the National Bank of Belgium's holdings by 

using Belgian francs available under the Belgian swap lines.  

In the area of third-currency swaps, Mr. Sanford said, the 

System prepaid its remaining $5 million equivalent sterling-guilder 

swap with the Bank for International Settlements by entering into a 

German mark-guilder swap for the same amount with that institution.  

A similar transaction was made for Treasury account, in the amount 

of $7.5 million. As a result, all of the sterling which had been 

used in third-currency swaps with the BIS had now been released.  

Mr. Sanford reported that, pursuant to the approval of the 

Committee at its August 10 meeting for renegotiation of interest rates 

applicable to drawings under the swap arrangements with the central



8/31/65 -6

banks of England, Canada, and Japan, the arrangements with the Bank 

of England and the Bank of Canada now provided for interest rates to 

be computed on the basis of the 90-day U.S. Treasury bill rate, as 

was the case with most of the other swap arrangements. He also had 

discussed the matter with the local representative of the Bank of 

Japan, who in turn had been in touch with Tokyo, but as yet there had 

been no final decision concerning revision of the rate applicable to 

drawings on the arrangement with the Bank of Japan.  

In reply to Mr. Robertson's question, Mr. Sanford said that 

the existing arrangement with the Bank of Japan called for a flat 3 

per cent interest rate on drawings. In the case of the Banks of 

England and Canada, the rate prior to renegotiation had been 2 per 

cent. If the Japanese agreed to an adjustment, practically all of 

the System's swap arrangements would be on a U.S. Treasury bill rate 

basis. The Belgian arrangement still involved a fixed rate, but 

there had been several adjustments that kept it close to the prevail

ing Treasury bill rate.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
System open market transactions in foreign 
currencies during the period August 10 
through 30, 1965, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Mr. Sanford then recommended that the $100 million swap 

arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, which matured on September 15, 

be renewed for a further period of three months, in agreement with 

that Bank.



8/31/65

Renewal of the swap arrangement 
with the Netherlands Bank for a further 
period of three months, as recommended by 
Mr. Sanford, was approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period August 10 through 25, 1965, 

and a supplemental report for August 26 through 30, 1965. Copies of 

both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes com

mented as follows: 

The past three weeks have not been particularly joyful 
ones in the Government bond market. Bond prices, after edg
ing lower in the first few days of August, turned more 
decisively downward in the past few weeks as dealers concluded 
that their inventories were too high but found little appetite 
among investors apart from the official accounts. On the plus 
side, there has been a significant reduction in dealer hold
ings of issues due in more than five years--from about $490 
million on August 9 to $285 million on August 27--but the 
decline has been largely traceable to purchases for the Sys
tem Account or Treasury investment accounts with little 
evidence to suggest that prices have reached an attractive 
range for other investors.  

The price declines during the past three weeks, ranging 
from about one-half point to nearly a full point for a number 
of long-term issues, have provided no fewer than 16 Govern
ment securities with a yield of 4.25 per cent or higher (based 
on the dealers' bid quotations). Thus, the 4.25 per cent 
interest rate ceiling has once again become an effective con
straint on Treasury debt management policy.  

To reiterate briefly the factors underlying the market 
adjustment, the main reason seems to be a continued display 
of strength in the economy and the prospects for further 
gains ahead. These prospects stem partly from anticipations



8/31/65

of increased military outlays in connection with Vietnam, 
but they also reflect a generally more buoyant mood in the 
economy. Bond market participants are keenly aware of the 
strength of bank loan demand, of business demands for credit 
in general, and of the possibilities implicit therein for a 
somewhat firmer monetary policy. Indeed, one of the more 
obvious depressants of Treasury bond prices is the higher 
yield now required to market high-grade corporate bonds-
apparently in the neighborhood of 4.70 per cent for AA
rated utility bonds, compared with about 4.45 per cent 
earlier this year. Moreover, the corporate bond market 
itself has generated little enthusiasm among investors even 
after moving to higher rates as a feeling has persisted that 
still further increases may lie ahead. Several large issues 
will reach the market during the first half of September, 
providing a good test of the market's distributive capacity.  

Treasury bill rates have also adjusted higher on balance 
during the past three weeks with weakness most pronounced in 
the longer bill maturities. The average issuing rates of 
3.89 and 3.99 per cent for the three- and six-month bills in 
yesterday's auction compared with rates of about 3.85 and 
3.95 per cent three weeks ago. The latest one-year bill, 
auctioned last week at an average rate of just over 4 per 
cent, was up 13 basis points from the auction rate a month 
earlier. In part, the rise in bill rates is seasonal in 
nature. For one thing, the demand from the auto companies 
is light at this time of the year. But beyond this the 
rate rise probably reflects an abatement of demand that may 
be related more generally to increased corporate needs for 
funds.  

The money market has been steadily firm in the past 
three weeks with Federal funds trading mainly at 4-1/8 per 
cent on all but a few days. Sporadically, some Federal 
funds trading has occurred in modest volume at 4-1/4 per 
cent. While the volume of such trading has not been large, 
it seems to have had a fairly pronounced effect on the 
funds market--tending to dry up the selling of funds before 
calendar weekends. In turn, this has helped to produce a 
bulge in member bank borrowing over recent weekends, which 
has been mitigated but not entirely offset by the System's 
use of short-term repurchase agreements. Even so, member 
bank borrowing in the recent period averaged about the 
same as in the several preceding weeks--roughly $1/2 bil
lion.

-8-



8/31/65

System open market operations withdrew reserves 
seasonally during the last three weeks, chiefly through the 
net maturity of holdings under repurchase agreements. Out
right holdings declined by a net of $62 million as a reduc
tion in Treasury bill holdings in the early part of the 
interval was only partly offset by coupon purchases in the 
latter part.  

Looking ahead, it would seem appropriate to meet part 
of the remaining reserve need in the Labor Day week through 
additional purchases of coupon issues. Shortly thereafter, 
it presumably will be necessary to absorb reserves again 
with the approach of the mid-September float bulge. The 
next major reserve position--and if past history is a guide, 
it could be a very substantial one--would not come until 
the very end of September or early October.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether the recent levels of dealer 

holdings of long-term Governments were much in excess of the amounts 

needed for the dealers to perform their function of making a market.  

Mr. Holmes replied that markets could be made at any level 

of dealer holdings. In his judgment, however, the size of their 

holdings of long-term Governments over an extended period earlier 

this year was related to their market-making function. Until recently 

dealers anticipated that long-term rates would be stable or declining, 

on the basis of their expectations that saings would continue at 

the earlier high rate and that the pace of economic expansion would 

slow. Accordingly, for the time being they had been willing to acquire 

and hold a large volume of longer-term issues, and that could be con

sidered to be part of their function.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked whether net sales of longer-term 

Governments recently had not been almost entirely to official accounts.  

Mr. Holmes replied that that had been the case most recently. Earlier



8/31/65 -10

there had been some periods of net investor demand in the 5-10 year 

maturity area, but at that time the dealers had been interested in 

building up their portfolios, believing that that would be profitable.  

At the moment dealers probably would not be able to lighten their 

holdings substantially further through sales in the market; at present 

rate relationships investors preferred corporate securities to Govern

ments. Knowing that the demand was light, the dealers were not pres

sing their holdings of Governments on the market, since the only 

effect of such action would be to push prices lower.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Hickman, Mr. Holmes said that 

there had been little speculative unloading of intermediate- and 

long-term securities acquired in the last two Treasury refundings.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period August 10 through 30, 
1965, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Noyes made the following statement on economic conditions: 

With the outcome of the steel negotiations unknown, the 
dimensions of the Vietnam buildup uncertain, and the future 
of sterling in doubt, it seems almost futile to attempt to 
draw any conclusions from the things that have actually hap

pened this summer. But, in fact, some of our doubts have been



8/31/65

resolved. We were concerned at the beginning of the year 
about the prospects for business investment in the second 
half, and about the possibility that private construction 
activity could not be maintained. The adjustment from the 
extremely high post-strike rates of auto sales carried at 
least a troublesome potential, as did the reduction in the 
stimulus from Federal fiscal policy in the first half.  

All these things added together suggested the possib
ility, if not the likelihood, that overall activity might 
well level off this summer, and that we might even see 
declines in some important sectors before the end of the 
year. Even as late as July 13, I was reliably informed, 
and so advised the Committee, that GNP would be up about 
$7 billion in the second quarter and that industrial pro
duction had leveled off at the advanced 141-142 rate. I 
might well have added that the relatively favorable 4.7 
per cent unemployment figure for June reported at that 
meeting, was due in part to an unexplainably small increase 
in the labor force in that month and that we expected a 
rise in July.  

As you are all already well aware, the kindest thing 
one might say about this information is that it was unduly 
conservative. GNP was up $9.5 billion, industrial produc
tion hit 144 in July, and unemployment dropped to 4.5 per 
cent and maintained that rate in August.  

On the other hand, the rather mild concern I expressed 
about price developments seems to have been just about 
right. On average, wholesale industrial prices have nei

ther advanced further nor retreated from the level they 
reached in mid-June, and the rate of advance of agricul
tural commodities has slackened, at least.  

At the same time, there is very Little basis for 
hoping that we will return to the unu;ual stability in 
wholesale prices that prevailed for five years, until just 
about a year ago. New wage settlements in the first half 
have averaged 3.8 per cent, with above guidepost settle
ments in such important industries as aerospace, aluminum, 
cement, and glass. I have no idea how the reported dif
ferences between the companies and the steel workers will 
be resolved--with or without a strike--but it seems almost 
too much to hope that the package will be truly within the 

guidelines. In these circumstances, at least a continued 
upcreep in wholesale prices seems the most realistic 

expectation.

-11-



8/31/65

The consumer price index has few friends, and I have no 
desire to argue the significance of a change in it of one
tenth of a point, but it is up again for July to 110.2 per 
cent of the 1957-59 average and would have been up another 
two-tenths had it not been for the excise tax reductions.  

It does not seem to me that any of these developments 
can be fairly characterized by the much overused and abused 
word "inflation." I would prefer simply to say that the 
economy is continuing to show, in prices as well as in other 
areas, some of the typical characteristics of the expansion
any phase of a business cycle. This, in itself, is cause 
enough for concern.  

I cannot conclude without mentioning once more the 
irventory situation. We have just learned that the book 
value of manufacturers' inventories ircreased by over $700 
million in July--the largest monthly increase since last 
October, and considerably more than double the average 
monthly rate for the first half. This is on top of the 
three quarters of overall inventory accumulation which the 
revised GNP figures show to have averaged at an annual 
rate of $8 billion. It is hard to see how we can make the 
necessary inventory adjustment, whenever it comes, without 
far-reaching repercussions throughout the economy. A major 
problem for all Governmental stabilization policies looms 
ahead if we are to cushion this adjustment. How far ahead 
I cannot say, except that it is almost certainly more than 
four weeks.  

It is obvious, I think, that I have consciously tried 
to avoid belaboring the immediate uncertainties that are 
so much on all of our minds today. But just as we should 
not exaggerate their importance, it wculd be foolhardy to 
ignore them. Until we know whether there is to be a steel 
strike, a settlement within the guidelines, or one well 
above them, it is impossible to say anything very meaning
ful about the economic climate in which monetary policy 
will have to operate in the weeks immediately ahead. This 
would seem to me to counsel against a change in policy at 
this time, even if such a decision might necessitate more 
drastic action later.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The credit review could be crowded into one sentence 
this morning: Bond markets have turned weaker, even while

-12-



8/31/65

the money market on average has remained roughly stable, 
and credit flows have continued apace This statement is 
correct in broad outline, and it sums up the dilemma of 
sorts that current events pose for policy; but there are 
some details submerged in these simple generalizations 
that I think can help to illuminate the appropriate path 
for resolving today's policy questions.  

First, I have been struck by the pressing size of 
business demands for external credit to help finance 
large inventory and capital outlays. Corporate bond 
flotations have been unseasonably large all summer, and 
as such have compounded the recent bearishness of dealer 
and investor expectations. Moreover, such flotations 
have no. served to replace bank loans, but are in addition 
to a persisting rapid business loan expansion. To be 
sure, we should anticipate that some moderation of business 
loan expansion will take place whenever the steel-using 
industries shift from piling up to drawing down their heavy 
stocks of steel; but the dimensions of that turnaround 
may not turn out to be so great, if purchasing agents 
come to expect, say, a procession of selective steel 
price increases over time and/or a substantial increase 
in metals consumption by the military.  

Enlarged business borrowing is significant because 
of the extent to which it is supporting business invest
ment outlays that are growing disproportionately relative 
to overall economic expansion. As the year has progressed, 
there has been a breaking away from the more balanced 
relation between business equipment and consumer goods 
output that previously had been a feature of this longest 
of peacetime business expansions.  

An analyst concerned with this developing imbalance 
might regard some rise in corporate bond yields as being 
therapeutic, and he might also favor some firming of bank 
lending terms to businesses and be disappointed at how 
little hard evidence of the latter is at hand. Butthis 
may be more a commentary on the deficiencies in our infor
mation network than a confirmation that bank lending terms 
are unchanged. As compared with before June, banks are 
borrowing more at the discount window, paying more for 
Federal funds, spending more money to attract time deposits 
and even long-term capital funds; and unloading Governments 
at lower prices. Adding all these factors together, they 
seem to me to suggest an appreciable and slowly cumulating 
marginal pressure on the banking system. It would be sur
prising if banks were not moving gradually to pass some of

-13-



8/31/65

the pressures on to their customers, in the form of higher 
interest rates and stiffer lending conditions. It would 
also be typical for banks, however, to accompany such action 
with further securities liquidations, even at increasing 
cost.  

Here a more generalized difficulty begins to take shape.  
Further bank sales of Government securities--and, for that 
matter, also any bank backing away from the municipal market-
would put added pressures on capital markets that are already 
strained by bearish dealer and investor expectations. Dis
cussion this morning and the staff comment on question 5 1/ 
have already amply detailed the sources of the changed market 
psychology. Suffice it to say that banks may be gradually 
moving into a position to make that market atmosphere still 
worse--not likely by massive sales but by a continual drib
bling in of selling pressures.  

In such circumstances, the capital markets, left to 
their own devices, would almost surely lack the resilience 
to recoup much of the price losses of the last month, and 
could easily generate some further interest rate increases.  
There could also be some arbitraging of past rate advances 
across other markets not yet much affected by yield adjust
ments, thus applying an element of interest rate restraint 
to a number of economic sectors where no major imbalance 
of resources and demand now exists.  

Is such a development desirable, or at least tolerable? 
The answer to that question, of course, is bound up in the 
consequences of the steel settlement, the Vietnam build-up, 
and the sterling crisis--all events which are still very 
much uncertain but which key financial markets have already 
discounted importantly. In effect, once again the workings 
of securities market expectations have managed to get the 
financial cart in front of the economic horse.  

At this juncture, monetary policy would seem to be 
facing two broad alternative courses. One would be con
tinuing to hold money market conditions stable, pending a 
clarification of the economic outlook. Under this approach, 
some bank adjustments would probably proceed, and the long
term markets would remain depressed, and by the time of 
the next Treasury financing, around the end of September, 
I would think a somewhat firmer atmosphere of financial 
restraint would probably have percolated through the 
economy. The contrary approach--to reverse the spread of 

1/ Certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

staff comments on them, are given at a later point in these minutes.

-14-



8/31/65

a somewhat more restrictive atmosphere--would necessitate 
an overt easing of reserve pressures on the banking system, 
and probably also aggressive official buying of coupon 
issues to remove what is left of the overhang in the market.  
If the latter seems to go too far toward market "rigging," 
a variation of the "no change" directive that would embody 
at least some solicitude for the struggling bond markets 
would be to continue to keep money market conditions on the 
average fairly stable, but to operate the System Account in 
ways which (a) would lighten pressure on the long-term mar
ket relative to the short market, and (b) within the money 
market, would increase pressure on the dealer financing mar
ket relative to the banks. This, for example, would imply 
emphasizing purchases of coupon issues whenever reserve 
additions are called for, and bill sales when reserve absorp
tion is necessary.  

Financial conditions by themselves, of course, cannot 
indicate which one or variant of these alternatives is the 
right choice at the moment. That has to depend basically 
upon one's own presumptions as to how the current major 
uncertainties in the economic picture are likely to be 
resolved.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

Since mid-year, the U.S. balance on "regular" inter
national transactions has reverted tc deficit, as everyone 
expected it would. Indeed, this seems to have happened as 
early as July, contrary to the impression we had 3 weeks 
ago from incomplete data. The size cf the deficit is not 
particularly large on a seasonaly adjusted basis--perhaps 
$200 million for July and August together according to the 
data so far available, or about the same $1-1/4 billion 
annual rate as in the first half-year. Nevertheless, it 
is a deficit.  

On the official settlements basis, on the other hand, 
there appears to have been a continued seasonally adjusted 
surplus in July and August, since there was a very large 
inflow during those months of foreign private liquid funds.  
Usually a development of this kind would be encouraging.  
But this time, as at the end of 1964, a large part of the 
inflow may represent the other side of the renewed run on 
sterling, and may prove temporary. Whenever sterling 
finally turns the corner, we should expect to see some 
foreign private funds flow out of dollars again and back 
into sterling.

-15-



8/31/65

The detailed information so far available does not 
help at all to explain the deterioration since mid-year 
in transactions other than inflows of foreign liquid 
funds. On the contrary. During July, there was a 
further large reflow of U.S. bank credit. Outstanding 
bank credit to foreigners is now not only far below the 
ceilings set by the voluntary restraint program, but is 
also lower than at the end of 1964. As the staff comment 
on question 3 points out, there is reason to think that 
other factors in addition to the program may be restrain
ing bank lending to foreigners this year. In particular, 
the IET, firmer domestic credit conditions, and easier 
conditions abroad in Italy and Japan, seem to be playing 
a useful adjusting role.  

Merchandise imports dropped sharply in July, another 
superficially favorable development. However, one-third 
of the drop resulted from a change in the way the statis
tics are compiled, and most of the rest is thought to 
have resulted from the seamen's strike on American ships, 
which lasted from June 15 through today (August 31).  
Exports will probably also prove to have been affected by 
the strike. So we seem doomed to another several months 
of uncertainty about recent trade trends, although it 
remains clear that, for the year to date, exports have 
been much less buoyant and imports more buoyant than in 
1963 and 1964.  

Finally, sales to U.S. residents of new issues of 
foreign securities were not particularly large in July
August. They will be much larger in the third quarter 
as a whole than in the second quarter, but most of the 
increase is scheduled for September.  

Thus, the July-August deterioration must be 
attributed to changes in the wide variety of items that 
we cannot yet measure, and most of which have not yet 
been measured even for the second quarter. Nevertheless, 
the deterioration comes as no surprise, since temporarily 
favorable factors were known to have played a large role 
in the second-quarter payments surplus.  

Most analysts, I think, would still expect a "regular" 
transactions deficit of the order of $1-1/2 billion for 
the year as a whole, implying some moderate further dete

rioration during the remaining four months. Outstanding 
bank credit to foreigners seems likely at least to stop 
declining. New securities issues will be large, as I 
mentioned (although Canada may have to take some action 
to damp down Canadian borrowing here, now that wheat sales

-16-



8/31/65

to Russia have improved its payments outlook). Finally, 
while steel imports should ultimately decline, total imports 
are likely to stay high for the rest of the year, and there 
is little in foreign business developments to suggest an 
early expansion in exports.  

Also, it still seems to me that we should expect some 
appreciable deficit on the official settlements basis for 
the year, even though there has been none to speak of dur
ing the first 8 months, since this pleasant and unexpected 
result seems to have depended on the prolonged sterling 
crisis that must sooner or later subside.  

Views about the outlook for sterling seem to have 
become less pessimistic in recent weeks. The July export 
figures helped, but there has also been a more fundamental 
reappraisal, symbolized by the fact that Britain's National 
Institute for Economic and Social Research now believes 
that the planned elimination of the basic deficit by the 
end of 1966 will come about, whereas it did not think so 
in May.  

It has become increasingly evident that the anti
inflationary actions of the Government are taking hold.  
The labor market has become a shade less tight, though it 
is still tighter than it was a year ago. Price increases 
have slowed down a little; much of the increase in the 
retail price index since February seems to be attributable 
to increased excise taxes. Bank loans have expanded very 
little since the end of 1964.  

It has also become increasingly evident that there 
has been more spirit in the British economy than was 
earlier believed, and also more need for anti-inflationary 
policies. Real GNP continued to rise pretty strongly into 
the first quarter, when it was 4 per cent higher than a 
year earlier--a performance comparable to that of the 
United States when account is taken of slower labor force 
growth in Britain. Plant and equipment outlays in manu
facturing increased about 14 per cent in real terms during 
this period, even after one discounts some inflation of 
the first-quarter figures by companies anticipating an 
adverse change in tax treatment. Even if plant and equip
ment outlays now level off, the total for the year will be 
up substantially.  

Thus, while market views about sterling may continue 
unsettled for some time, there seems to be a feeling in 
the air that an adjustment of the right sort is underway, 
even though no one can feel certain of its speed or extent.

-17-



8/31/65 -18

The National Institute is much more pessimistic 
about the longer-run outlook, foreseeing great dif
ficulty in earning a sufficient payments surplus to 
repay debt and rebuild reserves without an unconscion
able dampening of growth at home. But several features 
of this gloomy prognosis raise questions, and the 
margins of error are wide. First, the Institute 
assumes (admittedly arbitrarily) that there will be 
no net short-term capital movements over the period 
of its projection. This seems an excessively cautious 
assumption; I would think some considerable part of 
the capital that has fled during the past year of 
crisis might later return. Second, the Institute 
regards any level of unemployment above 2 per cent 
as profoundly unsatisfactory (in much the same way 
that scme people feel the U.S. economic performance 
has been poor because the unemployment rate here is 
above 4 per cent), and its projections, being based 
on past trends, allow nothing for the success of new 
efforts to increase the flexibility of the economy.  
In fact, of course, the point of the projections is 
to emphasize the need for such new efforts.  

Mr. Ellis asked what Mr. Reynolds thought the effects on the 

position of sterling would be if the level of U.S. interest rates 

increased further and the rise was eventually confirmed by an increase 

in Federal Reserve discount rates.  

Mr. Reynolds replied that such effects were difficult to 

predict, but on the whole he did not think they would be very great 

under present circumstances. The situation had been different earlier 

in the summer, when there as yet was little statistical evidence to 

indicate that the necessary adjustments in Britain's situation were 

underway, and when there were rumors that the U.S. had decided not to 

assist the British further. A rise in U.S. interest rates then 

probably would have been taken as confirmation of such rumors, and



8/31/65

might have had substantial repercussions on the position of sterling.  

He would add, however, that his belief that there would be no signif

icant effects now was only a guess, and one about which he felt 

particularly unsure.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions suggested for consideration by the Committee, and 

comments thereon. These materials were as follows: 

(I) Business conditions.--What are the implications of the 
renewed rapid increase in industrial production in June and 
July for developments later in the year? 

The renewed rapid increase in industrial production in 
June and July--seasonally adjusted--reflected mainly further 
advances in output of business equipment and materials to 
levels about 10 per cent above a year earlier. Consumer goods 
output recently has continued to show little change at a level 
on the average only 5 per cent above a year ago. Unless 
demands for output are greatly stimulated by military devel
opments or accelerated consumer spending, the rate of advance 
in industrial production will probably slow in coming months.  

One special factor this summer has been the continued 
high output of steel and steel products to build up stocks 
further for protection against a possible strike September 1.  
With output of some other materials already at or near 
capacity rates, curtailment in steel can be expected at 
least to slow down the advance in the materials component 
of the index.  

Backlogs of orders for business equipment have continued 
to rise and developments in Vietnam may provide some further 
stimulus to equipment output. The rise recently--and over 
all of the past year--has been very rapid, however, and no 
substantial acceleration appears likely. Industrial capacity 
continues to grow as the large amount of equipment ordered 
and produced earlier comes into full use, and capacity might 
begin to appear excessive fairly soon unless consumer takings 
accelerate.

-19-



8/31/65

Whether the rate of increase will be adequate, however, 
is questionable. Retail sales have been high, and expected 
advances in income--including the higher Social Security 
benefits--should sustain further rises. But auto sales would 
need to increase from their recent annual rate of 8.8 million 
units to a rate of 9-1/2 million even to maintain the level 
of auto output expected to prevail through September. Retail 
stocks of home goods and apparel have been rising even though 
output has not increased from the record levels reached at 
the beginning of the year.  

To date, developments with respect to Vietnam have not 
been such as to give any sharp direct impetus to buying by 
either consumers or businesses. It seems increasingly likely 
that the economic stimulus from stepped-up Vietnam activities 
will be imparted more gradually over time, as actual military 
outlays and orders grow. The precise timing and dollar amount 
of the increases in military expenditures, however, are still 
highly uncertain.  

(2) Prices.--Considering demand and supply developments over 
the past year and price behavior during this period, what are 
the prospects for stability in industrial commodity prices in 
the months ahead? 

Increases in industrial prices over the past year have 
been selective and for the most part limited. Unless the 
wage settlement results in a significant steel price rise, 
and unless activities in Vietnam are stepped up sharply, 
continuation this autumn of the recent pattern of price 
performance would seem to be more likely than any appreciable 
general increase in price levels.  

As earlier in this expansion, increases over the year 
were largest for nonferrous metals, which were up 8 per cent 
in response to further world-wide increases in demands that 
strained available sources of supply even when supplemented 
by withdrawals from U.S. stockpiles. For steel, changes in 
prices have been small so far despite heavy inventory demands, 
partly because of growing competition from abroad on an in
creasing range of products.  

One important factor limiting the advance in industrial 
prices over the past year has been continued stability in 
labor costs per unit of output. With rapidly increasing volume 
of output and continuous modernization of plant, productivity

-20-



8/31/65

has increased about as fast as hourly wage costs. Profits have 
risen sharply, even in many industries where prices have not 
risen. A slowing in the rise in industrial production in this 
country probably would also retard further gains in productivity.  
If at the same time wages should rise more rapidly, unit labor 
costs would come under upward pressure.  

On the other hand, some of the influences tending to hold 
prices in line this past year will still be operating in the 
months ahead. New and more efficient plant is continuously 
coming on stream and the work force is expanding--although in 
the younger and industrially urtrained age groups. Demand 
abroad for materials may continue to show somewhat less growth 
than earlier.  

At the moment, attention is focused on the steel settle
ment, which may be followed by some price advance. An important 
question would be whether price advances that might be initiated 
would hold. Demand for steel will be considerably reduced for 
some months after a settlement and any price advances announced 
will be subject to test during that period.  

(3) Balance of payments.--To what extent is U.S. bank lending 
to foreigners being limited by factors other than the voluntary 
restraint program? 

During the first seven months of 1965, U.S. banks actually 
reduced the amount of credit outstanding to foreigners by $100 
million, whereas for the year as a whole a net increase of 
nearly $500 million would be consistet with the 105 per cent 
VFCR ceiling. If outflows are being significantly restrained 
by forces other than the voluntary restraint program, they may 
remain small for some time; but if the program is the dominant 
restraining influence, renewed outflows of more than $500 mil
lion might be expected during the remainder of the year without 
the banks exceeding their ceilings.  

The voluntary program presumably is the main constraint 
for some 40 banks that were still above their ceilings at the 
end of July. It probably also dominates the foreign lending 
behavior of a few large banks that have cut back below their 
ceilings in order to make room for scheduled loan disbursements 
or anticipated use of credit lines later this year, particularly 
those banks that have sold off loans to their foreign branches 
at some cost. Furthermore, seasonal influences would normally

-21-



8/31/65

reduce bank credit outflows by roughly $150 million in the first 
seven months of the year. But these considerations do not ex
plain the absence of any net bank lending to foreigners so far 
this year; additional factors must also be acting to restrain 
outflows.  

At least three such factors may be at work on the supply 
side. First, having made very large foreign credits last year, 
partly in anticipation of the IET and controls, some U.S. banks 
may be wanting to go slow for a time on further foreign lending.  
Second, new economic difficulties in Japan and some other coun
tries, and recent failures like that of the Atlantic Acceptance 
Corporation in Canada, may have reduced the credit-worthiness 
of many potential foreign borrowers in U.S. eyes. Third, strong 
domestic loan demand, and a slight firming of U.S. credit cordi
tions, may have reduced the eagerness of banks to lend abroad.  

On the demand side, application of the IET to medium- and 
long-term bank loans to borrowers in developed countries, for 
purposes other than financing U.S. exports, has made this coun
try a less attractive source of funds for those borrowers.  
Secondly, the leveling off of U.S. exports this year probably 
has been accompanied by a decline in new financing needs.  
(When U.S. exports last leveled off, in 1962, outflows of U.S.  
bank-reported capital dropped to $45C million from $1,260 mil
lion the year before.) Third, a marked easing of credit 
conditions in Italy and Japan, which borrowed heavily here 
last year, may have reduced demand in those countries for U.S.  
funds as compared with domestic funds.  

It is too early to assess statistically the relative 
importance of such factors, although nuch light might be shed 
by the explanations that might be elicited from individual 
bankers. It is clear, however, that U.S. bank lending to 
foreigners currently is being significantly restrained by 
economic forces and by the IET, as well as by the VFCR 
program.  

(4) Bank credit.--What accounts for the accelerated growth in 

bank time deposits since mid-year, and what are its implications 
for continued bank credit expansion? 

Time and savings deposits grew at a seasonally adjusted 
annual rate of 15.0 per cent in July, and appear to be increas
ing at a 20 per cent rate in August. The growth of time 
deposits since midyear thus has approached the high rates of 

early 1965, after slowing to an 11.5 per cent rate during the 
second quarter.

-22-



8/31/65

Three main factors seem to be important in explaining this 
development. First, the unusually large increase in savings 
accounts at weekly reporting member banks--and most likely at 
other banks also--probably stems in part from the substantial 
increases in nonfarm personal income and private financial 
savings generated by the vigorous pace of economic expansion 
this summer.  

Second, there is some evidence in July of another shift 
in financial asset preferences of the public from savings and 
loan association shares to commercial bank time deposits.  
According to preliminary estimates savings and loan shares rose 
only $0.4 billion (seasonally adjusted) in July, one-half the 
gain of July 1964 and the smallest increase since January.  
While information now available on yield relationships does 
not fully explain the shift of saving flows from associations 
to commercial banks, trade sources attribute it to more 
aggressive promotional efforts by bankers.  

Finally, facing a continued and pervasive increase in 
loan demands, banks have been more willing to bid for CD money 
since midyear. Large increases in outstanding CDs at banks 
outside New York City took place in July, when interest rate 
relationships allowed these banks to be aggressive issuers, 
and in August major New York City banks returned to the market 
in size.  

Looking ahead, time deposit growth might not continue to 
keep pace with a strong fall loan expansion, since returns on 

competing market instruments have moved slightly higher and the 
attraction of funds away from savings and loan associations 
that developed in July may not persist. Assuming no further 
change in interest rate relationships, however, and a contin
uing rapid growth in incomes, interest-bearing deposits at 
banks should continue to increase at rates higher than in the 
second quarter, thus contributing to further substantial 
expansion in bank credit.  

(5) Capital markets.--To what extent does recent price weakness 
in the bond markets reflect current supply-demand considerations 

as opposed to psychological factors? 

Declines in U.S. Treasury bond prices since late July 

seem to reflect primarily a shift in dealer and investor 
expectations. In other bond markets, while changed expecta

tions have exerted their influence, price movements have

-23-



8/31/65

reflected changes in the volume of current offerings as well.  
In the case of corporate bonds, for example, an unseasonably 
large calendar of new offerings has tended to confirm changed 
expectations and has reinforced their price-depressing effects.  
In the case of municipals, on the other hand, a marked--albeit 
essentially seasonal--cut-back in August offerings has helped 
to keep prices relatively stable.  

Earlier in the summer, although uncertainties concerning 
Vietnam and sterling were recognized, market psychology was 
dominated by a general presumption that the pace of economic 
expansion would slacken following a steel settlement. While 
ic was felt that the momentum of the economic expansion 
already prevailing would continue to generate unusually heavy 
business demands for external financing through the summer, 
questions were being raised whether these demands would persist 
so strongly later in the year.  

Escalation in Vietnam, coming on top of the unexpectedly 
strong summer economic performance, has erased market doubts 
concerning a possible economic slow-down, and instead has 
given rise to concern that the combined pressures from a 
continuing capital boom and rising Federal expenditures might 
trigger more widespread commodity price increases.  

With this change of perspective, investors have revised 
their judgments both as to future supplies and future demands 
for funds. Demands of businesses for external financing are 
now expected to be maintained at levels well above normal, 
and some--as yet indeterminant--increase in Treasury borrowing 
is generally assumed. At the same tine discussion has intensi
fied as to the chances for a shift to a more restrictive 
monetary policy and a further increase in Federal Reserve dis
count rates.  

During this same period, the markets were swept by a wave 
of pessimism about sterling. While this attitude was later 
moderated by the improved British trade figures for July, inves
tors are still highly sensitive to the possibility of renewed 
deterioration in the payments positions of both Britain and the 
United States.  

In short, price weakness in Treasury bonds over the past 
month has been the result chiefly of expectations which events 
have not yet confirmed or disproved. In response to these 
expectations, dealers have pressed to reduce their inventories

-24-



8/31/65

of longer-term issues, and investors have tended to hold back 
from bond purchases at prevailing prices. Price softness in 
the market has also been abetted from time to time by some bank 
selling and by a tendency for some investors to switch out of 
Governments into corporate bonds in response to the recently 
more attractive yield spread in favor of the latter.  

In the corporate bond market, expectations of heavy fall 
financing have been an important fac:or in recent price declines, 
but it remains difficult to sort out the extent to which market 
reports of prospective new issue volume represent firm plans 
for financing as opposed to mere conjecture. Some unexpected 
additions to the August calendar already scheduled for Septem
ber is sizable. However, it is not yet clear whether total 
September offerings--including private placements--will run 
much ahead of the $1.1 billion average monthly volume for the 
year to date.  

Finally, although a substantial, partly seasonal, increase 
is expected in new municipal offerings after Labor Day, there 
is no tirm indication that this volune will run significantly 
ahead of the average monthly volume prior to August. Even 
though the August new issue volume has been well below July, 
municipal dealers' inventories since mid-August have climbed 
back around the $800 million level. Such an inventory build
up could be evidence of a less active bank interest in the 
face of current and expected loan demands; alternatively, it 
may merely be a reflection of investor caution associated with 
the recent shift in expectations. Nevertheless, the combina
tion of the change in market psychology and the larger September 
calendar could conceivably lead municipal dealers, like Govern
ment dealers, to press to lighten their inventories, thereby 
spreading recent price weaknesses to the tax-exempt market as 
well.  

(6) Money market relationships.--Assuming a continuation of 
current monetary policy, what range of money market conditions, 
interest rates, reserve availability, and reserve utilization 
by the banking system might prove mutually consistent during 
coming weeks? 

In August weeks net borrowed reserves and member bank 
borrowings have averaged around $170 million and $550 million 

respectively, not much changed from their June-July averages.  
The rate on 3-month Treasury bills has fluctuated in a 3.80 
to 3.87 per cent range, moving to the upper end of that range 
most recently as market demand for bills has tapered off

-25-



8/31/65

seasonally. Federal funds have continued to trade mainly at 
4-1/8 per cent, with trading below that rate more infrequent 
than earlier and a small amount of trading at 4-1/4 per cent 
reported. Despite the consistently firm atmosphere in the 
funds market, dealer loan rates in New York have been main
tained at the lower end of their 1965 range, as major banks 
in the City have remained in relatively comfortable reserve 
positions and dealer financing requirements have declined.  

Assuming a continuation of current monetary policy and 
ro new disturbances from international developments, net 
borrowed reserves could remain in a $150 to $200 million 
range in the weeks ahead, but with bill rates fluctuating 
over a somewhat wider and higher range than recently. The 
3-month bill could fluctuate between 3.85 per cent, or a 
little below, up to around 3.95 per cent. Seasonal con
traction of bill demand in August will be followed by money 
market pressures during the mid-September tax and dividend 
period and a Treasury financing in the bill area in late 
September or early October. Temporary declines below cur
rent levels are also possible, on the other hand, especially 
if the System should meet a sizable portion of its reserve 
needs around Labor Day through purchases of bills in the 
market and if public fund demand expands seasonally in early 
September.  

As noted under question 5, yields in the U.S. and 
corporate bond markets have risen recently. Since this 
rise has reflected more a change in market expectations 
than changes in current supplies and demands, these markets 
could be entering a period of pause as participants wait 
for developments to confirm or deny their changed outlook.  
Some further rise in Treasury bond yields should not be 
ruled out, however, particularly if banks begin to press 
securities on the market more and more in order to make 
room for expected fall loan demand or if dealers encounter 
difficulty in reducing further their still sizable bond 
positions. Municipal yields could come under some upward 
pressure as fall approaches, if strong bank loan demand 
results in curtailed commercial bank purchases of these 
bonds and/or municipal dealers try to lighten their large 
inventories.  

In the environment described, continued vigorous bank 
credit expansion is to be expected. Loan demands appear 
considerably greater than seasonal, and banks will be helped

-26-



8/31/65

in accommodating loan requests by the strong growth in their 
time deposits (as indicated under question 4). The growth in 
money supply will probably continue erratic, aggravated by 
sharp swings in the Treasury's cash balance in August, Septem
ber, and October. On the average, however, the demand deposit 
component of the money supply might expand at an annual rate in 
the neighborhood of 4 per cent over the months ahead.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with Mr.  

Treiber, who made the following statement: 

The domestic economy has continued to advance vigorously 
on a broad front. The most recent data on industrial produc
tion, new orders for durable goods, personal income, retail 
sales, employment, corporate profits, prospective capital 
spending, and other factors add up to a distinctly buoyant 
current picture. The prospective step-up in spending, trig
gered by the developments in Vietnam, has added to the 
buoyancy.  

The wage negotiations in the steel industry have not 
yet produced a settlement, and the President has intervened 
to press the parties for a settlement without a strike. Thus, 
a long strike does not appear likely. Some reduction in 
customers' steel inventories appears in prospect for the 
remainder of the year. Such inventory reduction, plus a 
continuation of a sideways movement in residential construc
tion, may be blessings in disguise as tempering factors in 
a rapid economic expansion.  

Pressures on prices are a cause for increasing concern, 
as added demands for goods and services press against the 
more limited availability of unused resources. Increases 
have been announced recently for a number of important indus
trial materials. Some reduction in wholesale prices as well 
as consumer prices might have been expected in view of the 
reports that about three-fourths of the recent excise tax 
reduction had been passed on to consumers; yet such prices 
failed to decline in July and may have risen in August.  
Some selected increases in steel prices appear probable 
regardless of the nature of the wage settlement in the steel 
industry.  

Recent balance of payments figures underscore the 
temporary nature of the second-quarter improvement. The 
underlying tide in payments is clearly against us. So far

-27-



8/31/65

in the third quarter we have seen a greater than seasonal 
decline in the trade surplus and increase in the tourist 
deficit, and a noticeable rise in the volume of new foreign 
securities issues placed here. In the absence of clear 
prospects for offsetting developments, a poor balance of 
payments record for the third quarter seems inevitable.  

Since our last meeting, there has been some improvement 
in international financial sentiment with respect to sterling, 
but the situation is still delicate. A renewed deterioration 
in sentiment, or other international developments, could 
being pressure on the dollar in international markets and 
on our own sensitive domestic markets.  

The demand for bank credit continues to be strong.  
There is no clear evidence that the growth of bank credit, 
or of all credit in use, has slackened from its rapid second-
quarter pace or that it has declined to the rate of growth in 
overall production.  

The most recent figures fcr the New York City banks show 
further substantial strength in total credit and in business 
loans. Bank liquidity has continued to decline. The moderately 
tighter lending terms gradually put into effect by many banks, 
particularly those in the major centers, over the first half 
of the year apparently continue as these banks still foresee 
possibly stronger than seasonal fall loan demands. As the 
yields on new issues of top-quality corporate bonds have 
risen to levels above the prime rate some sentiment is now 
being expressed for a rise in the prime rate, which has not 
been changed since it was reduced from 5 to 4-1/2 per cent 
in August 1960. With higher yields on corporate bonds and 
continued heavy demand for ban credit, some upward move in 
bank rates is logical.  

Although expenditures of the U.S. Government are expected 
to rise, its income is also likely to be higher; it is probable 
that the Treasury's borrowing needs during the remainder of 
1965 will be modest, and could be satisfied through the sale 
of Treasury bills. The auction sale of such additional bills 
should serve as no constraint on System policy and its imple

mentation. Since the last meeting of the Committee, market 

prices of Government bonds have drifted lower as dealers have 

reduced their inventories. There is still considerable un
certainty in the market stemming from discussions about the 

future of sterling and the implications of the Vietnam situation 

coming at a time when domestic economic activity is buoyant 

and moving strongly upward.  
In my opinion some restriction in domestic credit avail

ability is now called for. Domestic considerations counsel

-28-



such a move before inflationary pressures gain further 
momentum; and the need to bring about a fundamental improve
ment in our international balance of payments is still 
pressing. The approach should be cautious in view of the 
uncertainties in international financial markets and the U.S.  
Covernment securities market.  

As evidence of firmer conditions in the money market 
flowing from such a move, somewhat higher net borrowed 
reserves and somewhat greater member bank borrowing from 
the Federal Reserve Banks would seem appropriate. Federal 
funds might be expected to trade predominantly at 4-1/8 per 
cent with more frequent trades at 4-1/4 per cent, and the 
yields on Treasury bills might be expected to rise moderately.  
As for the form of the directive, I favor alternative B.1/ 

I would not favor an increase in the discount rate at 
this time. If a firmer open market policy is adopted and 
money market rates move higher, careful consideration of an 
increase in the discount rate may well be appropriate before 
long.  

Mr. Ellis reported that the prevailing business situation in 

New England was one of high, if not record, activity. Summer business 

had generally equaled or surpassed expectations. Barring the unpre

dictable effects of steel developments on regional activities, the 

general expectation was for a vigorous fall season.  

The essential outlines of present conditions, Mr. Ellis 

continued, were provided by summary statistics: In July, manufactur

ing output was up from June, and 8.1 per cent above a year ago; 

employment also was up over the month, and 2.2 per cent higher than a 

year earlier; unemployment, seasonally adjusted, about held its own 

relative to June, and insured unemployment was down 19 per cent in 

the year to a low not reached on a comparable basis since July 1956.  

1/ Two alternative drafts of the directive prepared by the staff are 
appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

8/31/65 -29-



8/31/65 -30

Those bare-bcne statistics were fleshed out by recent news stories 

that gave some flavor of events. The furor about special requests 

to Secretary of Labor Wirtz to allow 500 experienced Canadian apple 

pickers into New England emphasized that there was a crop to be 

picked, even though its quality had certainly been affected by the 

extensive drcught this summer. Seventeen counties in New England 

had been officially classified as disaster areas because of the 

drought, thereby entitling farmers to special access to Federal 

loans and reauced feed costs. Meanwhile, tourist attraction centers 

were having a good season, with an average attendance increase in 

July of 7 per cent over July 1964. Several of the District's shoe 

manufacturer. had announced price increases on their spring lines 

that would average about 5 per cent.  

The financial counterpart of those trends continued to be 

sharp expansion, Mr. Ellis remarked. Deposit balances at monthly

reporting mutual savings banks in the District increased only 0.5 

per cent in July compared with plus 0.7 per cent in July 1964, 

primarily because withdrawals were heavier and new deposits lighter 

than last year. In contrast, savings deposits at the reporting mem

ber banks increased 1.7 per cent on average in the three-week period 

ending August 28, to record a 16 per cent year-to-year gain. Even 

that growth apparently did not satisfy the banks' objectives, however, 

since they reached into the negotiable certificate of deposit market--



8/31/65 -31

in some cases with higher rates--to achieve a sharp expansion in "all 

other time deposits" that brought the year-to-year gain to 27 per 

cent. The weekly reporting bank sample indicated that those funds 

had been flowing principally into business loans, which showed a 19 

per cent year-to-year gain, and into real estate loans, where the 

gain was 22 per cent, about twice the national average.  

Because monetary policy operated with a substantial time lag 

between actions and their ultimate effect on the economy, Mr. Ellis 

said, it was inevitable and proper .hat policy be shaped in light of 

business prospects on the immediate horizon. Last spring the pros

pect of a substantial slowdown in business activity in the fall 

influenced the Committee's decisions to make no further probing moves.  

Now, on the threshold of the fall season, although details were still 

clouded by the uncertainty of the steel negotiations, there seemed 

to be a much more general expectation that further substantial advances 

would occur this fall. Assuming that the Vietnam buildup would continue 

at about the present rate and that the steel production interruption, 

if any, would be of short duration, it seemed likely that industrial 

production would continue to rise.  

In Mr. Ellis' judgment there was little prospect for stability 

in industrial commodity prices in the next few months; the uptrend 

that started in late 1964 would probably continue. A number of forth

coming price increases for this fall had been announced, in such items



8/31/65 -32

as machine tools, paper, rubber products, yarn, cement, and sulphuric 

acid. With the economy continuing strong, there was no reason to 

think those plans would be cancelled.  

Coupled with those developments, Mr. Ellis continued, were 

reports from bankers that they anticLpated that fall credit demands 

would match or exceed seasonal patterns. It was understandable if 

bankers, faced with such expectation and with their own reduced 

liquidity, were contributing to the market pressures that were reduc

ing the prices of long- and intermediate-term Governments. Further

more, the yield spread between new corporates and Governments of 

about 40 basis points was high by recent standards, and had begun to 

stimulate switching from Governments. Although many banks held few 

Governments, prospective strong loan demand could be expected to 

reduce further holdings of Governments where feasible.  

In that context, Mr. Ellis asked, what was the proper role 

for monetary policy? It seemed clear that, with continuing strong 

loan demands, even a modest probing action such as he had been advo

cating in recent meetings would lead to an upward movement of 

interest rates; indeed, it was possible that the present posture of 

policy would lead to rate increases if demand strengthened. The 

changes might include upward movements in yields on all maturities 

in the Government list, an advance in the prime rate, and, in due 

course, a confirming rise in the discount rate. In short, if the



8/31/65 -33

Committee started on that path, its course was not likely to be 

reversible in the near future.  

Were sterling not in its present weak and sensitive position, 

Mr. Ellis said, he would have no hesitation in advocating that the 

price of money be allowed to rise in response to domestic demands 

this fall, despite the immediate uncertainties. But sterling had to 

be considerec, and during this critical fall period it was difficult 

to judge what expectational effects might flow from general rate 

increases in the United States, including a discount rate increase.  

Perhaps he exaggerated the possibilities of repercussions on sterling; 

his analysis might be two months behind that of Mr. Reynolds. He 

would like to hear how others would appraise the alternative possi

bilitie. Meanwhile, he was persuaded that policy should not be 

materially altered during the next four weeks. That interval should 

provide more insight on the steel labor negotiations as well as on 

the significance of the present peace feelers concerning Vietnam.  

And the market would have been allowed to settle down, if other events 

led in that direction, without having been tilted by a policy move.  

His own definition of "no change," Mr. Ellis observed, would 

involve a target for net borrowed reserves centered at $150 million, 

with the expectation that borrowings would continue to average over 

$500 million. Three-month Treasury bill rates might fluctuate near 

the top of their recent range, and Federal funds rates might hold



8/31/65 -34

generally at a 1/8 per cent premium. He would accept alternative A 

of the draft directives, but would interpret it in terms of the third 

alternative that Mr. Holland had described--to call not for easing 

actions but for operations designed to help stabilize the long end of 

the market, by providing needed reserves through purchases of longer

term issues and withdrawing reserves, when necessary, through sales 

of short-term issues.  

Mr. Irons reported that business activity in the Eleventh 

District, as in the nation as a whole, continued at a very high level.  

Industrial production was up, construction was strong, new car sales 

were high, employment continued to rise, and unemployment remained at 

the low rate of 3.3 per cent. The situation in agriculture was highly 

favorable this year; the weather had been excellent throughout the 

District, and there would be increased cotton yields and higher out

put of wheat and other crops. Cattle prices were holding steady at 

the improved levels of three months ago. In sum, District economic 

conditions were unusually good--in some respects almost startlingly 

so.  

With respect to financial developments, Mr. Irons continued, 

bank loans continued to rise, particularly in the commercial and 

industrial and consumer loan categories. Banks were continuing to 

reduce their Government securities holdings and at the same time were 

increasing their holdings of other securities. Time and savings



8/31/65 -35

deposits had risen; so had demand deposits, although by a smaller 

amount. Purchases of Federal funds were rather high, averaging about 

$800 million in the past three weeks, with sales averaging about $650 

million. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had been low; banks had 

been obtaining money from other sources. Bankers were expecting 

heavy loan demands over the rest of the year, in excess of usual 

seasonal requirements. Bankers and businesmen generally thought 

that the business outlook was strong and that some further price 

rises were possible, although they were concerned about the same 

kinds of uncertainties that had been mentioned today.  

Turning to the national situation, Mr. Irons said that the 

question facing the Committee was whether the elements of strength 

in the economy were sufficient to prevail over possible unfavorable 

developments; or, in other words, how much weight should be placed 

on the present uncertainties in deciding or policy. In his judgment, 

the Committee should place a considerable amount of weight on them.  

One might conclude that some moderate firming was in order, along 

the lines Mr. Treiber had mentioned, in view of the very high level 

of economic activity, the somewhat less favorable balance of payments 

situation, the likelihood of increased Federal expenditures as a 

result of Vietnam, the continued inching up of prices, the optimism 

of businessmen, the rapid expansion of credit, and the ability of 

banks to obtain the funds they needed for further credit expansion.



8/31/65 -36

It seemed to him, however, that this was not a good time for firming 

action. With the steel negotiations still in process, the problems 

of sterling still unresolved, and other uncertainties, it was prefer

able, in his judgment, not to change the posture of policy signifi

cantly. He would hold a steady course while watching developments 

over the coming four weeks closely, and reconsider the situation at 

the next meeting.  

Perhaps, Mr. Irons observed, it would be desirable to reduce 

the pressures on long-term Governments by purchases of coupon issues, 

with some offsetting sales of Treasury bills, as had been suggested.  

It might be charged that such actions would savor of a pegging opera

tion, but he thought they could be carried out short of that point, 

Mr. Irons thought that the time was approaching at which the 

Committee would have to begin moving toward a firmer policy. When 

that time arrived he believed it would not be long before an increase 

in the discount rate would become inevitable. At the moment he would 

be reluctant to see a discount rate change.  

In accordance with his policy views, Mr. Irons continued, he 

preferred alternative A to B for the directive. He thought, however, 

that there should be more emphasis on the existing uncertainties than 

in the staff's draft. As he had indicated, it was because of those 

uncertainties that he preferred no change in policy; if they had not 

been present he certainly would have favored alternative B. Conse

quently, he would prefer language that indicated the dominance of the



8/31/65 -37

uncertainties over the evidences of strength in the economy, if the 

Committee decided not to change policy today.  

Mr. Swan reported that the economic situation in the Twelfth 

District was somewhat mixed. Aerospace employment was up in July 

and the industry's July forecast was for further increases over the 

next four months. On the other hand, the unemployment rate for the 

District rose rather sharply in July, in contrast to the national 

figure. Not enough details were available as yet to indicate defi

nitely where the unemployment rise occurred, but it seemed to be 

related primarily to the situations in agriculture and construction.  

District housing starts in July were at the lowest level in five 

years. Nevertheless, the demand for lumber had remained rather strong, 

with further scattered price increases. Nonresidential construction 

continued at high levels. There had been a number of strikes in the 

building trades that, for the most part, were relatively short and 

were settled on terms rather favorable for labor.  

Mr. Swan commented on the adequacy of the labor supply for 

harvesting the tomato crop that he had mentioned at the previous 

meeting. The growers estimated that they needed 23,000 workers, and 

Secretary of Labor Wirtz's committee had now certified about 18,000 

or 19,000. The canners were faced with reduced acreage and prospects 

of a shortage of labor for harvesting, but earlier in the year they 

had held very substantial inventories of tomato products. In the



8/31/65 -38

second quarter, however, the canners had shipped some thirteen million 

cases, as compared with nine million in the same period last year.  

Thus, the canners would start the new season with smaller than usual 

inventories, and substantial price increases on canned tomato products 

were expected.  

As to banking developments, Mr. Swan continued, the general 

impression in the District, as elsewhere, was one of strong demand 

for loans. The fact remained, however, that in the three weeks end

ing August 18, the rate of expansion in bank credit at District weekly 

:eporting banks was considerably less than in the rest of the country 

and also less than in the District a year ago. Much of the rise that 

did occur was due to the increase in holdings of securities other than 

Governments, which was greater at District reporting banks than in the 

rest of the country. The increase in holdings of other securities 

seemed to be related in considerable measure to a policy decision by 

one of the District's larger banks to shift a substantial volume of 

funds from the Federal funds market into short-term municipals in light 

of current interest rate relationships. Despite the smaller than 

national increases in both total bank credit and loans, District banks 

were still borrowing in substantial volume at the Reserve Bank, and 

they remained in rather tight reserve positions.  

Turning to policy, Mr. Swan said that he, too, had been 

impressed by the uncertainties in the present situation. As to the 

steel negotiations, along with Mr. Holland he wondered whether, if a



8/31/65 -39

settlement was reached quickly, the following inventory liquidation 

might not be much smaller than had been expected in light of probable 

military requirements for steel and the possibility of a price increase.  

In any case, given the present uncertainties, he did not think that 

this was an appropriate time for the Committee to change policy. He 

was in complete agreement with Mr. Ellis' interpretation of "no change." 

Mr. Swan went on to say that he shared Mr. Irons' feeling with 

respect tc the directive. Perhaps the problem could be met without 

any elaborate change in alternative A by referring to the existing 

uncertainties in the first sentence, before the statement that "the 

domestic economy expanded further." He also questioned the desirabil

ity of retaining, without qualification, the phrase "gold outflows 

have continued" in view of the recent reduction in the rate of out

flow.  

Mr. Galusha reported that the N..nth District continued to move 

forward at a rapid pace. The extraordinary levels of agricultural 

production had engendered a high degree of optimism among District 

banks. There was, however, less optimism as to prices. Nonfarm 

employment was high, with Minnesota reporting a June-July gain larger 

than in any year since 1957. Tourist income and travel had also 

broken records where figures were available.  

Credit demand at District banks appeared to be on a plateau, 

Mr. Galusha said. No Twin City banker anticipated a resumption of



8/31/65 -40

the excessive demand of the second quarter. Credit was becoming 

increasingly selective, with the major banks attempting to assert 

rate pressure where they could. There reportedly had been no change 

in the quality of credit.  

Mr. Galusha said that he would confine his comments on the 

staff questions to the first, second, and fifth. Optimism about the 

nation's economic performance in the second half of 1965, and in 1966 

as well, seemed to be increasing. He, for one, was more optimistic 

than he had been a few weeks ago. The third-quarter increase in 

money GNP might turn out to be about as large as was recorded in the 

second quarter. Some slowing down in the rate of economic growth 

would seem to be on the horizon; more particularly, he expected 

smaller quarterly increases in money GNP in the fourth quarter and 

for a while thereafter than had been recorded lately, in spite of 

the recently announced Vietnam buildup.  

The rumbers would indicate that the buildup actually had 

started several months ago, Mr. Galusha said. He directed the Com

mittee's attention to second-quarter 1965 Federal purchases; the 

increase between the first and second quarters was impressive.  

There probably would be a further buildup and further increases in 

GNP over what it would have been in the absence of a larger war. How

ever, he could not see the coming buildup as doing more, at least in 

the fourth quartet, than offsetting the likely reduction in inventory 

accumulation.



8/31/65 -41

In sum, Mr. Galusha's feeling was that the third quarter could 

well witness an increase in money GNP of the order of magnitude of 

that recorded in the second quarter; and that the fourth quarter would 

witness a smaller, if still impressive, increase. At the moment, there

fore, it appeared plausible that the econony would pretty much hold 

its own in terms of resource utilization over the remainder of the 

year. Unemployment and utilization rates might move a bit one way or 

the other in coming months, but not, he thought, greatly in either 

direction. And he was inclined to believe that whatever general 

price pressures existed earlier this year would continue to moderate 

over the remainder of the year.  

In that connection, Mr. Galusha noted that the changes in 

straight-time hourly earnings in manufacturing reported in the "green 

book"1/ seemed to him surprisingly small. In light of the recent 

decline in unemployment rates and, more importantly, the record cor

porate profits, he would have expected a considerably larger increase.  

But no doubt it was too much to hope that there had been a lasting 

change in the behavior of money wage rates, a change hinting of less 

cost-push pressure in the future. He also was encouraged, incidentally, 

by the green book report that, after all, unit labor costs had not 

been rising.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
by the Board's staff for the Committee.



8/31/65 -42

If Mr. Galusha's view of basic economic developments led him 

to favor no change in monetary policy at this time, so also did tech

nical market conditions. Recent experience strongly suggested that 

financial markets were a bit nervous; perhaps "apprehensive" would be 

a better word. The implication was that a modest change in policy-

a probing operation, if one preferred--might not at this moment be 

possible. An expression like "slightly firmer" connoted a stable, 

disciplined market which did not appear to exist at present. There 

was considerable risk that a small change in marginal reserve meas

ures would be transformed by market expectations into a dispropor

tionately large rate adjustment, in long-term rates as well as short, 

and possibly even in bank lending rates. Adjustment in those rates 

was overdue, and could come even with no perceptible change in the 

Committee's policy. Nor, finally, did he see anything in balance of 

payments developments sufficient to warrant a change in policy at 

this time. In brief, he still favored alternative A of the draft 

directives.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that the Seventh District economy had 

moved through the midsummer months without losing momentum. The only 

weak spot was steel, where strike prospects remained uncertain. On 

balance, he believed that unless there was a prolonged strike the 

impact of a cutback in steel probably would be confined largely to 

that industry and to associated transportation and materials-supplying 

firms. The final demand for goods and services appeared to be strong



8/31/65 -43

and getting stronger. Continued strength in new orders for capital 

goods, together with announcements of long-range capital expenditure 

programs of firms in the steel, auto, chemical, and petroleum indus

tries, indicated the continuance of high and perhaps accelerating 

rate of outlays well into 1966.  

A considerable number of machine tool producers, encouraged 

by growing backlogs, had raised prices by 2-1/2 to 12 per cent, Mr.  

Scanlon said. A moderate uptrend in average wholesale prices con

tinued. In part, that was related to the escalation of military 

operations in Vietnam. There still appeared no indication that the 

general price uptrend was accelerating.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that District labor markets appeared to 

have tightened further. There was no major area with a substantial 

labor surplus, in the District, now that South Bend had been reclas

sified.  

Figures for District banks indicated relatively greater 

slowing in growth of total bank credit in July and August than did 

national figures, Mr. Scanlon said. The banks had continued to 

reduce broker and dealer loans and holdings of Government securities, 

although their business and real estate loans and other securities 

had increased further. Business loans had risen faster in the Dis

trict than at all weekly reporting banks, and larger gains than in 

the same period last year were reported for most of the major indus

trial categories. Bankers generally reported that loan demand was



8/31/65 -44

strong, but there was some difference of view as to whether it would 

be strong enough to provide upward pressure on interest rates.  

The basic deficit position of the Chicago banks had continued 

to grow somewhat larger despite reductions in their holdings of Govern

ments and dealer loans, Mr. Scanlon continued. CDs outstanding at 

those banks had declined since the end of July. Borrowings at the 

Reserve Bank's discount window had risen somewhat over the past three 

weeks, although the number of banks borrowing--both reserve city and 

country--had declined, and total borrowing was relatively small.  

While Mr. Scanlon interpreted the available evidence as 

indicating a continued expansion in business activity and probably a 

further reduction of the now small supply of unused resources in the 

Seventh District, the magnitude and duration of the adjustment in 

steel remained uncertain. Therefore, he would favor no change in 

policy posture at this time. He recognized that that might be erring 

on the side of excessive ease, but he did not favor additional probing 

actions because he questioned whether even a slight firming was pos

sible at this juncture without a rather prompt increase in the discount 

rate. It would seem to him that any firming would, for example, result 

in Federal funds trading at 4-1/4 per cent quite regularly. He doubted 

whether the Committee could have that situation for more than a very 

limited period of time without encountering difficulty in administer

ing the discount window. Accordingly, he did not favor a change in



8/31/65 -45

policy unless the discount rate was changed, and he would prefer to 

wait a bit longer before making that move. He preferred alternative A 

for the directive to be adopted today, with the same reservations that 

Mr. Irons had expressed.  

Mr. Clay said that the national economy continued to exhibit 

an impressive performance in terms of both expanding activity and 

increasing employment of manpower. The pattern of activity in the 

Tenth District was quite different from that nationally, as was 

evidenced by the fact that nonfarm employment, seasonally adjusted, 

had failed to increase this year. The contrast between District and 

national growth was attributable largely to smaller cyclical variabi

lity in District manufacturing, as a result of relatively heavy 

concentration in nondurable goods manufacturing. Reductions in 

defense-oriented industries had been a factor in the District's employ

ment pattern. By contrast, some defense plants in the District would 

now experience increases in employment before the end of the year, as 

a result of the expanded military program in South Vietnam. Those 

included both stepped-up activity in going facilities and reactivation 

of facilities that had been on a stand-by basis since the Korean war 

period.  

A contrast between the nation and the Tenth District was 

apparent also in banking developments, Mr. Clay continued. The rates 

of expansion in bank credit, total loans, business loans, and consumer 

loans at District banks this year all had been less than the national



8/31/65 -46

rates of increase. Growth in those categories had been somewhat larger 

at District country banks than at District city banks, however. The 

growth in bank credit relative to available funds in many country banks 

was such that they were making extra efforts to attract and hold depos

its by increasing their interest rates paid on time deposits to 4-1/2 

per cent. Competition with savings and loan institutions was a factor 

in that competitive effort. For the most part, rural banks did not 

increase their time deposit rate to the 4-1/2 per cent level at the 

time of the modification in Regulation Q permitting it, and the Reserve 

Bank had no organized data as to the proportion that were at that level 

now. His impression was gained from reports of Reserve Bank represent

atives calling on banks.  

Mr. Clay went on to say that as long as the improvement in the 

national economy took place in an orderly fashion, as it had thus far, 

it was a further step toward the achievement of national economic goals.  

The staff analysis carefully reviewed the factors involved in the pro

spective situation and, it seemed fair to say, gave evidence that 

further advance in the months ahead likely could continue to take place 

in an orderly fashion. The qualification concerning the uncertainty 

as to the amount and timing of military expenditures set forth in that 

analysis was a very important one, however. Moreover, it was difficult 

to know what effect changing attitudes and expectations growing out of 

recent developments might have on private economic decision-making.



8/31/65 -47

Added to that was the crucial decision being awaited in the current 

steel wage negotiations.  

The logical thing to do in terms of monetary policy, it seemed 

to Mr. Clay, was to continue essentially the current policy and to 

watch closely both domestic and international developments. Money 

and capital market forces influenced by expectations already had placed 

upward pressure on yields and had led to somewhat uncertain money and 

capital markets. Obviously, that policy position would need to be 

modified by any sudden developments in the military or international 

fields requiring monetary policy action. Alternative A of the direc

tive drafts appeared satisfactory to him.  

Mr. Wayne commented that in the Committee's policy discussions 

from time to time there had been references to the market's tightening 

itself. That had rarely happened because the Committee had usually 

intervened to affect the situation one way or the other. But it 

seemed to him that it had happened in recent weeks. With no change 

in monetary policy, a firmer tone had developed in both the money 

and capital markets, whether for financial or psychological reasons.  

Of course, that might be a delayed reaction to the Committee's firmer 

policy of the past six months.  

In any case, Mr. Wayne said, he was content to see the develop

ment continue for the present. He would favor maintaining reserve 

availability at about its present level. If recent market trends 

continued, that would probably mean somewhat firmer money market



8/31/65 -48

conditions and higher short-term interest rates. Those conditions 

would be appropriate in view of the vigor with which the economy was 

moving forward, the uncertainties on the military front, and the 

fiscal stimuli the economy would be receiving in the next few weeks.  

Also, some additional firmness here would be helpful to Canada in 

coping with inflationary pressures. On the other hand, he believed 

that any overt move toward tighter credit, and especially an increase 

in the disccunt rate, would be unwise now in view of the weakness in 

the capital market and the position of sterling.  

Mr. Wayne noted that recent increases in industrial production 

had centered chiefly in equipment and materials, and had apparently 

been associated with rising defense procurement, steadily expanding 

business capital outlays, and metals stockpiling. While the metals 

stockpile was likely to be reduced, he anticipated that defense orders 

would probably continue to increase and recent reports indicated that 

businessmen had once again raised their sights on plant and equipment 

outlays. On balance, he expected industrial production to increase 

over the remainder of the year but at a rate somewhat more moderate 

than in June and July.  

Despite steadily expanding capacity, Mr. Wayne said, prospects 

for stability in industrial commodity prices did not look encouraging.  

Private demand continued to rise and public outlays were moving up in 

several major areas. A wage settlement was forthcoming in steel which, 

if it followed patterns already set this year, might well place 

additional pressure on the industrial wage structure. In brief, strong



8/31/65 -49

demand and higher wages seemed likely to keep industrial prices under 

some upward pressure through the remainder of the year.  

On the basis of contracts with District banks and given the 

international rate structure, Mr. Wayne believed that foreigners were 

still prepared to step up their borrowing here and that the banks 

would expand their foreign lending substantially were it not for the 

voluntary program. Application of the Interest Equalization Tax to 

bank loans had probably effected some restraint, but he thought that 

the voluntary program was at the moment the most significant restraint 

preventing a sizable increase in bank lending to foreigners.  

Mr. Wayne observed that the growth rate of time deposits at 

weekly reporting banks thus far in 1965 had been about equal to the 

average for the past four years. On an unadjusted basis, the recent 

acceleration in the growth rate did not appear to be more significant 

than other fluctuations which had occurred during that period. First, 

the rate in the second quarter was probably depressed appreciably by 

heavy tax payments; payments of individual and corporate income taxes 

were approximately $4 billion more in the second quarter than in the 

first, whereas last year the difference was only $800 million. Sec

ondly, the recent rise was probably stimulated by the reportedly 

heavy loss of savings at savings and loan associations in July. The 

recent buildup in time deposits suggested that banks were in a position 

to continue lending and investing at a good pace. When they had taken



8/31/65 -50

care of the demand for business and consumer loans they would probably 

put most of the remaining funds into municipals and mortgages, as they 

had been doing.  

Mr. Wayne thought the current price weakness in the bond 

markets was attributable in large part to psychological factors and 

those, in turn, appeared to stem from a reappraisal of domestic economic 

conditions and from continued uncertainty over the future of the pound.  

The market now apparently saw some possiblity that the economy might 

become overheated in the coming months instead of easing off, as had 

been widely predicted. Speculation regarding the coming steel settle

ment also was causing some apprehension. As a precaution against the 

possibility of higher interest rates and a tightening of monetary policy, 

dealers had been reducing their positions in longer-term Government 

securities while investors had been shying away from long-term commit

ments.  

Fifth District business continued to advance in line with 

national trends, Mr. Wayne said. The latest survey reflected some 

improvement in business sentiment, with expectations now about evenly 

divided between further improvement and stability at present levels.  

The statistical record also indicated continuing strength, with sub

stantial gains in nearly all sectors of nonfarm employment and rising 

man-hours in most of the principal manufacturing industries. The 

textile business, in particular, remained in an unusually strong



8/31/65

position. At this early stage in the tobacco marketing season the 

average price of flue-cured was 18 per cent higher than a year ago 

and dollar sales were up 30 per cent.  

Returning to his starting point, Mr. Wayne said he believed 

that the Committee's policy should be essentially one of no change, 

maintaining a level of reserve availability about equal to that of 

the past three weeks. Obviously, he would prefer alternative A for 

the directive. He questioned the desirability of placing additional 

emphasis on uncertainties since "no change" implied a continuation 

of the steady pressure to which the Committee had been committed for 

some months. In his opinion, the Manager should be authorized to 

provide additional reserves if market forces produced more than a 

moderate firing of money market conditions.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

It seems clear that major factors are at work or in 
the offing that might well call for a reappraisal of all 
Government stabilization policies, monetary policy included.  
I have in mind, particularly, the steel wage-price picture 
and the escalation of outlays for Vietnam; but there is 
also the cliff-hanging exhibition being put on by sterling.  
In each of these areas, however, we do not yet know what 
is going to happen.  

In the absence of other impelling reasons for chang
ing monetary policy, therefore, I favor holding a steady 

course until we have had an opportunity to better weigh 

the import of developments in these key sectors. So far 

as I can judge, no other factors are so compelling. Price 

performance continues restrained, and monetary expansion 

is not out of bounds. Commodity markets have been remark

ably stable considering all the loose talk about the size 
of our Vietnam build-up and its possible consequences for 
the economy.

-51-



8/31/65

Such uncertainties in the outlook, however, have helped 
to give the financial markets a case of the jitters, and the 
resultant increases in long-term interest rates are running 
well ahead of the apparent changes in real demands. I rec
ognize this bond market weakness has developed for reasons 
largely unconnected with the stable money market conditions 
being maintained by the Manager, but I think we also ought 
to recognize that a persistence of such higher long-term 
rates can exert a tightening influence on the economy, other 
things being equal, and that monetary policy needs to be 
framed with this in mind. I personally would not want to 
act overtly to create offsetting ease in reserve availability 
until and unless the steel and Vietnam pictures are resolved 
in a way that makes it likely that no added monetary restraint 
would be required this fall. But, at the same time, I would 
certainly not wish to move in the opposite direction and 
thereby compound the tightness already evident in some longer
term markets.  

As I said at our last meeting, 1 would be prepared to 
see the bill rate work lower, if investor shortening of 
maturities produces any such tendency, but I frankly doubt 
that it will occur. With that qualification, I would direct 
the Manager to maintain about the same money market conditions 
as have prevailed since our last meeting. Accordingly, I 
would vote for alternative A of the current directive.  

Mr. Shepardson said he concurred completely with the view that 

buoyant conditions existed throughout the economy. But he also was 

concerned about the uncertainties abroad with respect to the position 

of sterling and the Vietnam situation, and about those at home relat

ing to the still-uncompleted steel wage negotiations. Like some others 

who had spoken, except for those uncertainties he would feel that con

ditions now called for a further move toward tightening. However, 

with the uncertainties--and particularly those concerning the steel 

negotiations, the outcome of which might or might not have a signif

icant effect on developments--he thought it would be inappropriate to

change policy at this time.

-52-



8/31/65 -53

Mr. Shepardson shared Mr. Irons' views about the directive.  

The Committee, appropriately in his view, had been changing the word

ing of the first paragraph of the directive from time to time in an 

effort to make the language reflect current conditions as it saw them.  

He thought the staff's suggested alternative A needed modification if 

the Committee concurred in the view that it should not change policy 

today primarily because of the existing uncertainties.  

He would begin the directive with .he opening statements of 

alternative B, which in his judgment presented a better description 

of the current domestic economic situation than did the equivalent 

part of alternative A. He would then add language indicating that 

the Committee's policy was unchanged in view of the prevailing uncer

tainties, which he would describe more fully than the staff draft did.  

For the second paragraph, he would accept the language of alternative 

A, except that he would delete the phrase "over the next four weeks" 

and say that open market operations shall "continue to" be conducted 

in the manner described. That change seemed desirable because of the 

possibility that some of the present uncertainties would be resolved 

in a manner that would justify reconsideration of the Committee's 

policy posture before four weeks had elapsed.  

Specifically, Mr. Shepardson proposed a directive along the

following lines:



8/31/65

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded 
further, business sentiment has become buoyant, some prices 
have been under upward pressure, bank credit expansion has 
been viorous thus far this year, and Federal expenditures 
are expected to increase in the months ahead as a result of 
the hostilities in Vietnam. Our international payments have 
reverted to deficit in August, and gold outflows have con
tinued. However, in view of the continuing uncertainties in 
securities and foreign exchange markets, in military develop
ments, and in the steel wage negotiations, it remains the 
Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to strengthen 
the international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
shall continue to be conducted with a view to maintaining 
about the same conditions in the money market as have pre
vailed in recent weeks, while taking into account the unset
tled conditions in securities and foreign exchange markets.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that he could heartily endorse a great 

deal of what he had heard this morning, but he would make a few obser

vations with a different slant. He thought it was quite likely that 

the economy was on the verge of an inventory-cycle turning point.  

There was good reason to believe that invertory accumulation had pro

ceeded more rapidly than was generally realized, not only in steel but 

also in the rest of the economy. As evidence of such a development, 

Mr. Gehman of the Board's staff had pointed to the differences in 

recent rates of output of materials and finished products. In any 

event, as Mr. Noyes had noted, the revised GNP figures showed a rate 

of inventory accumulation averaging $8 billion over the last three

-54-



8/31/65 -55

quarters, and the book value figures for July indicated an exceptionally 

large further increase at manufacturers. Thus, the inventory situation 

probably had gotten out of hand, and a steel settlement undoubtedly 

would lead tc some reappraisal of the levels of stocks.  

Consumer spending, Mr. Mitchell continued, did not appear to 

be rising sufficiently rapidly to warrant real confidence in the out

look. Nevertheless business confidence was strong; businessmen seemed 

to be disregarding the possibility of a turning point in the inventory 

cycle. The economy might surmount the inventory adjustment by a fur

ther expansion in final takings, but it seemed clearer than it had 

earlier that such an adjustment lay ahead.  

Mr. Mitchell shared the dissatisfaction others had expressed 

with the language of the directives the staff had suggested for this 

meeting. Perhaps it was not feasible to do anything about it; as 

Chairman Martin often had said, nineteen people could not write a 

directive without getting bogged down in questions of semantics.  

Nevertheless, he also had worked out some possible language, which 

read as follows: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expaned 
further, but with increasing reliance on inventory accumula
tion. Business sentiment has become buoyant. The Government 
securities and corporate capital markets have experienced a 
significant rise in yield, with top-quality corporate bonds 
at their highest yield in four years. Our international pay
ments have reverted to deficit in August, and uncertainties 
persist in foreign exchange markets. In this situation, it 
remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy



8/31/65 -56

to strengthen the international position of the dollar, to 
avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, and to counter 
speculative pressures in the bond markets, while accommodat
ing moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and 
the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
over the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
maintaining about the same conditions in the money market as 
have prevailed in recent weeks, while taking into account 
the need to cushion the unsettled conditions in the Govern
ment securities and foreign exchange markets.  

In explaining his proposed revision of the second paragraph, 

Mr. Mitchell indicated that he thought purchases of coupon issues by 

the System Account would be useful in helping to tranquilize the 

longer-term bond markets.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he had little to add this morning to 

what had been said; he agreed that no change should be made in policy, 

in view of the uncertainties existing in both the domestic and inter

national situations. As to the uncertainties in the international 

area, he was impressed with the significance of the question that 

Mr. Ellis had put to Mr. Reynolds, and with Mr. Ellis' conclusion on 

the point. While Mr. Reynolds did not think the repercussions on 

sterling of higher U.S. interest rates would be great at present, he 

had indicated that he was unsure of his judgment, and had at least 

implied the existence of some risk for sterling in any firming of U.S.  

monetary policy. Mr. Daane was not sure of his judgment either, but 

was inclined to take a somewhat less optimistic view. In any case, 

a firmer policy in this country certainly would not help the position 

of sterling.



8/31/65 -57

On the domestic side, Mr. Daane said, he agreed with Mr.  

Galusha's characterization of the atmosphere in financial markets as 

"apprehensive." Against that background, the consequences of any 

step that appeared to involve further firming--even if it were described 

as a "modest" move--were likely to run far beyond the intentions of 

those advocating it. Thus, on both international and domestic grounds, 

he would favor standing fast with respect to policy over the period 

immediately ahead.  

On the directive, Mr. Daane said he had to confess to being 

a bit puzzled. At the previous meeting Mr Galusha had said that his 

(Mr. Daane's) reasoning involved a non sequitur, and perhaps it had.  

After further reflection he had concluded that the real difficulty 

arose in the attempt to spell out, within a relatively brief first 

paragraph, the reasoning underlying the Committee's policy decision.  

Within reasonable limits it was perfectly appropriate to recognize 

any substantial changes in the factual description of the situation 

but, because of the difficulties in attempting to satisfy everyone 

the Committee was likely to make its meeting intolerably long if it 

tried to spell out all the reasons for its policy decision.  

Accordingly, Mr. Daane continued, he would temper his desire 

to suggest changes in the staff's draft. He agreed completely with 

Mr. Irons that the existing uncertainties were the primary reason 

for not changing policy today and, if the Committee was to explain



8/31/65 -58

the basis of its policy decision, that those uncertainties should be 

highlighted in the first paragraph. As to the second paragraph of the 

draft, he disliked the final phrase, which read, "while taking into 

account the unsettled conditions in securities and foreign exchange 

markets." That construction implied that unsettled conditions were 

merely something for the Account Management to keep in mind; but as 

he sensed the Committee's views they were the major reason for the 

policy decision itself. Accordingly, he proposed replacing the words, 

"while taking into account" with the words, "and to take into account." 

Mr. Maisel said he concurred with most of the observations 

that had been made, and would comment briefly only on a few points.  

He was somewhat concerned because the word "buoyant" was being treated 

as having an unfavorable connotation. He would be happy to see the 

economy become more buoyant under present circumstances, with less 

than full utilization of resources and with final demand growing no 

faster than capacity. There had been some reduction in the unemploy

ment rate but primarily as a result of the inventory buildup; there 

was no indication that final demands had risen to appropriate levels.  

He agreed that demand would start moving up now as a result of Viet

nam, and there was a possibility that it would move fast enough to 

offset the expected moderation in the rate at which inventories had 

been growing. But that expectation did not provide grounds for a 

basic change in policy, and he favored no change between now and the 

next meeting.



8/31/65

His second point, Mr. Maisel continued, concerned the long

term bond market. One reason for the prevailing uncertainty was 

that the market was unsure of the Committee's policy. The Committee 

should not accept the market's uncertainties as a given datum and 

reason for action. Instead, it should help to resolve those uncer

tainties, and reduce speculative expectations, by operating in the 

long-term market in a manner that would make its intentions clear.  

In short, the Committee ought to set the market straight.  

Mr. Maisel said that he would accept alternative A, as drafted 

by the staff, for the directive. In his judgment the Committee would 

get into a great deal of difficulty if it tried to make extensive 

revisions around the table.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that business news since the previous 

meeting of the Committee had been generally favorable, but the major 

question of whether or not the economy would continue to move upward 

in a balanced and orderly way remained unresolved. The sharp increase 

in the production index in July was unsustainable, and little further 

gain could be expected in August. Autos were unlikely to contribute 

further to g ins in industrial output this year and a downdrag from 

steel would have to be faced. Defense spending would provide a 

countervailing boost to the economy, but its contribution to aggregate 

demand was indeterminate at this time.  

A priori, Mr. Hickman said, the economy would seem to be 

closer to its potential than there had been reason to hope a month or

-59-



8/31/65 -60

two ago, but even that was uncertain since the figures on the production 

potential were now being revised. The best bet now was that GNP would 

grow at an annual rate of $9 or $10 billion in both the third and 

fourth quarters, or about the same as the second quarter rate of gain.  

For the year, that would represent a gain of 6 to 7 per cent, in cur

rent dollars, which was the same as last year's gain.  

On the price front, Mr. Hickman continued, recent information 

added little to what was known three weeks ago. Recent movements had 

been minor and there still was no evidence of general price inflation.  

In the financial sphere, Mr. Hickman said, developments of the 

past week or two had been mixed. Speculation in the London gold mar

ket was reduced by news of Canadian wheat sales to Russia. The wheat 

sales should improve the Canadian trade balance, which should reduce 

the amount of the Canadian deficit that would have to be financed in 

the United States. Nevertheless, the pound sterling remained under 

pressure, and the U.S. corporate and Government bond markets remained 

nervous and unsettled.  

Until visibility improved, Mr. Hickman observed, monetary 

policy should continue to be moderately stimulative, as it had been 

at most times throughout the current business recovery. In view of 

the uncertain outlook, he thought the Committee should take partic

ular care at this time to avoid a gradual creep towards higher net 

borrowed reserves. The Manager was to be congratulated for coming



8/31/65 -61

very close to what he (Mr. Hickman) thought was the correct target of 

$150 million net borrowed reserves during the past two weeks. On the 

other hand, the original estimates of net borrowed reserves had become 

suspect because of an almost uniform tendency during the past several 

months to revise them to deeper levels. In view of that observed bias, 

perhaps an initial target of something under $150 million, say $125 

million, might bring the revised figures nearer the desired goal.  

Mr. Hickman was not particularly happy with either of the two 

draft directives because neither stressed the elements of uncertainty 

created by the steel situation and Vietnam, and had been clearly 

pointed out by Mr. Irons and Mr. Daane. With minor modifications, 

however, he would accept alternative A, as interpreted by Mr. Ells.  

Turning to Mr. Swan's question about the possible rate of 

liquidation of steel inventories, Mr. Hickman said he now suspected 

that liquidation would be less than had been anticipated earlier.  

Nevertheless, he was inclined to agree with Mr. Mitchell that the 

economy might be on the verge of an inventory adjustment. But the 

size of actual inventories of steel and other products was not known 

accurately. Because of the inadequacies of available statistics, it 

was difficult to reach firm judgments on such questions and to shape 

monetary policy. As he had mentioned at an earlier meeting, the Sys

tem could usefully devote some resources to improving the quality of 

inventory statistics.



8/31/65 -62

Mr. Bopp reported that discussions during the past week with 

officials of Philadelphia banks had revealed that the voluntary credit 

restraint program was the primary factor limiting foreign lending.  

Two of the banks which were slightly above their ceiling because of 

prior commitments were refusing loan applications in order to get 

within the limit. Banks below the limit were cautious in making new 

loans because they had lines of credit outstanding to good customers 

and were uncertain as to the amounts those customers would take down.  

The voluntary credit restraint program was also a limiting 

factor in more indirect ways, Mr. Bopp continued. One banker estimated 

that as much as 50 per cent of the foreign demand for bank credit from 

September 1964 to February 1965 had been in anticipation of future 

needs and that some borrowers, finding they had borrowed more than 

they needed, had made prepayments. Several bankers reported that the 

restraint program had resulted in banks being more selective in foreign 

lending, favoring loans with higher compensating balances and higher 

interest rates. One bank reported raising rates to new borrowers and 

another reporting turning down some European applicants because the 

rates were too low. A few of the banks were working toward a better 

balanced loan portfolio geographically by limiting further expansion 

in certain areas, notably Japan.  

With respect to the recent rapid upswing in time deposits, 

Mr. Bopp said, Third District weekly reporting member banks reported 

a substantial 20 per cent increase in total time deposits, on an



8/31/65 -63

annual rate basis, from mid-year through the first two weeks in August.  

As in the nation, about one-half of the total increase was accounted 

for by an expansion in negotiable CDs. Inasmuch as CDs typically car

ried a rate in excess of other time deposits, there was a tendency 

toward increasing pressure on banks to employ their funds in higher

yielding earning assets and perhaps some upward pressure on loan rates.  

Turning to policy, Mr. Bopp said that recent developments 

offered diverse guides to action. Some factors would appear to weigh 

on the side of slightly greater restraint, notably the situation in 

Vietnam together with some apparent worsening in the balance of pay

ments in August, a slight rise in industrial commodity prices, and 

industrial utilization reaching an estimated 90 per cent of capacity.  

On the other hand, the moment of truth in the steel negotiations was 

approaching with the possibility of some slack resulting from a run

off of inventories, either with or without a strike. That slack, 

combined with increasing capacity coming on stream each month as a 

result of record capital spending, should help counterbalance the 

events in Vietnam. It should also be noted that recent industrial 

price hikes were still of a selective nature, that revised data showed 

continued stability in unit labor costs, and that the August balance 

of payments figures were as yet incomplete. In addition, considerable 

nervousness and uncertainty existed in financial markets at this time.  

After weighing those several factors, Mr. Bopp would recommend that no 

change be made at present in the general posture of monetary policy.



8/31/65 -64

Mr. Fatterson commented that at the last meeting he had 

reported reduced gains in Sixth District income and employment and 

even some old-fashioned declines, especially in housing. Although 

the Atlanta Bank economists did not think a recession was in the 

offing, it had seemed clear to them that the pace of activity had 

slowed down in the District. On the basis of the most recent figures, 

that was still basically true. Of course, significant changes could 

not have been expected to have occurred, as it would Lake time for 

the increased commitment in Vietnam to have a measurable influence 

on the econony. With one of every seven members of the armed forces 

stationed in the District States, however, the impact could come 

fairly quickly.  

The District textile industry had already been affected, 

Mr. Patterson said. The Reserve Bank directors reported that in 

recent weeks the Government had placed heavy orders for sheets, 

shorts, and towels. Even before that happened, textile activity 

was high, orc'er backlogs were large, and skilled labor was in shor 

supply. Defense procurement could tax capacity in that industry 

fairly quickly.  

As far as Mr. Patterson could tell, the mortgage markets had 

felt little influence of the higher corporate and Treasury yields.  

The prevailing mood seemed to be one of caution, and some increase 

in FHA and VA discounts was widely expected. The biggest real estate



8/31/65 -65

news has been the purchase of 3,000 acres of land, at a price in excess 

of $5 million, in Southwest Atlanta. The buyer planned to develop that 

land for a $400 million industrial and amusement complex patterned 

after the "Six Flags Over Texas Amusement Park" between Dallas and 

Fort Worth. In the long run, the more important event had been the 

announcement of a national corporation, Anaconda Aluminum Company, 

that it would start the production of aluminum in Georgia, using 

porcelain clay or kaolin. That development could well lead to the 

beginning of other aluminum operations in the State.  

In examining the influence of the Vietnam situation on banking, 

Mr. Patterson said, one had the benefit of later statistics than for 

any other sector of the economy. There had been a step-up in consumer 

loans at major city banks. However, it would be premature to conclude 

that customer. were about to rush out to buy automobiles and other 

durables because of impending shortages. The acceleration in consumer 

financing did not carry into other bank lending activities.  

The basic reserve position of large banks in the District : 

far in August had been slightly tighter than in July, Mr. Patterson 

remarked. Bu it was still difficult to find any solid indication 

that the modification in Federal Reserve policy this year had held 

back the strong credit expansion at District banks.  

Mr. Patterson concluded with the observation that it might be 

months before the full impact would be seen of the Vietnam situation,



8/31/65

the steel settlement, and the sterling crisis. In his judgment any 

change in Federal Reserve policy would be inappropriate at this time.  

Mr. Balderston made the following statement: 

The Committee's consensus on policy seems clear but the 
situations at home and abroad are quite unclear. Rising 
above the turmoil and confusion of the moment is the sickness 
of sterling. Its plight, for the moment at least, seems to 
dominate the conflicting forces that tend to pull the economy 
toward inflationary price rises on the one hand and cessation 
of the boom on the other. In view of the struggle to save the 
pound and of the continued uncertainty as to the steel settle
ment, I favor a continuance of the present policy. For the 
moment a steady posture seems to be indicated until the uncer
tainties diminish.  

The underlying forces threatening instability still need 
to be watched constantly; the Committee might be called upon 
to make a decision without having as much information as it 
might desire. Threatening the stability of prices is the 
fact that the U.S. is engaged in war. Dr. Roland Robinson, 
a former Board staff member, discovered that in 25 of the 
first 44 years following the birth of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem the consumer price index was reasonably stable, showing 
changes of less than 3 per cent. If one were to exclude the 
two world wars and the period of Korean hostilities, that 
standard was met in 24 of the remaining 31 years. The cumu
lative price changes during the nonwar years just about 
balanced out, leading Dr. Robinson to suggest that, without 
the influence of war, the price level at the end of that 
period might not have been far different from that prevail
ing almost a half-century earlier.  

But once again we are in a war serious enough to disturb 
stability in the overall price level and to generate lop-sided 
price expectations. In short, war-time price expectations 
are biased so that the two-way movement of prices is replaced 
by movement in one direction only--and that upward. Conse
quently, the five-year stability in the prices of goods, 
though not of services, which has so aided U.S. export volume, 
is now threatened not only by the current steel negotiations 
but by the even more pervasive pressures of wartime.  

Not to be forgotten is the increased spending planned by 
the Federal Government in connection with the war against 
poverty, as a supplement to the steady growth in State and 
municipal spending. That increased emphasis upon fiscal 
stimulus also affects price expectations.

-66-



8/31/65

On the other hand, the inventory buildup that Mr. Noyes 
has stressed would properly be regarded as a threat to the 
continuance of cyclical expansion were the U.S. not at war.  
Eventually, the inflated volume of inventories must exert a 
braking effect upon the rate of production. For example, the 
production of autos has exceeded sales since last February.  

Despite his concern about those underlying forces, Mr. Balderston 

added, the international problem seemed to be dominant at the moment 

and, as he had indicated, he would favor continuing present policy.  

Like others, he was not happy with the language of alternative A, the 

draft calling for no change in policy. He noted, for instance, that 

it contained no reference to the firming of prices. In his judgment 

prices had firmed; with few exceptions, the changes that had occurred 

had been in an upward direction. Unless the Committee chose to accept 

Mr. Shepardson's proposal for a more general revision of the first 

paragraph, three fairly small changes might be made. First, the words 

"with some firming of prices but" might be inserted in the opening 

sentence, after the statement that the domestic economy had expanded 

further, and before that relating to international payments. After 

the first sentence might be added the statement, "For the moment, 

international problems appear dominant." Also, he would strike the 

phrase "and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures" from 

the final sentence of the paragraph. If the Committee made no policy 

change today, it would not be acting for the purpose stated in that 

phrase; its present policy was permitting business loans and total 

bank credit to grow at rapid rates. As for the second paragraph, 

Mr. Balderston liked Mr. Shepardson's suggested revision.

-67-



8/31/65 -68

Chairman Martin remarked that he was in complete agreement 

with the consensus that had emerged for no change in policy, and he 

had nothing to add to the observations that had been made. The direc

tive the staff had drafted seemed to be less satisfactory this time 

than usual. He suggested the Committee attempt at this point to 

arrive at a directive that would be reasonably agreeable to a majority.  

To begin the effort, he proposed that Mr. Mitchell repeat the directive 

wording he had recommended earlier.  

After Mr. Mitchell had done so, Mr. Daane commented that he 

found Mr. Mitchell's proposal unsatisfactory on several counts. For 

one thing, it implied that the economic advance was resting on inven

tory accunulation and was running out of steam. That might be correct 

but he did not think it represented the judgment of a majority of the 

Committee. Moreover, there were no references to price developments, 

or to the implications of Vietnam. He was not sure that the Committee 

should try to use the first paragraph of the directive as a substitute 

for the text of the policy record entry. but if it was to make the 

attempt a more balanced statement seemed to be called for.  

Chairman Martin then remarked that it might be desirable for 

the staff to attempt to develop a new draft of the directive on the 

basis of the comments that had been made this morning on the original 

draft. He proposed that, while this work was in process, the Committee 

move into executive session to discuss a memorandum dated today that



8/31/65 -69

had been distributed to Committee members and other Reserve Bank 

Presidents, entitled "Contingency Planning for the Government Securities 

Market." 

Thereupon, all members of the staff left the meeting except 

Messrs. Young, Holmes, and Sanford. Mr. Balderston summarized the con

tents of the memorandum that had been distributed, following which there 

was general discussion of the actions that might be appropriate under 

various possible contingencies.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee members be 

prepared for the possible necessity for holding a meeting, either by 

telephone conference or with all participants in Washington, in the 

interim before the meeting tentatively scheduled for September 28, 

1965. There were many uncertainties existing at present, he noted, 

and the interval between today's date and September 28 was relatively 

long.  

Following the executive session the regular meeting resumed 

and Mr. Young read two new alternative drafts of the directive that 

had been prepared by the staff. After further discussion, a consensus 

emerged in favor of the shorter of the two alternatives.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and with Mr. Treiber dissenting, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to execute trans
actions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following current economic policy 
directive:



8/31/65 -70

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded 
further, but with markets characterized by uncertainties 
as to possible developments in steel, sterling, and Vietnam.  
Our international payments have reverted to deficit in 
August, and gold outflows have continued, although at a 
more moderate rate. In this situation, it remains the 
Federal Open Market Committee's current policy to strengthen 
the international position of the dollar, and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining about the same conditions in the 
money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, while taking 
into account unsettled conditions in securities and foreign 
exchange markets.  

In explaining his dissenting vote, Mr. Treiber said that he 

agreed that caution was necessary in view of the existing uncertainties 

in the bond and foreign exchange markets. He continued to feel, how

ever, that it was desirable for the Committee to make a further slight 

move toward a somewhat lessened degree of credit availability at 

present, recognizing that in the prevailing conditions any such move 

must be made with caution. In his judgment such a policy decision 

would not have an undesirable effect on the position of sterling.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, September 28, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 30, 1965.  

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on August 31, 1965 

Alternative A (no change) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further, our 
international payments have reverted to deficit in August, gold out
flows have continued, and uncertainties persist in securities and 
foreign exchange markets. In this situation, it remains the Federal 
Open Market Committee's current policy to strengthen the international 
position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary 
pressures, while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
about the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in 
recent weeks, while taking into account the unsettled conditions in 
securities and foreign exchange markets.  

Alternative B (firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy has expanded further, 
business sentiment has become buoyant, some prices have been under 
upward pressure, bank credit expansion has been vigorous thus far 
this year, and Federal expenditures are expected to increase in the 
months ahead as a result of the hostilities in Vietnam. Our inter
national payments have reverted to deficit in August, gold outflows 
have continued, and uncertainties persist in securities and foreign 
exchange markets. In this situation: it is the Federal Open Market 
Committee's current policy to move further to strengthen the inter
national position of the dollar, and to counter the emergence of 
inflationary pressures, by moderating somewhat the pace of growth 
in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next four weeks shall be conducted with a view to attaining 
slightly firmer conditions in the money market, while taking into 
account the unsettled conditions in securities and foreign exchange 
markets.


