









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 23, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balderston 
Bryan 
Daane 
Ellis 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Clay, Alternate for President of Minneapolis 
Bank

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
St.

Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Holland, and Koch, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Stone, Manger, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 1/ 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.



3/23/65

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Roberts, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Strothman, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Patterson, First Vice President and 
General Counsel, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta 

Messrs. Holmes, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, Tow, 
and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, 
Richmond, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Sternlight, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Mr. Arena, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston 

Mr. Rothwell, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on March 2, 1965, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market operations and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period March 2 through 17, 1965, and a supplemental report for



3/23/65 -3

March 18 through March 22, 1965. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that 

the gold stock would remain unchanged this week at $14.6 billion, 

after reductions in earlier weeks of the year totaling $825 million.  

So far these reductions had not had any serious effects on the dollar, 

perhaps partly because the French takings had been so well advertised 

that they had been discounted in advance. However, if U.S. losses 

should continue over the next several months, with new reductions 

every two or three weeks, there would be some rather serious effects.  

During the current month of March, it was expected that gold sales 

would reach a total of approximately $360 million and that the 

Stabilization Fund would end the month with a gold balance of 

roughly $65 million. In April, scheduled gold sales amounted to 

$135 million and probably would be further increased by other pro

spective sales to a total of at least $235 million.  

In discussions at Basle at the time of the March Bank for 

International Settlements meeting, Mr. Coombs said, the other central 

banks concerned had accepted the U.S. proposal that the Gold Pool 

should continue to intervene in the London gold market, even if the 

Pool's resources of $270 million should become exhausted, with the 

cost of intervention being shared on the same pro rata basis as



3/23/65 -4-

before. That decision would be reviewed at the time of the April

meeting and he was hopeful that the new arrangement would be con-

tinued on a month-to-month basis. As of today, $180 million of

the Pool's resources had been used up. Meanwhile, buying pressure

on the London gold market had subsided, owing mainly, he thought,

to a series of foreign central bank statements disavowing any

support for the French gold program. The gold market, however,

remained a highly vulnerable point in the defensive arrangements

and further sizable reductions in the U.S. gold stock would be

likely to stir up renewed speculation in the London market. There

might be some possibility of acquiring from the Bank of England

$100-$150 million in gold to cushion temporarily the prospective

losses during April, but the basic solution, of course, lay in

sharply curtailing the current flow of dollars to the continental

European countries.

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, the British

report earlier in March of an improved trade performance during

February temporarily strengthened sterling. Since then, sterling

had shown a weakening trend owing to uncertainty regarding the April

budget, to pressures generated in the Euro-dollar market by the U.S.

balance of payments program, and, finally, to heavy maturities

coming due on forward contracts entered into last December. The

Bank of England's drawings on the swap line with the System, which



3/23/65 -5

had been reduced to $105 million at the end of February, had now 

risen once more to $325 million.  

Mr. Coombs thought that the pressures on sterling were 

likely to continue until announcement of the April budget, which 

might very well decide the future of sterling. As of the end of 

February, the Bank of England had drawn $700.million on the short

term credit facilities provided by central banks, and it was 

possible that by the time the budget was announced their drawings 

would have risen to $1 billion or more. The implication was that 

most if not all of the British drawing on the International 

Monetary Fund would have to be used to pay off the central bank 

credits. Even if the British budget did prove to be a strongly 

corrective force, they still would have a rather slender reserve 

position, having exhausted much of the possibilities for drawing 

on the IMF.  

Mr. Coombs remarked that repatriation of U.S. short-term 

investments in Canada had also been a major factor in the decline 

of the Canadian dollar rate from close to its upper limits a month 

or so ago to a level in recent days slightly below par. Similar 

pressure was also being exerted on the Japanese yen as customary 

sources of commercial financing in New York and the Euro-dollar 

market were becoming less readily available and more expensive.



3/23/65

During the past week or so, Mr. Coombs said, there had been 

some signs of minor improvement of the dollar against continental 

European currencies, and the dollar had strengthened further this 

morning. So far, however, there had been no sizable outflows of 

funds from the continental financial centers and it had not been 

possible to make any further progress in paying off the System's 

swap drawings, which now totaled $515 million.  

Mr. Coombs observed that the U.S. balance of payments 

program seemed to be producing the pattern that many had expected 

of pressure on the Canadian dollar, sterling, and the Japanese yen, 

mainly owing to the curtailment of bank lending and repatriation 

of short-term investments of industrial corporations. In those 

two areas, he expected the voluntary restraint program to be fairly 

effective and to bring about a major improvement in the U.S. balance 

of payments statistical position. It remained uncertain, however, 

whether the necessary cutbacks in corporate direct investment on 

the continent of Europe would be achieved. There was considerable 

risk that corporations might try to satisfy their obligations under 

the voluntary restraint program by pulling back sizable amounts of 

short-term investments abroad, while maintaining intact much of 

their direct investment programs on the European continent. If 

that pattern should materialize, there might be a spectacular 

improvement in the U.S. balance of payments figures, heavy pressure



3/23/65 -7

on the Canadian dollar, pound sterling, and Japanese yen, and 

continuing losses of gold to the continent. During the month of 

March France might take in as much as $100 million, which would 

be fully converted into gold in April.  

Mr. Coombs was inclined to think that further efforts 

should be made to restrain direct investment in the Common Market 

and other continental European countries. The European central 

banks also could help to restore payments equilibrium without 

exposing themselves to further inflationary pressures at home by 

encouraging, through the use of credit policy and other measures, 

outflows of short- and intermediate-term credit into the inter

national capital markets. The Bank of Italy already was doing 

something along that line, and it was to be hoped that others 

would also. Unless such steps were taken, there was a distinct 

possibility that the curtailment in the flow of U.S. credit would 

produce a serious squeeze in the international credit markets, 

particularly in the Euro-dollar market.  

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said 

that the countries most likely to suffer from the credit squeeze 

he had mentioned were Britain, Canada, Japan, and a number of the 

less developed nations. The position of some large European indus

trial concerns also might become exposed; unless the central banks



3/23/65 -8

moved in quickly to supply additional credit as U.S. credit was 

pulled out, there could be a number of bankruptcies.  

Mr. Mitchell then noted that there had been reports of 

weakness in some Japanese industrial concerns, and of several 

recent bankruptcies in that country. Mr. Coombs commented that 

since the war many Japanese concerns had been operating on thin 

equities and were heavily dependent on financing from the United 

States. If there was a serious contraction in the flow of credit 

to Japan, it was likely that the Japanese would find themselves 

under severe pressure.  

Mr. Daane asked whether Europeans were not likely to fill 

the gap left by a contraction of U.S. credit abroad, in part by 

shifting deposits from the United States to foreign banks or 

foreign branches of U.S. banks or, possibly, even to the Euro

dollar market in general. Mr. Coombs replied that there was some 

likelihood of that occurring, but he considered it less desirable 

than the alternative in which European central banks made redundant 

dollar holdings available to their nationals. It seemed to him 

that the present situation offered those central banks an excellent 

opportunity to help themselves and the entire world without 

suffering any inflationary consequences.  

Mr. Daane said he agreed that American corporations were 

more likely to pull back liquid funds than to reduce their direct



3/23/65 -9

investments abroad. He asked, however, whether it was possible 

that they might turn more to local sources for financing their 

foreign investments, perhaps with some official encouragement.  

That would not only help the U.S. balance of payments but might 

also eliminate the hard feelings that resulted when an American 

corporation obtained funds in the U.S. for foreign investment at 

a rate lower than that available to their foreign competitors.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the U.S. payments balance would, 

of course, be helped by such a development, but he doubted that 

any official encouragement was necessary; European commercial banks 

now were being swamped by credit applications of subsidiaries of 

U.S. companies. Swiss banks might be able to expand their short

term loans to American firms, but they were not in a position to 

provide medium-term credits. More generally, European commercial 

banks were subject to fairly severe restrictions at the moment and 

would not be able to lend much to American firms unless the central 

banks eased their credit policies.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether Mr. Coombs would describe the 

mechanics of the operation under which European central banks could 

replace dollars repatriated by Americans. Mr. Coombs replied that 

in one possible sequence--which might be followed, for example, in 

Germany--commercial bank reserve requirements would first be lowered.



3/23/65 -10

That would provide the commercial banks with additional mark 

availabilities with which they could undertake more financing of 

U.S. subsidiaries in Germany or could channel a greater volume of 

funds into the international credit markets. In the process a 

demand for dollars from European central banks would be generated, 

enabling the central banks to reduce their dollar holdings and thus 

kill two birds with one stone. There would be no effect on the 

U.S. balance of payments statistics, but there would be a desirable 

reduction in the overhang of surplus dollars at foreign central 

banks.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
March 2 through March 22, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the Committee had approved a revision 

of the guidelines for foreign currency operations at its previous 

meeting on the understanding that it might consider further re

visions at the present meeting to deal with a point raised by 

Mr. Ellis. Certain revisions were proposed in Mr. Broida's 

memorandum of March 16, 1965, which he understood were considered 

by Mr. Ellis to meet the problem satisfactorily. (Note: A copy 

of the memorandum referred to has been placed in the Committee's 

files.) The proposed revisions affected the first and second



3/23/65 -11

paragraphs of Section 4 of the guidelines, and in both cases 

involved replacing the words "may prove desirable" with the words 

"may be undertaken." The proposed new words had a more positive 

connotation, and Mr. Coombs felt it would be helpful if the 

Committee would approve the suggested revisions.  

Mr. Robertson said that he had no objection to the proposed 

revisions as such. He thought, however, that the Committee should 

refrain from introducing increasingly liberal language into the 

guidelines that might serve to limit the extent to which actions 

taken under them were discussed with the Committee. It was desirable 

for the Committee to follow operations quite closely and to stay 

fully informed on them.  

Mr. Coombs commented that the main limitations on foreign 

currency operations specified in the present authorizations and 

directives related to purposes and dcllar amounts; otherwise, the 

authorities given to the Special Manager were fairly broad. The 

reason was that the Account Management often was confronted with 

situations that emerged suddenly and had to be dealt with immediately.  

Mr. Robertson said he was aware of that problem, but would 

suggest that the Committee and staff lean over backward to discuss 

operations before rather than after the fact whenever possible.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he would endeavor to do so.



3/23/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
Section 4 of the guidelines for System 
foreign currency operations was amended 
to read as follows: 

4. Transactions in Forward Exchange 

Transactions in forward exchange, either outright or 
in conjunction with spot transactions, may be undertaken: 

(1) When forward premiums or discounts are incon
sistent with interest rate differentials and 
are giving rise to disequilibrating movements 
of short-term funds; 

(2) When it is deemed appropriate to supplement 
existing market supplies of forward cover, 
as a means of encouraging the retention or 
accumulation of dollar holdings by private 
foreign holders; 

(3) To allow greater flexibility in covering 
System commitments, including those under 
swap arrangements; 

(4) To facilitate the use of holdings of one 
currency for the settlement of commitments 
denominated in other currencies.  

Forward sales of authorized currencies to the U.S.  
Stabilization Fund out of existing System holdings or in 
conjunction with spot purchases of such currencies also 
may be undertaken in order to allow greater flexibility 
in covering commitments of the U.S. Treasury.  

In all other cases, proposals of the Special Manager 

to initiate forward operations shall be submitted to the 
Committee for advance approval.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that during April certain Bank of 

England drawings on its swap line with the System, in the amount of 

$80 million, would mature for the first time, and if, as seemed

-12-



3/23/65 -13

quite possible, they should wish to renew, he would recommend 

approval of such renewals.  

Renewals by the Bank of England 
of its swap drawings on the System were 
noted without objection.  

Mr. Coombs noted that Federal Reserve drawings of $60 

million on the Swiss National Bank, $50 million on the Bank of 

Italy, and $5 million on the National Bank of Belgium also would 

mature for the first time in April. In the absence of a reversal 

in the flow of funds enabling the System to pay off these swap 

drawings, he recommended their renewal for a second three-month 

term.  

Renewals of the System's drawings 
on the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of 
Italy, and the National Bank of Belgium 
were noted without objection.  

Mr. Coombs reported that a $5 million drawing on the 

Netherlands Bank would mature for the second time on April 20.  

He was hopeful that it would be possible to acquire enough 

guilders to repay this drawing, but if it was not possible he 

would recommend a second renewal for a further period of three 

months. He noted that the Committee had authorized second renewals 

of a number of drawings at the previous meeting. The guidelines 

specified that drawings should be fully liquidated within 12 months,



3/23/65 -14

and in general actual performance had been better than that; the 

bulk of the System's drawings had been liquidated within six months.  

Renewal of the drawing on the 
Netherlands Bank was noted without 
objection.  

Mr. Coombs then observed that the Committee had received 

his memorandum dated March 18, 1965, recommending an increase of 

$100 million each in the swap lines with the Banks of Japan and 

Italy, and that later it had been advised that he was recommending 

an increase of $200 million, rather than $100 million, in the Bank 

of Italy swap line. (Note: Copies of the documents to which 

Mr. Coombs referred have been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

Toward the end of last week, after preparing his memorandum of 

March 18, he had received a suggestion from Governor Carli of the 

Bank of Italy that the swap line be increased by $200 million.  

Earlier, when a $100 million increase was under discussion, the 

Bank of Italy had apparently anticipated that a U.S. Treasury 

credit line of $100 million, extended to that Bank in March 1964, 

would be renewed at the end of its one-year maturity. However, 

the Treasury was reluctant to renew that credit line--which, in

cidentally, had never been used--because doing so would lock up 

an unduly high proportion of the limited resources of the 

Stabilization Fund. The Bank of Italy was hopeful that the System 

could, in effect, take it up under its facilities; hence the



3/23/65 -15

suggestion for an increase of $200 million rather than $100 million 

in the swap with the System.  

As indicated in his memorandum, Mr. Coombs continued, 

Governor Carli was one of the staunchest supporters of the U.S.  

approach of relying upon mutual credit facilities to economize on 

gold settlements. He was inclined to concur in Governor Carli's 

appraisal of the size of the credit facility needed to help cushion 

the swings in the Italian balance of payments. More generally, 

conclusior of such a substantial increase in the swap line with 

the Bank of Italy would provide further evidence that even the 

Common Market partners of France were pursuing an approach dia

metrically opposed to the French call for a return to the gold 

standard. That, in Mr. Coombs' judgment, was an extremely impor

tant consideration. Moreover, such an increase in the swap line 

with the Bank of Italy might encourage Germany to be liberal in 

extending a direct swap line to the Bank of England sometime in 

May or June. For Germany to do so would represent an important 

breakthrough; it might mark the beginning of the development of 

third-country swap arrangements similar to those of the System, 

and to some extent such a development would take pressure off 

the dollar in its role as an international reserve currency. The 

debate between the American and French approaches was in an active 

stage at the moment, and although the $200 million figure was



3/23/65 -16

higher than Mr. Coombs originally had had in mind, on balance it 

would give added weight to the U.S. side in the debate.  

Mr. Balderston asked what arrangements would be made to 

inform other countries with whom the System had swap arrangements 

of any action that might be taken with regard to the swap line 

with the Bank of Italy. He recalled that in June 1964, after a 

package of assistance to Italy had been developed, there had been 

some feeling that other nations had not been given adequate advance 

notice.  

Mr. Coombs replied that normally other central banks were 

advised by Telex the night before a change in a swap arrangement 

was publicly announced. It would be possible, if the action on 

the Italian swap line was approved today, that its announcement 

could be delayed until after the Basle meeting in April, and that 

other central banks could be informed at that meeting. He would 

not anticipate any disagreement with the action. Another alterna

tive would be to advise the other central banks by Telex several 

days before public announcement.  

Mr. Daane said that the circumstances surrounding the 

action proposed now were quite different, in his judgment, from 

those of last June. He doubted whether other countries would con

sider an increase in the Italian swap line to be a sensitive 

matter.



3/23/65 -17

Mr. Coombs agreed with this view. However, he thought 

Mr. Balderston had raised a good point regarding the desirability 

of advance notice. Perhaps such notice should be given one, two, 

or three days, rather than just a few hours, in advance. He felt 

that the central banks could be relied on not to disclose the action 

prematurely.  

Mr. Scanlon mentioned that it had been pointed out in 

earlier discussions that the sizes of the various swap lines should 

have some reasonable relationship with one another. He asked how 

the proposed increase in the Italian line to $450 million would 

affect the rest of the swap arrangements.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the action recommended would make 

the Belgian and Dutch lines look relatively small, but perhaps that 

would be desirable. The System's swap line with the German Federal 

Bank was in the amount of $250 million, but if that Bank made a 

direct swap with the Bank of England of, say, $250 million also, 

the two could be considered additive. There would be important 

advantages to a British-German arrangement; for example, if there 

was a flow of funds from London to Frankfurt, it would be more 

convenient for the Germans to extend credit to the British than 

for the U.S. simultaneously to borrow from the Germans and lend 

to the British.



3/23/65 -18

Mr. Daane said he agreed with Mr. Coombs that the Italians 

were strong advocates of the U.S. approach to the role of credit 

facilities in the evolution of the international monetary system.  

He thought the proposed increase in the swap line would be useful 

in fortifying their attitude.  

In response to Mr. Mitchell's request for information on 

present and prospective drawings under the System's swap facility 

with the Bank of Italy, Mr. Coombs said that the System had a 

drawing of $100 million now outstanding. It would not be surprising 

if the Bank of Italy took in $300-$400 million during the May

September tourist season. The situation then would be likely to 

reverse; there seemed to be an inherent instability in the Italian 

balance of payments, with large surpluses tending to be followed 

by swings in the other direction. From time to time the swap line 

would be likely to be drawn upon by one partner or the other, but 

it was hard to predict the amounts. The U.S. was apt to be making 

drawings initially.  

Mr. Robertson said that he had no adverse reaction to 

increasing the swap line by $100 million to $350 million, but he 

questioned the advisability of raising it to $450 million now.  

It seemed to him that $350 million would be sufficient to take care 

of this country's needs for the foreseeable future. He gathered 

from what had been said that the main reason for going to $450 

million was political, and he thought it was a mistake to attempt



3/23/65 -19

to use the swap lines for political purposes. Moreover, to raise 

the Italian line to $450 million created a danger of imbalance in 

the relative sizes of the arrangements with various countries, and 

might produce more problems than it solved.  

Mr. Hayes said he had understood that there was a good 

chance that the U.S. might want to draw as much as $450 million 

during the Italian tourist season. Mr. Robertson replied that the 

line could be increased when the need became evident. Mr. Coombs 

observed that the need might present itself rather quickly.  

Chairman Martin said that, as he understood the matter, 

Governor Carli favored a $200 million increase primarily for economic 

rather than political reasons.  

Mr. Coombs agreed. He added that the main political aspect 

to the question involved the pressure on the Bank of Italy from 

parties on both the right and left to buy gold with its dollar 

holdings. There were similar pressures in a number of other coun

tries. The swap network gave central banks under such pressures 

an alternative to gold purchases that carried an exchange guarantee 

in terms of their own currencies.  

Mr. Robertson said that he would expect the factor of 

prestige to lead to requests for increases in other swap lines if 

the Italian line was raised to $450 million. Mr. Coombs replied 

that in his judgment questions of prestige had not been important



3/23/65 -20

in discussions of the sizes of swap lines. In the past, changes 

in the swap lines had been in anticipation of swings in the flow 

of payments. There was a possibility that the Bank of Canada 

might suggest a higher figure, but he doubted that other central 

banks in the network would.  

Mr. Daane said he thought the $200 million increase 

clearly was justified on the basis of the general concepts under

lying the swap network. Moreover, he did not think political 

considerations should be brushed aside; it was helpful to have 

one of the leading Common Market countries on this country's side 

in the current debate on international monetary arrangements. While 

he would not. favor the action solely on that ground, he thought it 

was an important supplementary consideration.  

Mr. Hayes felt that the $200 million increase definitely 

was a useful step. The fact that Governor Carli had personally 

suggested it should carry a good deal of weight, he said.  

Mr. Robertson commented that while he suspected that the 

proposed $200 million increase was not a desirable move, judgments 

obviously could differ on the question. Accordingly, he would not 

dissent from the action.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, an 
increase of $200 million in the swap 
arrangement with the Bank of Italy, to 
a total of $450 million, as recommended 
by Mr. Coombs, was approved.



3/23/65

Mr. Mitchell referred to Mr. Coombs' recommendation that 

the swap line with the Bank of Japan be increased by $100 million, 

and asked whether drawings by the Japanese were likely to mount 

rapidly in the coming period.  

Mr. Coombs replied that that was a real possibility. Japan 

represented an important element in the international financial 

structure, and their prospects were worrisome. Indeed, if their 

customary sources of financing dried up, it might even prove neces

sary during the coming year to develop a major international 

package of credit assistance for them, as was done for Italy in 

1964.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, an 
increase of $100 million in the swap 
arrangement with the Bank of Japan, to 
a total of $250 million, as recommended 
by Mr. Coombs, was approved.  

Mr. Coombs noted that it was the Committee's practice to 

establish the dollar limit on the aggregate amount of foreign 

currencies that might be held under reciprocal currency arrange

ments at an amount equal to the sum of all individual swap 

arrangements. In view of the actions just taken to increase the 

size of the swap lines with the Banks of Italy and Japan, he 

recommended a revision of the continuing authority directive for 

foreign currency operations to increase this limit from $2.35 bil

lion to $2.65 billion.

-21-



3/23/65

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
first paragraph of the continuing authority 
directive for System foreign currency 
operations was amended to read as follows: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized 
and directed to purchase and sell through spot trans
actions any or all of the following currencies in 
accordance with the Guidelines on System Foreign 
Currency Operations as amended March 23, 1965; provided 
that the aggregate amount of foreign currencies held 
under reciprocal currency arrangements shall not 
exceed $2.65 billion equivalent at any one time, and 
provided further that the aggregate amount of foreign 
currencies held as a result of outright purchases 
shall not exceed $150 million equivalent at any one 
time: 

Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Netherlands guilders 
Swiss francs 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Austrian schillings 
Swedish kronor 
Japanese yen 

Chairman Martin then noted that a memorandum by Mr. Nettles 

of the Board's staff dated March 19, 1965, and entitled "Comments 

on reciprocal currency agreements with Mexico and Venezuela" had 

been distributed to the Committee for preliminary discussion.  

(Note: A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the Committee's 

files.) He asked whether Mr. Coombs would like to comment.

-22-



3/23/65 -23

Mr. Coombs said that he was not inclined at the moment to 

make a specific recommendation regarding swap arrangements with 

Mexico and Venezuela. A similar question had been raised about 

a year ago, and he had thought then that such action would be pre

mature. Before the Committee made a decision now it might be useful 

to hold further informal discussions with those countries and 

probably also with one or two European central banks.  

In general, Mr. Coombs said, the case for arranging a swap 

with Mexico in the amount of, say, $50 million was fairly strong.  

The Mexican economy was tied in closely with that of the U.S.  

Their exchange system was wide open; at the time of the Bay of 

Pigs invasion, for example, Mexico lost $300 million in short-term 

capital outflows in a few months' time. Some cushioning by means 

of a swap line could have great value to them in stabilizing their 

reserve position; much the same considerations had led the System 

to negotiate a swap line with Canada. Mexico also was an 

Article VIII country under the IMF Articles of Agreement.  

Venezuela's economic ties with the U.S. were not as strong, 

Mr. Coombs said, and their capital flows were not as volatile. In 

addition, Venezuela was not yet an Article VIII country, although 

it probably could attain that status fairly easily.  

In due course, Mr. Coombs concluded, it probably would be 

useful to incorporate into the network one or two such countries



3/23/65 -24

who were managing their affairs well, but he was not sure that now 

was the appropriate time. That time might be close for Mexico, but 

he was less certain about Venezuela.  

Chairman Martin asked how Mr. Coombs would view a swap 

arrangement with Peru. Mr. Coombs replied that he was unable to 

comment because he had not examined the question.  

Mr. Bryan expressed doubt that it would be desirable to 

make a swap arrangement with Peru at the present time. More 

generally, he felt that the System might be getting into a trouble

some area by considering further extensions of the swap network.  

He did not know how the difficulties could be avoided since 

questions of national pride were so deeply involved. He suspected 

that eventually the System would have swap lines with Mexico and 

Venezuela if those countries wanted them.  

Mr. Mitchell said that he had discussed the Venezuelan 

situation on two or three occasions with Governor Machado of the 

central bank of that country, and could add an observation to tne 

points covered in Mr. Nettles' memorandum. Venezuela had not 

bought gold for five years, but there was a possibility that they 

would decide to do so soon. They were this country's sixth largest 

trading partner, and were selling about twice as much to the U.S.  

as they were buying from it. Their reserves were about equally 

divided at present between gold and dollars, and they were getting



3/23/65 -25

restive about that ratio. Given the size of their dollar holdings, 

it would not be unusual for them to decide to buy some gold, and 

if they did so Mexico might do the same; one could not say how far 

the trend might go. Governor Machado felt that some sort of an 

arrangement would strengthen their credit position and also would 

strengthen their ability to resist domestic demands that they 

increase their gold ratio. Thus, a swap arrangement might be 

useful from the U.S. standpoint, and one probably would be desirable 

at some point although not necessarily immediately. Mexico ranked 

fifth among U.S. trading partners, and in view of Mexico's location 

and Venezuela's natural resources it was reasonable to expect that 

U.S. relations with both countries would continue to grow.  

Mr. Wayne thought it would be helpful for the Committee to 

have memoranda providing information on current conditions within 

the two countries before attempting to reach a decision on the 

matter.  

Mr. Robertson remarked that in his judgment the proposal 

involved utilizing swap arrangements for a purpose that was foreign 

to those originally envisaged for them. The System would be moving 

into the political field rather than limiting itself to efforts to 

protect the international financial positions of the U.S. and the 

other parties to the swaps. If arrangements were made with Mexico 

and Venezuela, no doubt other Latin American countries would request



3/23/65 -26

similar arrangements. It would be highly premature, he thought, 

to make swap arrangements with the two countries now.  

Mr. Coombs noted that one basic purpose for the swap 

network was to protect the U.S. gold stock. Venezuela held 

$500 million in dollars, and could convert a sizable proportion 

of that sum to gold. Mexico had been buying gold from Canada.  

From the purely financial point of view--the defense of the U.S.  

gold stock--he thought there were good arguments for swap arrange

ments with the two countries.  

Chairman Martin said he thought Mr. Coombs' point was 

valid. But it seemed to him (Chairman Martin) that, as 

Mr. Blessing of the German Federal Bank recently had suggested, 

it was necessary to have some understanding among nations regarding 

the role of gold. It was not possible fcr all foreign countries 

holding dollars to convert their holdings to gold, and he suspected 

that the swap network now was being used about as far as possible 

to supplement the gold exchange standard. That was one of the 

major, overall problems that had to be dealt with.  

Chairman Martin then said that the matter of possible 

swaps with Mexico and Venezuela had to be considered carefully.  

He agreed with Mr. Wayne's suggestion that the Committee should 

have memoranda on Venezuela and Mexico, and, he would add, on Peru.  

Also, he noted that Mr. Furth had prepared a memorandum on Mexico



3/23/65

and Venezuela which should be distributed. After receiving these 

documents the Committee could discuss the question further at a 

later meeting.  

There were no objections to the Chairman's suggestions.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S. Govern

ment securities and bankers' acceptances for the period March 2 

through March 17, 1965, and a supplemental report for March 18 

through 22, 1965.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone 

commented as follows: 

The past three weeks provided a classic example of 
the way in which money market variables that are supposed 
to move together--and that generally do move together 
over the long run--can behave perversely in the short run.  
Against the background of the seasonally heavy liquidity 
needs associated with the dividend and tax dates, rates 
on most: money market instruments moved upward. Major 
banks were paying 4.30 per cent on 90-day CDs; finance 
company paper moved up in rate after having declined 
briefly at the outset of the period; some trading in 
Federal funds occurred at 4-1/8 per cent on nearly every 
day, and on six days the heaviest volume of trading was 
at that rate; dealer loan rates posted by New York banks 
moved up to as high as 4-3/4 per cent; and dealer port
folios of acceptances rose to over $325 million to the 
accompaniment of developing discussion of an upward 
adjustment of that rate. While all this was going on, 
however, Treasury bill rates moved downward.  

I confess that I have no full explanation of the 
contrasting behavior of the bill rate on the one hand 
and other money market rates on the other. I suspect,

-27-



3/23/65 -28

however, that a substantial repatriation of short-term 
funds from abroad is underway--that a part of the 
aggregate pool of corporate liquidity is being redis
tributed toward money market assets in this country and 
away from such assets abroad. While these funds may be 
spread among the whole range of our market instruments 
eventually, corporate treasurers seem initially to be 
concentrating them in the bill market until further 
decisions are made. And while these return flows in many 
cases require liquidation of dollar assets by foreign 
holders, the effects of such liquidation may not be, and 
probably are not, concentrated in the bill area, but rather 
are iffused and dispersed among many market instruments.  
And indeed, in some cases there may be no immediate foreign 
liquidation of a money market instrument.  

The conduct of open market operations was complicated 
by the unusual behavior of short rates. If we had supplied 
more reserves to ease the pressure on other rates, we would 
very likely have triggered further declines in the bill 
rate. And if we had supplied fewer reserves, or had ab
sorbed funds, as a means of dealing with the bill rate, 
we would have aggravated the situation with regard to 
other rates. We would, moreover, have had to reduce 
marginal reserve availability so far as to give a false 
signal to the market that the Committee had adopted a 
firmer policy at its last meeting. In these circumstances 
the Desk followed a middle course, trying to insure, on the 
one hand, that the market mechanism handled smoothly and 

well the heavy seasonal demands that converged upon it; 
and attempting to avoid, on the other hand, a situation in 
which the bill rate moved so low as to dilute the System's 
contribution to the balance of payments program.  

As for the outlook for bill rates, it is particularly 
difficult to speak with any confidence right now. I doubt 
that the bill rate can go much lower if reserve and bor
rowing conditions remain as they have been recently; at the 
same time, if it is true that an important reflux of 
corporate funds is underway, the "normal" relationships 
among market variables may continue in suspension for a 
time, and the upward pull to which bill rates should be 

subject will not be fully exerted. Perhaps, therefore, 
the best guess that can be made is that, within the frame
work of present policy, the bill rate may stay about where 
it is or creep slightly upward.



3/23/65 -29

Mr. Stone added that the Committee might be interested in 

the results of an informal survey that had been made by a Canadian 

money market dealer interested in placing U.S. funds in Canada.  

The dealer had contacted treasurers of 63 major U.S. corporations 

and inquired about their plans for dollar holdings in Canada.  

Forty-five of the treasurers reported that they planned to place 

no additional funds in Canada in the immediate future, and for the 

time being to repatriate funds as their Canadian investments matured.  

The remaining 18 treasurers indicated that they would continue to 

place funds in Canada but at a substantially slower rate than 

earlier.  

Mr. Scanlon asked if Mr. Stone would expand on his reasons 

for believing that a continuation of current policy would lead to 

no change or only a slight rise in bill rates. Mr. Stone replied 

that that expectation was based on the assumption that some substan

tial reflow of funds from abroad would continue. He suspected such 

a reflow was occurring not only from the reported actions of 

corporate treasurers but also because it was the only obvious 

explanation of the recent divergent behavior of rates on Treasury 

bills and on other short-term instruments. However, he did not 

think that a continued reflow would force bill rates down much 

further, primarily because dealers were not willing to acquire 

additional bills yielding as little as 3.92 per cent when dealer



3/23/65 -30

lending rates at New York banks were ranging as high as 4-3/4 per 

cent. The high financing rates had not had much effect thus far 

because the demands for bills had been so great that dealer inven

tories of bills were relatively low.  

In response to questions by Messrs. Swan and Wayne, 

Mr. Stone said that corporate treasurers were investing repatriated 

funds in Treasury bills--including those with maturities of less 

than 90 days--temporarily, until further decisions could be made.  

They were under instructions from their chief executive officers, 

who had been called to Washington, to bring funds back to this 

country. The bill market was the obvious place to put these funds 

for the time being; it was much broader than, say, the CD market, 

and large investments could be made quickly. He would expect that 

in due course funds would be moved out of bills and into other 

money market instruments in many cases.  

Mr. Daane said he was prepared to admit the impossibility 

of projecting relationships among the different variables--which 

was one reason he opposed proposals for using rigid numerical tar

gets in the directive--but he would still ask whether Mr. Stone 

thought a further reduction in the marginal reserve figures would 

leave the present discount rate in an untenable position, given 

the reflow of funds from abroad. To put his question another way, 

did the reflow offer the Committee some leeway for maneuver, if it 

wanted to take advantage of it?



3/23/65 -31

Mr. Stone replied that he doubted whether any serious 

question would be raised about the discount rate unless the 3-month 

bill rate got up to 4-1/8 per cent or higher. In his judgment, the 

Committee would have some room for maneuver if the reflow continued.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period March 2 through March 22, 
1965, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Stone then noted that a question had been raised at the 

preceding meeting of the Committee with respect to the volume of 

third-country acceptances in the New York Bank's portfolio of bankers' 

acceptances. In a memorandum to the Committee dated March 18, 1965, 

he had shown a breakdown of the Bank's holdings as of the end of 

December of 1963 and 1964, February 19, 1965, and March 12, 1965.  

(Note: A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the Committee's 

files.) In the Bank's customary survey of bankers' acceptances as 

of the end of February it was found that 48.6 per cent of total 

acceptances outstanding in the U.S. then had been drawn to finance 

third-country trade. As indicated in the memorandum, the proportion 

of such acceptances in the Bank's portfolio was smaller; on March 12, 

for example, it was 38.4 per cent. About 45 per cent of acceptances 

held by the Bank for foreign accounts on that date involved third

country trade. Mr. Stone added that he had not undertaken in his 

memorandum to advance arguments for or against holding such acceptances



3/23/65 -32

in the Bank's portfolio because as he had understood the Committee's 

request it was for a factual report.  

Mr. Hayes said he had studied the figures given in Mr. Stone's 

memorandum and had thought about the question raised at the previous 

meeting. He still felt, as he had indicated then, that it would 

be unwise for the Committee to modify its policy and refuse to buy 

acceptanes involving third-country trade. He was impressed by 

the fact that such acceptances were included in the credits to which 

the 105 per cent limitation--specified in the System's guidelines 

for restraint on foreign lending by banks--applied; hence control 

was being exercised at the source of this acceptance credit. The 

sale of an acceptance in the market to the New York Bank or to any 

other purchaser did not affect the original transaction; the credit 

concernec was still included in the 105 per cent limitation. If 

one assumed that there should be some kind of discrimination against 

such acceptances, it should take place at the time the banks created 

them. If it was felt that the volume of third-country credits was 

mounting undesirably and that they should be discouraged, that 

should be indicated directly; and, indeed, it was indicated in 

somewhat general terms in the guidelines.  

Mr. Hayes said he also was impressed by the fact that Japan 

accounted for by far the greatest part of third-country financing; 

Mr. Stone's figures disclosed that as of February 19, $50 million



3/23/65 -33

of the $70 million of third-country acceptances held at the New York 

Bank represented the movement of goods to or from Japan. The whole 

Japanese position was a matter of top-level negotiation with that 

country, looking to the maintenance of the present level of financing 

for Japan with the exception of export financing. In his judgment 

it would be inappropriate for the Committee to act today to make 

third-country financing involving Japan virtually impossible. If 

the Committee changed its policy and refused to acquire third

country acceptances it would be necessary to inform the dealers, 

and news of the action would be conveyed to the market rapidly.  

This would seriously jeopardize the quality of the market. At the 

same time it was likely to result in some confusion, since foreigners 

presumably would continue to want such acceptances and the New York 

Bank would continue to buy them for foreign accounts. Moreover, the 

System had been working for 50 years, and particularly for the last 

10 years, to promote the development of tte acceptance market, and 

he questioned whether a decision now not to buy third-country 

acceptances would be desirable from the longer-run point of view.  

In sum, Mr. Hayes said, System participation in the 

acceptance market on an across-the-board-basis--which happened, as 

Mr. Stone's figures indicated, to result in a smaller percentage 

of third-country acceptances in the Bank's portfolio than in total 

outstandings--was a reasonable procedure, in his judgment. He



3/23/65

thought it would be neither desirable nor practical to start 

discriminating among the types of acceptances the System would buy.  

Mr. Stone said he would like to emphasize one point 

Mr. Hayes had made. If the System began to discriminate against 

any class of acceptances that fact would be known immediately all 

over the country. Other market participants also would stop buying 

them, and dealers would begin to refuse to take them from banks, 

which in turn would become unwilling to create them. As a result, 

the volume of that class of acceptances outstanding quickly would 

drop to minimal amounts.  

Mr. Robertson noted that he had been absent during the part 

of the previous meeting when the questior under discussion first 

had been raised, and he had not had an opportunity to consider the 

matter fully. He asked whether the Committee would be agreeable to 

carrying the discussion over until the next meeting. No objections 

were made to postponement of further discussion.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement on economic 

conditions: 

I think it is fair to say that every member of the 
Committee's staff has been analyzing the statistics on the

-34-



3/23/65

economy's performance with more than the usual intensity 
these past weeks. The reason is obvious. In its latest 
phase, for the first time in this remarkably long and 
stable business expansion, activity has clearly been 
rising at an unsustainably rapid rate. This will be plain 
from the size and composition of the fourth-quarter to 
first-quarter rise in GNP when it is published, but some
thing like the current rate of upsurge actually began 
last November and December, as soon as the auto strikes 
were over.  

How destabilizing will the inevitable let-down be? 
Certainly this will be importantly conditioned by the 
duration of the current spurt and the extent of distor
tions it interjects into business decisions. It is on 
these issues that I would like to focus my remarks this 
morning.  

Insofar as duration is concerned, the general 
expectation is that the rate of expansion will have to 
slow in the second quarter. Such reasoning assumes a 
more restrictive Federal budget posture until midyear, 
and a less-than-seasonal spring rise in auto output 
from the very high levels already attained in catching 
up from last fall's strikes. Also assumed is a slow
down or even a reversal in steel inventory building 
after the scheduled May 1 labor contract termination.  

What is the key evidence at hand on these points? 
As one measure of the Federal budgetary influence, the 
full-employment surplus is projected to amount to 
$4.8 billion in the April-June quarter, about half again 
as large as over the preceding nine months, before 
dropping back to a $1.4 billion deficit after midyear, 
assuming adoption of the Administration program.  

In the auto industry, domestic deliveries held 
even in the first ten days of March, failing to show 
the usual seasonal increase. But even if customer 
takings of cars from here on out were to show no 
seasonal rise at all, auto production would undoubtedly 
be held at present rates for a month or two in order 
to rebuild dealer stocks to levels more in line with 
current sales.  

In steel the present high rate of consumption has 
probably served to attenuate the phase of inventory 
building. Judging from the Census series on tonnage 
held, steel consumers had only managed to build up their 

steel stocks from about a 1.8-month to a 2.2-month supply

-35-



3/23/65

by the end of January, the l.st month for which data are 
available. Several additional months of accumulation at 
the recent rate would be necessary before the peak 2.8-month 
stock ratio reached in 1962 and again in 1963 would be 
reattained. An earlier change of pace in steel buying 
could appear, however, if the labor picture should brighten.  
This may be helped by the pattern-setting implications of 
the can industry settlement which developed over the week
end, involving an annual increase in labor costs of about 
3-1/2 per cent per man-hour.  

This kind of decision, even if it does not spread 
to steel, is symptomatic of a kind of reasonableness 
in private decision-making that has seemed a good deal 
more prevalent during this current inventory bulge than 
in some earlier counterparts. In the past, over
ebullient business expectations engendered in such an 
environment sometimes have fostered overreaching price 
increases, extravagant wage settlements, generous hirings, 
and optimistic levels of capital spending for future 
capacity. In contrast, business performance on all 
these counts has been restrained throughout this long 
expansion, and particularly so in the rapid advance 
beginning last November. No inflationary wage settle
ments have been agreed to by major industries during 
this period. For the man-hours needed to increase output 
temporarily, manufacturers have relied in greater part 
upon larger overtime by existing workers, rather than new 
hirings. Some observers regret the potential reduction 
in unemployment thus foregone, but the economic distress 
from subsequent cutbacks to lower production levels will 
surely be less when it can consist of eliminated overtime 
checks rather than outright firings.  

On the price point, businesses have made relatively 
few efforts to hang higher price tags on what they have 
regarded as temporary bulges in orders. Overall, the 
wholesale commodity price index is unchanged thus far 
in 1965; the chief elements giving rise to the upward 
tick in this index last fall--increases in nonferrous 
metals prices and a recovery in petroleum products--have 
since either leveled off or declined.  

Capital expenditure programs have been increased, 
but even after allowing for some possible understatement 
of estimates, projected quarter-to-quarter increases in 
business plant and equipment expenditures run somewhat 
smaller than last year's quarterly advances. Perhaps

-36-



3/23/65 -37

more importantly, the capacity additions represented by 
such outlays appear well balanced with underlying product 
demands, both in total and by major industrial sectors.  

Probably it is in the area of inventory investment 
itself that the greatest possibilities for miscalculation 
are created as a result of the current efforts to build 
up stocks. Moreover, efforts to perceive such miscalcula
tions are very much hampered by the tendency for the early 
inventory statistics to be particularly unreliable around 
inflection points. For example, direct reports on inventory 
holdings continue to suggest more moderate levels of stocks 
than do the inferences to be drawn from the differences 
between independent production and consumption measures.  
We still cannot be sure whether inventory accumulation at 
an annual rate of, say, $10 billion, is a good description 
of the latest five months, although we know the first 
officially published figures will be substantially less 
than that, and perhaps for a short span of time or so 
within that period the final rate, after all eventual 
revisions, could even turn out to be somewhat higher.  

We do know that the inventory investment over this 
period has not been monolithic. Earlier accumulations 
centered more in materials, but then later the focus 
shifted to work-in-process and finished goods. Last 
fall's additions were importantly in manufacturers' 
hands, while later data suggest that wholesale and re
tail outlets are now bearing more of the brunt of 
additions. Such a distribution of the weight of added 
inventories should increase the economy's ability to 
weather the moderation in rates of growth that seems to 
lie very close ahead.  

The causes of that change in rate of growth relate 
too largely to very short-term inventory adjustments, and 
are impelled by too strong and special forces, to be 
amenable to much if any timely moderation by monetary 
policy. On the other hand, the inventory-caused bulge 
in demands over these past five months seems well enough 
perceived and sensibly enough dealt with by the private 
sector to eliminate a good part of its potentially de
stabilizing ramifications.  

Mr. Brill then made the following statement concerning

financial developments:



3/23/65

In attempting to draft a set of directives for 
consideration by the Committee today, the staff bogged 
down over the same problems that beset it--and the 
Committee--at the last meeting and on other recent 
occasions. The problem that continues to stump us is 
the inconsistent behavior among the financial measures 
that serve as guides to and targets for policy. We 
don't seem to be able to get quantities and prices both 
to move in a desired direction at once, and among the 
quantities and among the prices we get divergent behavior 
from time to time that is difficult to interpret and 
makes it even harder to specify policy objectives. This 
morning, I'd like to address myself to a few dimensions 
of the problem.  

First, let me turn to the quantities. It is natural 
that attention should be captured by the rapid rate of 
expansion in the flow of bank credit. An 8 or 9 per cent 
annual growth in this variable is historically fairly 
unusual, and the 10 to 12 per cent rate of recent months 
is even more unusual. But so are the circumstances that 
give rise to such quantities. It is not often, if ever 
before; that monetary policy has had to operate under such 
constraints and imperatives as (a) a high rate of private 
saving, reflecting in part the effects of a cyclically 
unusual fiscal policy, (b) a need for balance of payments 
purposes to keep the level of interest rates--particularly 
short-term market rates--relatively high, and (c) a need 
for domestic expansion purposes to keep the cost of 
financing investment as low as possible, consistent with 
the desired level of short-term rates.  

To meet these objectives within the limits of the 
specified constraints, we have depended in part on debt 
management maneuvers, but more importantly on monetary 
techniques to divert a large share of the private saving 

flow through the banking system. Banks have been 
encouraged to compete aggressively in order to keep these 

saving flows from depressing short-term market rates, and, 
in turn, have transformed the saving into long-term 
financing, thus satisfying objectives of monetary policy 
while creating new headaches for bank supervision.  

Over the past four years banks have succeeded in 

capturing about a third of all credit flows, a proportion 
previously achieved in the postwar period only in reces

sion years. But it might have been 50 or 75 per cent 

without having materially different effects on the economy,

-38-



3/23/65

other than the increased discomforture of banks' competitors.  
GNP doesn't grow any faster just because housing is financed 
out of savings deposits rather than savings shares. Nor is 
there any empirical evidence to suggest that holders of bank 
time and savings deposits feel more liquid and behave dif
ferently from holders of other depositary claims or of open 
market instruments. It is hard to ascribe any unique or 
special meaning to bank credit changes that result primarily 
from the increased vigor of bank competition for saving flows.  

Even if there were some special economic significance 
to the recent expansion in bank credit, there is little we 
could do about it, given our emphasis on interest rates as 
operating guides. So long as the quantity of reserves provided 
is determined principally by the need to maintain certain 
"conditions in money markets" (our euphemism for short-term 
market interest rates), and so long as the ceiling rates banks 
can pay to attract savings are set with an eye to keeping 
funds here rather than flowing abroad, we can't control the 
total quantity of bank credit flows. Even the Federal Reserve 
can't overdetermine the economic system. Under the given 
circumstances, we can give priority to our rate objectives 
or priority to flow-quantity objectives, but not to both.  

Similarly, it has become increasingly difficult to set 
a meaningful objective in terms of desired changes in the 
money supply. While in the long run the demand for money 
may be interest inelastic (as suggested by our friends of 
the Chicago school of monetary economics), it certainly 
hasn't been inelastic in the short run. In particular, 
money supply has responded sharply to increases in the 
interest attractiveness of time and savings deposits. After 
each increase in Regulation Q, there has been a sharp burst 
in time and savings deposits, partly at the expense of other 
types of institutional saving and market instruments, and 
partly at the expense of money balances. But the bursts 
into time deposits and out of money have been short-lived-
about three months--and then money demand has resumed, 
with growth in time deposits continuing but at a slower 
pace. Such switches out of money into time deposits can 
be accompanied by very sharp rises in total bank credit 
without necessitating significant changes in bank reserves, 
but the reversal of such deposit trends increases reserve 
needs. This makes it very difficult to lump changes in 
"the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply" under 
the same blanket intention, as is done in the first part of 
the Committee's directive.

-39-



3/23/65

I say all this not in a spirit of criticism, but to 
illuminate an impending problem in specifying the Committee's 
near-term quantity objectives. The attractiveness of the 
new higher rates paid by banks on time and savings deposits 
is beginning to wane--on schedule. The rate of expansion 
in time deposits has been slowing down in recent weeks and 
that in money supply accelerating. While the increase in 
the money supply in the first half of March is overstated, 
reflecting largely the temporary disbursement of Government 
balances, it also probably heralds a return to a more normal 
rate of growth in money balances. If these deposit-shift 
trends persist, a directive pointed to "no change" in 
money market conditions probably would have to accommodate 
an acceleration in the reserve base and in the money supply, 
even with a slowing in the pace of bank credit expansion 
from recent exceptionally high rates.  

I emphasize the "probably"not only because our knowledge 
of the linkage between quantities and prices is still so 
imprecise, but also because there appears to be, at the 
moment, some distortion in the constellation of interest 
rates that comprise "money market conditions." Most 
indicators of money market conditions indicate some tautness, 
even though the bill rate has eased significantly.  

We don't know to what extent the bill rate decline is 
attributable to ephemeral factors--including the repatriation 
of funds from abroad or retention of funds originally destined 

for foreign money markets as a result of the introduction of 
the balance of payments program--or to a fundamental reappraisal 
by investors of longer-term credit demands and monetary policy.  
All we can say at the moment is that the bill rate appears 
out of line with the rest of the money market, and it is not 
clear which will move towards which.  

My own preference would be to play it cautiously, for 
it seems somewhat premature to assume substantial and con
tinuing success of the voluntary restraint program on the one 
hand, or complete subsidence of inflationary potential on 

the other. The fragmentary information available is favorable 

on both fronts. It might be more prudent in the short-run, 

however, to offset tendencies toward further reduction in 
bill rates, even if it resulted in some temporary slowing 

in reserve growth to do so, and not to resist a tendency for 

the bill rate to move back into closer alignment with other 
short-term rates if market forces propel it in that direction.  
It should be noted that the Treasury is not in an especially 
good position to provide help on this score, for its large 
cash balance probably limits debt management to small additions 
to the weekly bill auction.

-40-



3/23/65

Such a cautious monetary policy is recommended only 
as an interim action until our vision clears. Three weeks 
from now we should have a clearer reading on international 
capital flows and wage negotiations, which would permit 
a longer-term decision as to the appropriate posture of 
monetary policy.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

On account of the disruptions caused by the port strike, 
it will be some time before we can get a reliable reading 
on trends in the current account of the balance of payments.  

The key questions about underlying forces affecting the 
current account are familiar ones. First, to what extent 
will world trade, and U.S. exports, be slowed by British 
efforts to correct their balance of payments and by the 
efforts of France and other countries to check inflation? 
The adjustment of British trade has barely begun. France 
seems as determined as ever to halt the present rise in 
costs and pressure on prices, even if that means allowing 
a recession in French business activity. Success in their 
effort will help them to preserve the strong payments 
position that France got out of the devaluation of 1958.  
The second question is: is the U.S. competitive position 
continuing to improve? On this, one may note that U.S.  
wholesale prices of producers' equipment have risen 2 per 
cent in the past year and a half. There are reports of 
growing delivery lags for products such as machine tools 
for which order backlogs have become large.  

In the private capital account, at least one major 
change has occurred in the last few weeks: the drying 
up of the previously massive outflow of term loans from 
U.S. banks. Little can be said yet about the outflow 
of short-term bank credit. And we can't yet be sure 
whether the quarterly reflux of corporate liquid funds 
in March was greater than seasonal this year.  

As to the banks' term lending, we do have some 
useful information. Confidential data on commitments 
show a very abrupt drop after the President's message 
to Congress on February 10 and the coming into effect 
that day of the IET on most term loans to developed 
countries. In the 4 months and 10 days up to February 10, 
commitments for term loans had totaled $1.6 billion, 
of which $350 million were made within the first ten

-41-



3/23/65

days of February. In the rest of February and first half 
of March, new commitments--now going almost entirely to the 
less-developed countries--were well under $100 million, and 
they may have been less than the present rate of total 
amortization reflows.  

Data on actual net outflows, as opposed to commitments, 
show a revised figure for January of about $250 million. I 
would guess that the net outflow in the first ten days of 
February may have been of the same order of magnitude as the 
January total. Taxable loans committed after August 5 of 
last year had to be disbursed before the Gore Amendment was 
put into effect if they were to escape the tax.  

If the net outflow on term loans, which may have been 
close to half a billion dollars ir the first six weeks of 
the year, has now virtually dried up, one would expect to 
see some impact on the spread between U.S. money market 
rates and rates abroad, especially the sensitive rates in 
the Euro-dollar market.  

In fact, London Euro-dollar market rates did rise more 
than seasonally from mid-February up to March 10, after which 
they eased off somewhat. Mere cessation of the U.S. term 
loan outflow could have been one factor in the tightening.  
Much of the term loan borrowing in January and early February 
must have been done ahead of real needs, in order to beat the 
IET, and there is indirect evidence that borrowers were 
putting some of the proceeds into Euro-dollar deposits.  
This indirect evidence is the sharp rise reported by member 
banks in their balances due to foreign branches, in the 
four weeks after January 20.  

If the United States is to make progress toward the 
objective of re-establishing the dollar as an unquestioned 
reserve currency, we will need to reduce the deficit financed 
by official settlements, as well as the overall deficit, and 
that means avoiding a drawing down of the large balances 
which commercial banks abroad have built up in the United 
States over the past two years. Interest rate tendencies in 
the Euro-dollar market will have some bearing on the changes 
in these balances.  

Spreads between Euro-dollar rates and U.S. rates on CDs 

were narrower on the average in 1964 than in earlier years.  
This was one reason why commercial banks in Europe (including 

U.S. branches) channeled more than $1 billion of short-term 
funds to the United States in the 12 months through last 

January. The inflows were fairly large in March and April 

of 1964, when CD rates were relatively high; and again in 
the summer, when the Euro-dollar market was easing off a 

little. They were largest of all in November, when the 

sterling crisis broke.

-42-



3/23/65

Although the rate spread, as measured by 90-day rates, 
was smaller on the average in 1964 than in earlier years, 
it was tending to widen a little as interest rates in most 
European markets were rising, while ours were fairly stable 
up to October. Then from October to February (if we make 
a crude adjustment for seasonal variations) it appears that 
Euro-dollar rates moved up somewhat less than rates in the 
United States. I would suggest that among the reasons for 
this relative ease in the Euro-dollar market from October 
to mid-February was the feeding of Euro-dollar supplies from 
two sources. The first source was the movement of private 
funds out of sterling. The other source, indirectly, was 
the heavy outflow of U.S. bank credit.  

Now that these sources of supply of the Euro-dollar 
market have lessened (and, perhaps, Canadian banks may be 
drawing funds out of the market, to meet U.S. corporate 
withdrawals of funds from Canada), Euro-dollar rates seem 
for the moment to stand somewhat higher relative to U.S.  
rates than they did a year ago. While three-month U.S.  
Treasury bill rates and CD rates in the secondary market 
are up by about 1/2 per cent and 3/8 per cent, respectively, 
Euro-dollar 3-month rates are 5/8 per cent above their 
March 1964 level.  

These comparisons remind us that the U.S. policy of 
the last few years for restraining capital outflows, which 
focused on gradual changes in money market rates and 
deposit rates, was deprived of much of its potential effect 
by the general rise in interest rates :n Europe, where 
monetary authorities have been endeavoring to control in
flationary pressures. It seems to me that we are getting 
closer to the heart of our problem with our new policies 
of prohibitive taxation of some term loans and of restrict
ing the availability of U.S. bank credit to foreigners.  
But interest rate differences, both short-term and long-term, 
may still plague us.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions and responses for consideration by the Committee.  

These materials were as follows: 

(1) Business activity--What are the implications for the 
sustainability of economic expansion that can be drawn 
from recent surveys of plans and attitudes and other in
formation with respect to (a) business spending for new 
plant and equipment and inventory investment; and (b) 
consumer purchases of autos, other durable goods, and housing?

-43-



3/23/65

Recent information on economic activity, including 
surveys of business and consumer spending plans, suggests 
that expansion in overall economic activity will continue 
in the near future, although prcbably at a more moderate 
pace than in the first quarter. The evidence is not 
unambiguous; major questions still relate to the prospects 
for inventory investment and consumer buying of autos and 
other goods.  

For autos, consumer buying plans suggest a substantial 
rise in sales from 1964 levels, but nothing like the 20 per 
cent gain over a year ago shown by the January-February sales 
figures. It is likely that sales have been above a sustainable 
rate, partly because of the existence of a backlog of demand 
built up during the strikes last autumn. In fact, sales of 
new domestically produced autos in early March declined slightly, 
in contrast to the normal seasonal rise at this time of year, 
and the year-to-year gain narrowed abruptly. It is possible 
that the downward adjustment to a lower (seasonally adjusted) 
level of new car sales may now be taking place.  

The inventory situation, usually difficult to interpret 
because the statistics are not especially reliable, also 
continues to be clouded by the effects of past and possible 
future work stoppages. Accumulation in November and December 
was exceptionally high. In the current quarter it is likely 
to continue heavy, despite reports that the high rate of steel 
use is preventing the desired rate of accumulation, and despite 
the results of the February survey which indicated that manu
facturers expected to add much less to their stocks this 
quarter than in the final quarter of last year. Part of the 
current rise in total business inventories is in distributors' 
stocks, mainly automobile dealers. Even if steel accumulation 
should begin to taper off soon, as a result of more favorable 
contract negotiation prospects or the achievement of desired 
stock levels, it is likely that auto inventories will con
tinue to rise for some time. Dealer stocks are still on the 
low side--relative to a year ago and relative to sales. The 
principal threat to sustained activity would come from 
continuing accumulation of stocks, followed by a concomitant 
cut-back in steel and auto orders, a possibility for late 

spring or early summer.  
There are other potential inventory problems--in 

consumer durable goods other than autos, in apparel, and 
in textiles. Retail sales data for home goods and apparel 
increased only a little further from the advanced levels 
reached last autumn, and for major household durable goods 
reported buying plans were down moderately from a year ago.

-44-



3/23/65

Meanwhile, production of home goods and apparel and in
ventories of these goods held by distributors and 
manufacturers increased appreciably.  

While downward adjustments are ir prospect for 
inventory investment and auto sales, moderate expansion is 
likely to continue in the rest of the economy. Recent 
surveys of investment plans and information on new orders 
for equipment and on construction contract awards all imply 
continuing growth in business expenditures on new plant 
and equipment in the near future. Business plans call 
for steady expansion this year at a pace only moderately 
less rapid than last year. Continuing expansion into 
coming months also seems assured for consumer spending 
on services and State and local government spending on 
goods and services. The expansionary impact of these 
outlays is likely to be offset, in part, by a leveling 
out in residential housing activity. After midyear, 
additional stimulus to the economy is expected from the 
proposed increase in social security benefit payments 
and reductions in excise taxes.  

(2) Balance of payments--What indications are there of 
actual and prospective changes in capital flows to and 
from the United States since the President's mid-February 
message on the balance of payments? 

Little statistical evidence is yet available on the 
impact of the President's balance of payments program on 
outflows of capital from the United States. Data on 
capital flows in March, the first full month of the program, 
will not be received for another month.  

The fragmentary information available suggests, however, 
that capital outflows have been reduced in the last month: 

(1) a more than seasonal rise in Euro-dollar rates this 
month, which would be consistent with larger than 
usual withdrawals of U.S. corporate funds from 
this market; 

(2) a decline of more than 3 cents per ounce in the 
price of gold in the London market over the past 
two weeks, possibly reflecting initial effects 
of the program sufficient to dampen gold specu
lation; 

(3) a general strengthening of the dollar in foreign 
exchange markets; 

(4) weekly payments indicators which, though based on 
incomplete coverage, show a surplus in the last 
four weeks as compared with a large deficit for 
the previous six-week period.

-45-



3/23/65

Besides some reflow of liquid funds, there may well 
have been a reduction in outflows of long-term bank loans 
to developed countries from the reportedly very heavy 
rates of the first half of February. More generally, U.S.  
lenders and investors may have hesitated in their activities 
pending clarification of the program and its application 
to them. There have been reports of such an attitude.  
Also, new commitments on term loans to foreigners dried up 
after February 10 to less than $100 million (and virtually 
nil for developed countries) between then and mid-March, 

as compared with $350 million in the first ten days of 

February alone. It remains to be seen, however, how much 
of this seemingly favorable initial response will prove 
transitory, and what forms and dimensions the ultimate 

response to the program to limit capital outflows will take.  

(3) Bank credit and money--What responses do banks appear 
to be making to the combination of reduced reserve 
availability, higher costs of funds: enlarged inflows of 

time and savings deposits, and strong business loan demands? 

Reflecting strong loan demand and somewhat tauter 

bank reserve availability in recent months, lending terms 
on business loans have tended to tighten, particularly on 

interest rates and compensating balances. Early reports 
on the March lending practices survey indicate that most 

banks reporting firmer policies in the December survey 
moved further in that direction in March, and that addi

tional banks were making similar ad ustments.  
At the same time, net deposit growth has been large, 

mainly reflecting the acceleration in time and savings 

deposit inflows in the November-February period. Most of 

the increased time and savings deposit inflow was in 

response to general rate increases and the promotion of 

relatively new instruments, such as savings and investment 

certificates.  

Banks also raised more funds this year than in the 

early months of other recent years through issuance of 

CDs, notwithstanding the relatively high rates needed to 

attract these funds. At New York City banks, outstanding 

CDs have risen quite steadily, but at outside banks, after 

rising sharply in January, they subsequently declined.  

With prime banks recently paying 4-3/8 per cent on 6-month 

maturities, within 13 basis points of the ceiling, it is 

possible that some nonprime banks may be encountering 

difficulties in retaining funds under the revised ceilings.

-46-



3/23/65

In addition to meetings strong loan demands, banks in
ceased their holdings of municipal and agency issues by 
$1.5 billion over the first two months of 1965. In 
addition, banks participated heavily in the Treasury's 
January advance refunding.  

With the cost of obtaining funds from the Reserve 
Banks, in the Federal funds market, and through issuance 
of CDs appreciably above the bill yield early this year, 
banks made large reductions in bill holdings in January 
and early February. Thus, banks have substituted longer
term Government and municipal issues for shorter-term 
securities in their portfolios and bank liquidity has 
declined further.  

Other adjustments which some larger banks appear to 
have made in response to the enumerated environmental 
changes include more aggressive bidding for Federal funds, 
which has driven the effective rate above the discount 
rate on several occasions in early March, and efforts to 
obtain increased correspondent bank participation in 
broker and other suitable types of loans. Also, excess 
reserves (seasonally adjusted) have averaged somewhat 
lower in recent weeks.  

(4) Business financing--What do business loan and money 
market developments up through the March tax date suggest 
as to the state of corporate liquidity and basic business 
needs for bank financing? 

Available data on business loan and money market 
developments through the March tax date suggest that while 
business needs for bank financing continue strong, this 
apparently has not been associated with any marked deteriora
tion in aggregate corporate liquidity. Perhaps to a greater 
degree than usual, however, there .re striking differences 
within the business sector; some corporations are borrowing 
heavily and others are supplying large amounts of short-term 
funds to the market.  

Tax and dividend borrowing was concentrated in the 
week of March 17, when business loans at New York City banks 

rose by a record amount, after declining the preceding 
week. While the net increase over the two weeks combined 
was not as large as in some earlier years, when corporate 
tax payments were smaller and a larger volume of tax 
anticipation securities was outstanding, it followed record 
expansion in January and February.  

A substantial part of the rise in business loans so 
far this year has reflected special influences, including 
borrowing for foreign purposes and short-term borrowing

-47-



3/23/65

by selected industries related to needs arising out of the 
dock strike and the buildup of steel inventories. Much 
of the remainder has been in domestic term loans, re
flecting in part the continuing upward trend in capital 
outlays.  

Meanwhile, corporate cash flows nave increased sharply 
in the first quarter, particularly in industries operating 
at peak rates such as autos and steel. The resultant 
availability of funds from these sectors of the business 
community has been reflected in continued demand for money 
market instruments. Thus, the Treasury bill market was 
unusually firm over the tax period, with yields declining 
on strong investment demand and light tax-date selling.  
Dealer bill positions, which usually show an appreciable 
tax period rise, declined slightly. Banks retained more 
CD funas than usual over the tax date and finance companies 
have been finding funds readily available on commercial 
paper in the 30-89 day maturity range.  

(5) Money market and reserve ccnditions--Assuming a con
tinuation of current monetary policy, what range of money 
market conditions, interest rates, reserve availability, and 
reserve utilization by the banking system might prove 
mutually consistent during coming weeks? 

The March dividend and tax dates passed with a sur
prising lack of money market pressures. While dealer loan 
rates in New York were on the high side and the Federal funds 
market was generally taut, Treasury bill rates actually 
declined during the period, as bill demand was sizable and 
tax date selling minimal. In the banking system, small net 
borrowed reserves during the past two statement weeks were 
accompanied by member bank borrowings averaging just under 
$400 million.  

As to long-term interest rates, the apparent early 
indications of success for the Administration's balance of 
payments program have quieted market expectations of a more 
restrictive general monetary policy, and this changed view 
has been reflected in the recent advances of Treasury bond 
prices. Corporate and municipal markets also seem to have 
stabilized since early March, with good investor reception 
of the enlarged volume of new offerings.  

More uncertainty than usual prevails about the relation
ship that might obtain in the coming weeks between free 
reserves and short-term interest rates. Net bank reserve 
positions have averaged a minus $25 million in the last 
four weeks--a tauter position than earlier this year--but

-48-



3/23/65

bill yields have still tended to decline. Some of the 
downward bill rate pressures of recent days may subsequently 
abate or even be reversed, with free reserves still re
maining within the range of recent weeks. However, it 
should be noted that we are now entering a period when there 
is little net seasonal pressure on bill rates one way or 
the other. Also, further repatriation of liquid funds 
from abroad would tend to continue downward pressure on 
domestic money market rates from this source.  

If in the weeks ahead it were desired to bring bill 
yields back closer to the discount rate, it might require 
persistent net borrowed reserves, perhaps averaging around 
$50 million. This would be consistent with Federal funds 
trading principally at 4 per cent, but with frequent trans
actions at 4-1/8 per cent, and with a continuation of 
relatively high dealer loan rates; such rates in turn would 
help to support bill yields. In light of current and pro
spective saving flows, however, these money market conditions 
would not likely produce any significant change in long-term 
rates.  

Such money market conditions are likely to be accompanied 
by a slower expansion in total bank credit than the 12 per 
cent annual rate in January and February. The margin of 
short-term funds costs over bill yields should work to dampen 
total bank credit and deposit expansion, although continuing 
strength in loan demands may work in the opposite direction.  
The recent slackening in time deposit growth, and the 
resumption in money supply expansion, suggest that the initial 
effects of rate changes under the Regulation Q ceilings have 
waned. The money supply increased sharply in early March, 
associated in part with a temporary and unusually large re
duction in U.S. Government balances. Further expansion in 
the demand deposit component of the money supply would be 
consistent with the money market conditions assumed above, 
although at a much slower rate than in the first half of March 
and probably at a rate below the 4 per cent of late summer and 
fall of 1964.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

1. Business Activity. The domestic business situation 
continues to be very strong, and despite uncertainties--notably 
with respect to labor negotiations in the steel industry--prospects 
for a sustained upward movement over the remainder of the year

-49-



3/23/65

are good. Industrial production, employment, personal 
income, and retail sales all rose in February. As 
expected, both inventory accumulation and heavy sales 
of new autos are contributing importantly to what seems 
to be an excellent first quarter; but inventory-sales 
ratios are still low. The outlook has been strengthened 
by the latest plant and equipment survey, which suggests 
that a pattern of upward revisions, similar to that which 
occurred in 1964, is developing. Further upward revisions 
could make the 1965 advance even stronger than that of 
1964. Unemployment remains in the same general range as 
in recent months. The mild updrift in industrial whole
sale prices that began last fall appears to be persisting.  

2. Balance of payments. Although available statistics 
do not yet fully reflect current trends in our balance of 
payments, there are several signs that the President's 
balance of payments program is beginning to have a 
significant effect on capital flows, especially short
term capital flows. The February deficit was large, 
inasmuch as the flow-back in the last half of the month 
failed by a wide margin to equal the outflow earlier in 
February. Fragmentary data point to surpluses in early 
March. Sizable repatriation of short-term funds placed 
abroad by United States corporations is indicated by the 
very rapid upsurge of Euro-dollar rates, and other 
foreign short-term interest rates, as well as by the 
behavior of the exchange markets; and, since February 11, 
new term loan commitments and drawings of loans to 
developed countries have been negligible. The initial 
psychological impact of the program has been substantial, 
at least in the financial area. We must see to it that 
it is well sustained.  

3. Bank credit and money. Bank credit advanced 
again at a robust pace in February, led by another very 
large expansion in business loans; and business loans 
apparently scored a further sharp gain around the March 
tax date. In the 14 months ended in February, bank 
credit increased at an annual rate of 8.6 per cent as 

against 7.5 per cent a year earlier, and business loans 
rose at an annual rate of 13.8 per cent, as against 9.5 
per cent a year earlier. While there were some special 
factors at work, including activities in anticipation of 
the balance of payments program, the main influence at 
the moment appears to be a strong loan demand generated 
by rapid economic expansion. Bank loan-deposit ratios 
generally moved up further during the month, and by

-50-



3/23/65

significant margins. The sizable February growth in bank 
credit was accompanied by an actual decline in the private 
money supply, while U.S. Government deposits expanded.  
On the other hand, time deposits posted a near-record 
expansion. It seems to me that these divergent develop
ments reflect largely a response to the November revision 
of Regulation Q, as has happened following earlier 
revisions. Thus the recent performance of the money 
supply should not be interpreted as evidence of a 
restrictive monetary policy. Indeed, the staff's 
memorandum on reserves notes that "...private demand 
deposits and the money supply as a whole apparently are 
increasing rapidly in March, reversing the February 

decline." This points up the danger of attaching 
excessive importance to short-run changes in the money 
supply. On balance, the recent record of total bank 
credit and total bank deposits still suggests to me 
the desirability of some slow-down.  

The repatriation of funds by United States corpo
rations has probably contributed to the decline of 
several points in U.S. bill rates. This decline has 
occurred despite a continued firm tone in the money 
market that has resulted in steady or rising yields on 
other short-term instruments over the same period, and 

despite the occurrence of corporate and dividend tax 
dates that are normally associated with upward pressures 
on bill yields. There is a risk that a persistent 
widening of the spread of foreigr short-term rates over 
our bill rate may in time attract a reverse flow of funds 
that could partly undo the initial favorable effects of 
the President's program.  

Monetary policy. It seems to me that several factors 
point to the wisdom of some further reduction in reserve 
availability. These include (1) the desirability of 
bringing the bill rate back to around 4 per cent, (2) 
the desirability of moderating the current excessively 
rapid rate of growth of bank credit, and (3) above all, 
the need to give stronger backing to the President's 
program to ensure its longer-run success. The very 
healthy state of domestic business gives us scope for a 

further modest policy change without any real risk to 

the economy. The coming three weeks offer an appropriate 
time for action, since the need for an even-keel period 

in connection with the Treasury's May refinancing might 

interfere with the possibility of a policy change at the 

April 13 meeting. Also, the recently reported heavy gold

-51-



3/23/65

losses provide a background of some urgency for a modifi
cation of policy.  

It seems to me that net borrowed reserves might 
fluctuate generally in a range of zero to $150 million, 
with the hope that the bill rate might: move back close 
to the discount rate. Since foreign and domestic ob
servers are likely to interpret any action taken now as 
being aimed mainly at restoring U.S. bill rates, the 
impact on intermediate and longer-term rates should be 
small. However, the policy move should be definite 
enough to signal to the market that a change of atmosphere 
has occurred.  

The wording of the directive should be changed to 
reflect the recent gold losses and to indicate a moderate 
change of policy with respect to the rate of expansion of 
bank credit and with respect to money market conditions.  
Alternative B would seem quite satisfactory, subject to 
some minor changes in wording. 1/ 

Mr. Shuford noted that, as had beer. discussed, economic 

activity in the nation had been advancing rapidly in recent months.  

Employment, production, incomes, and sales all had risen significantly.  

Wholesale prices had moved up over the past six months in contrast to 

near-stability over the past six years as a whole. In the Eighth 

District production and employment had been increasing as rapidly, 

if not more rapidly, than in the rest of the nation.  

Mr. Shuford observed that attitude surveys pointed to con

tinued expansion in business plant and equipment expenditures and 

in outlays for consumer durables; and to a moderation in the rate 

of inventory growth. Those developments, if attained, appeared to 

1/ The two alternative draft directives prepared by the staff are 
appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-52-



3/23/65

be consistent with continued economic growth. Businesses had 

been accumulating inventories at an unusually fast pace and some 

slowing seemed desirable even though inventories were still low 

relative to current sales.  

Recent developments in foreign exchange and Euro-dollar 

rates as well as the weekly balance of payments estimates indicated 

a marked reduction in the outflow of capital since the President's 

message, Mr. Shuford continued. Foreign loans and investments by 

banks in the Eighth District were limited, but he had talked with 

the four banks in the District that reported on Treasury forms.  

Those banks supported the voluntary foreign credit restraint 

effort and were cooperating. Reports indicated that there was 

a somewhat stronger foreign demand for credit, and some foreign 

borrowers were reported to have contacted a few banks seeking new 

or increased lines of credit. Thus, there were indications even 

from interior banks that the program was receiving attention--and 

perhaps taking hold--but it was too soon to make a reliable evalu

ation cf its effectiveness.  

Business loan demand in the District, particularly in 

St. Louis banks, had been very strong in recent months, Mr. Shuford 

observed. The net increase in borrowing during the week ended 

March 17 was greater than normal for that tax period. Bank attitudes 

in the District with respect to extensions of credit had not changed 

materially in recent months--at least not quite as much as the green

-53-



3/23/65 -54

book 1/ reported that they had changed in tne nation as a whole--but 

some District banks were firming rates on a selective basis. Corpo

rate holdings of liquid instruments were large, but with the expansion 

in business investment the demand for credit also was strong.  

Assuming no change in policy, as in the fifth question 

posed by the staff, Mr. Shuford felt that the pattern of money 

market and reserve conditions that would develop was highly unclear.  

On balance, however, he thought Federal funds were apt to continue 

in relatively short supply, with rates at 4 per cent and at times 

a little above that figure. Short-term bill yields probably would 

range from their recent levels to slightly below the discount rate, 

especially if the outflow of capital from the country was limited, 

and long-term interest rates probably would change little. Free 

reserves might stay within $50 million of the zero level. With 

those money market conditions, he would anticipate a continued 

growth in bank credit and time deposits, although some slowing in 

time deposit growth might occur as the stimulative effects of the 

recent change in Regulation Q wore off. Tctal member bank reserves 

probably would continue to increase in an irregular fashion. The 

money supply might be expected to begin rising soon, but at a 

slower rate than last year; in his opinion that would be desirable 

at this time.  

1/ The report "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
for the Committee by the Board's staff.



3/23/65

In summary, Mr. Shuford said, he thought the domestic 

economy was expanding rapidly, and it appeared that the voluntary 

program was reducing the net capital outflow. The existing con

ditions in the money market as well as the level of interest 

rates and growth in bank reserves and money appeared appropriate 

for the near future in view of the economic situation. He favored 

no change in policy at this time while the Committee awaited a 

little better perspective on the national and international 

situations, and he would not change the discount rate. Alternative 

A of the staff's drafts for the directive was satisfactory to him.  

In a concluding comment, Mr. Shufcrd referred to Mr. Hayes's 

observation that even keel requirements might interfere with the 

possibility of a policy change at the April 13 meeting of the Com

mittee, and noted that he had understood that the Treasury would 

not be engaging in any substantial financing operations until May.  

Mr. Stone indicated that under the present schedule the 

Treasury would be consulting with its Advisory Committees concerning 

the May refunding on April 27, and would announce the terms of th.t 

operation on April 28, with books open during the following week.  

Mr. Bryan observed that the Sixth District's economy was 

robust. New jobs had kept insured unemployment low and increasing 

personal income supported a high level of consumer spending.  

Businesses and consumers had in recent weeks contributed to a 

strong expansion in bank loans, and modest gains had occurred in 

the farm sector.

-55-



3/23/63 -56

Mr. Bryan said he would attempt brief answers to some 

of the staff's questions.  

1. The surveys seemed to indicate that plant and 

equipment spending would continue to bolster the economy through

out 1965. Consumers still had strong, if somewhat diminished, 

buying intentions. By early summer, if not earlier, some 

downward shift apparently would take place in durable goods 

inventory buying; but that expectation might be radically altered 

on the upside by any important tendency to an upward drift in 

prices. Altogether, he thought that it was too early to make a 

confident prediction regarding the entirety of 1965. However, 

barring important strikes, and with an excess of caution, he 

expected no great slowdown in economic activity in the next 

three months; and if he were to guess, he would guess that 

substantially the present level of economic activity would extend 

much further into 1965.  

2. Mr. Bryan said he had little firsthand information 

on the balance of payments problem and had to accept Secretary 

Dillon's testimony to the International Finance Subcommittee in 

which he reported a spectacular decrease in loans to developed 

countries since February 10.  

The voluntary credit restraint program apparently had 

made many more banks and other businesses aware of reporting 

requirements than they had been before, Mr. Bryan continued.



3/23/65 -57

Perhaps in a desire to establish as large a base as possible 

for the 5 per cent limitation, perhaps in a belated accrual of 

candor, several banks in the District were "finding" new foreign 

accounts and some apparently were going to start reporting for 

the first time. That might have the perverse effect of actually 

increasing recorded short-term outflows temporarily.  

Mr. Bryan did not know whether to be alarmed or uneasy, 

or simply to regard the matter as a normal growth. But according 

to figures maintained at the Atlanta Bank, the Treasury at some 

point in early March was short something over $1 billion in 

foreign currencies. The Federal Reserve System was short about 

$577 million. Those figures, to his mind at least, indicated 

how imperative it was that the United States attain a balance 

in its international payments.  

3. Banks obviously had been changing their portfolio 

mix; but Mr. Bryan was not at all certain that the shift was a 

result of reduced reserve availability. It seemed to him more 

nearly the result of higher costs of furds in the Federal funds 

market, and a recently large inflow of time and savings deposits 

at higher costs.  

4. Business loans at weekly reporting member banks had 

been exceptionally strong during the first quarter, Mr. Bryan 

said. Some slowing occurred in the week of March 10, and he was 

aware that everything could be explained away, but even so the



3/23/65 -58

gain from year-end 1964 amounted to over $1 billion. In the 

comparable period last year, business loans had declined by 

$1.3 billion from year-end 1963. In both cases the buildup of 

such loans in the last quarter of the year had been sharp.  

Federal funds had been tight during the past three weeks, as 

pressures on bank reserves had mounted. Although there was 

considerable lag in the published data, corporate liquidity 

had continued to decline as working capital expanded. The 

bulk of increased current assets had gone to increase receivables 

and inventories. It appeared that in spite of continuing large 

cash throw-off, business as a whole still required heavy increments 

of bank credit, especially in time of good or booming business.  

The fifth question, Mr. Bryan said, was a jigsaw puzzle, 

and beyond his capacity. He would have to listen as his colleagues 

put together an answer.  

As for national policy, Mr. Bryan continued, with the 

exception of the Federal funds rate, Governments had been edging 

down in yield from recent peaks. He understood that foreign 

rates in the meantime had been trending upward over the last few 

months. That divergent development was to be expected as foreign 

capital markets were thrown back on their own resources and U.S.  

supplies of capital had to find domestic outlets. Any further 

divergence of rates would make the voluntary credit restraint 

program the more difficult.



3/23/65

In addition, Mr. Bryan noted certain reserve figures.  

Since August of last year, when the Committee was to have a 

slight change of policy direction, total reserves had increased 

5.8 per cent; nonborrowed reserves, 5.4 per cent; required 

reserves, 5.7 per cent; and required reserves against private 

deposits, 5.1 per cent. While he could not prove the point, 

he had the feeling that those reserve increments were well 

above anything that the economy could long stand without an 

inflationary evolution. Meanwhile, he cculd not look with 

equanimity on price developments--either in wholesale prices 

or in consumer prices.  

Although Mr. Bryan did not advocate a change in discount 

rates, he believed that in such a situation the Committee had no 

choice but to proceed to make more of the reserves going into 

the banking system borrowed reserves rather than provided 

reserves. Thus he suggested, if reserves were to be measured 

by a free reserve target, that the Committee retreat to net 

borrowed reserves averaging about $50 or $60 million over the 

next three weeks, with a weekly range between $125 million and 

zero net borrowed.  

Mr. Bopp reported that economic activity had stopped 

increasing every month in the Third District after two years in 

which consecutive month-to-month rises constituted the predominant 

pattern. Although unemployment was at relatively low levels

-59-



3/23/65 -60

compared to earlier years, it no longer was decreasing in most 

of the District's labor markets. Output measures also reflected 

the leveling-off process. It was not that a downtrend had begun; 

rather, the upward movement of economic activity had slowed very 

substantially.  

Mr. Bopp said that he would limit his further remarks 

primarily to the staff's question on initial responses of banks 

to the foreign credit restraint program.  

In general, the five Philadelphia reserve city banks 

engaged in foreign lending had been cooperative, despite some 

questions over interpretation of the guidelines, computation of 

base figures, and like matters. Although it was too early as 

yet to get a firm idea of what the future might hold (indeed, 

base figures had not yet been computed for any of the banks), 

some straws in the wind were disclosed by a survey completed 

last week.  

First of all, Mr. Bopp remarked, the banks did have 

working ideas of their base figures; the four largest presently 

were at 100 per cent or less of their working base. The fifth 

bank, which was the smallest foreign lender, stood at 108 per 

cent. Thus, there was room for some expansion within the pre

scribed limits by Philadelphia banks.



3/23/65

Asked where they expected to be with respect to the 

105 per cent limit by July 1, Mr. Bopp continued, four of the 

banks indicated that commitments now on their books could put 

them well over the limit (two indicated they could go up to 

125 per cent of the base period if all commitments were taken 

down), but all four were optimistic that they could stay within 

the limit. The fifth bank, accounting for about 20 per cent of 

foreign lending, reported that firm commitments and scheduled 

take-downs would bring it to roughly 110 per cent of the base by 

July 1. Finally, when asked if any diversion of foreign loan 

demand was coming their way from New York or elsewhere, three of 

the banks indicated they had been approached by customers who 

evidently were finding it difficult to obtain accommodatio 

elsewhere.  

Mr. Bopp then turned to national economic developments.  

The economy continued to be characterized by basic, underlying 

strength, he said, and there existed an overall margin of unused 

resources which appeared to be sufficient to meet prospective 

growth in aggregate demand. However, the economic froth stemming 

from past and possible future labor problems was creating some 

industrial imbalances. Nevertheless, he concurred with the opinion 

that tighter money would be of questionable effectiveness in 

slowing the present rate of inventory accumulation and, because 

of time lags inherent in monetary actions, might possibly deter

-61-



3/23/65 -62

future investment at the precise time when inventory decumulation 

had become a drag on the economy.  

Given the present general stability of industrial prices, 

the continuing high level of unemployment, and preliminary 

indications that the President's balance of payments program was 

beginning to become effective, Mr. Bopp would make no change at 

this time in the general posture of monetary policy. Accordingly, 

he favored alternative A for the directive.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that as the Committee knew by now, 

he usually had very strong views on developments and policy.  

But this was a period of transition, and it was difficult at 

such times to be certain or to take very strong positions. So 

far as the statistical record was concerned, business continued 

at a near-boom level, but logic indicated that some things soon 

had to begin to slide. Uncertainty also prevailed on the monetary 

side. Steps had been taken which logically should improve the 

U.S. balance of payments, but the results thus far were 

inconclusive.  

Auto production and sales had been maintained at 

extremely high levels, Mr. Hickman observed. Some upward 

revision of the forecasts for the year might be in order. No 

one believed, however, that the present pace of production, at 

an annual rate of close to 10 million cars, could be sustained



3/23/65 -63

for long. Perhaps a straw in the wind was the fact that prices 

of used cars sold at auction had been declining since January.  

The steel situation had not changed since the last 

meeting, Mr. Hickman continued. Ingot output remained at nearly 

140 million tons, seasonally adjusted annual rate, but the sharp 

drop that was expected by all analysts in the industry was still 

in the cards: although it had been deferred. While labor

management negotiations were making a ponderous beginning, 

nothing decisive had occurred to clear the air, either as to the 

prospective date of settlement or its contents.  

The staff's answers to the staff's questions seemed to 

Mr. Hickman to be reasonably complete, but he proposed to express 

a few independent thoughts. First, recent surveys of business 

plans and attitudes seemed to him to be more than usually 

difficult to evaluate; but then he had to confess to a general 

skepticism regarding the survey technique of economic forecasting.  

According to the most recent Commerce-SEC survey, plant and 

equipment expenditures would be up by 12 per cent this year, 

whereas at the present time a year ago the increase for 1964 had 

been expected to be 10 per cent. Since actual expenditures in 

1964 had exceeded the forecast by 4-1/2 percentage points, one 

might take the latest reading as bullish if the circularity of 

the figures was overlooked. Plant and equipment expenditures 

would rise by more than current projections if business expanded



3/23/65 -64

vigorously throughout 1965--but that was precisely the question 

to be answered.  

The latest survey figures on manufacturers' expectations 

for inventories and sales seemed to be self-contradictory, 

Mr. Hickman said, and even less reliable than the spending 

figures. Moreover, the past performance of those figures 

indicated that they should be used with extreme caution. The 

latest survey of consumer intentions to purchase cars showed a 

decline from October, but declines almost always occurred at 

this time of year. Here again, the evidence was inconclusive.  

Secondly, Mr. Hickman continued, it was still much too 

early to measure the effects of the voluntary credit restraint 

program, but there were a few signs that suggested ultimate 

success. The Euro-dollar rate had moved upward more than 

seasonally from early February to mid-March. In his discussions 

with bankers throughout the Fourth District, he had been assured 

that the guidelines would be met to the extent legally possible 

under existing loan agreements. The stream of new commitments 

had been curtailed, but almost every bank reported a rise in 

outstandings under existing agreements. Thus, so far as the 

banking sector was concerned, things might appear to get worse 

in a statistical sense before they got better, but the expected 

outcome was favorable. No figures were available as yet in the 

District for nonbank financial institutions.



3/23/65

Thirdly, Mr. Hickman said, recent monetary developments 

were clouded by the fact that the March tax and dividend dates 

had just been passed; thus the statistics raised more questions 

than they answered. The domestic money market had not shown the 

usual pressures associated with March tax and dividend dates, 

despite the fact that business borrowings at New York banks had 

risen by a record amount. The reported slowdown in the expansion 

of time deposits during March was apparently associated with 

maturing CDs around the tax date. The money supply moved upward 

in early March, sympathetically with the decline in time deposits 

and a reduction in the Treasury balance. He did not attach much 

significance to those developments.  

Finally, monetary policy seemed to Mr. Hickman to have 

been appropriate in the past three weeks, as indeed it had been 

since the turn of the year. Borrowings had averaged more than 

$400 million in February, but were a little too low for his 

taste in early March. At the last meeting, he had recommended 

a free reserve target of between zero and plus $50 million, but 

it seemed to him that the Committee should begin to think now 

of a lower target if the voluntary credit restraint program 

caused a return flow to New York of funds that would be redundant 

unless absorbed by System action. As goals for the next three 

weeks he recommended borrowings of about $400 million, free

-65-



3/23/65 -66

reserves below the zero line (say, between zero and minus $100 

million as a target), a bill rate between 3.95 per cent and 

4.05 per cent, and Federal funds at 4 per cent or higher most 

of the time. He believed the current direc:ive would accommodate 

the kind of mild tightening he had in mind for the next three 

weeks, but he would have no objection to alternative B of the 

staff's drafts, providing the reference to gold was eliminated; 

if the U.S. could improve its balance of payments, the gold flow 

would take care of itself.  

Mr. Daane said that the direction of his own thinking 

had been indicated by his earlier question to the Account 

Manager as to whether there was room for the Committee to firm 

reserve availability a bit further without creating expectations 

of a discount rate change or making the present discount rate 

untenable. If he understood all the nuances of Mr. Brill's 

analysis, it also led in that direction. In Mr. Daane's 

judgment the Committee should pay more than lip service to the 

general proposition that monetary policy was a flexible instrument.  

One virtue of monetary policy was that in a real sense the 

Committee was able to shift course at three-week intervals, or 

even more often if necessary.  

For the coming three weeks Mr. Daane was inclined to 

think in terms of a somewhat lower net borrowed reserve figure.



3/23/65 -67

He did not have an overt move in mind; perhaps $25 or $50 million 

in addition to the current figure of about $50 million net 

borrowed reserves would be appropriate operationally. A slight 

shift of that sort, he thought, would be supportive of the 

voluntary restraint program. In his opinion it would be premature 

now to attempt to judge the probable impact of that program, and 

it certainly was too soon to estimate its effective duration.  

Mr. Daane said he had been impressed by comments on the 

quality of credit he had heard at the American Bankers Association 

meetings at Princeton last week, although he had not yet been 

able to assess their full significance. The bankers were almost 

unanimously of the view that a considerable deterioration in 

credit quality was both in process and in prospect. The head of 

one of the largest New York banks had said frankly that his bank 

was making loans of poor quality. Apparently the deterioration 

had proceeded further than current statistics indicated.  

Mr. Daane continued by observing that he had thought 

somewhat lower reserve figures could be achieved within the 

present policy directive, simply by giving the Account Manager 

somewhat greater leeway to err on the side of tightness, but he 

would not object to the adoption of either alternative A or B.  

If alternative B was adopted, however, he would be slightly 

concerned about one possibility; namely, that if the market came 

to believe that the System had decided to firm policy again,



3/23/65 -68

there might be a general conviction that still further firming 

was in prospect and, consequently, an undesirably large shift 

in expectations.  

Mr. Mitchell said that he believed that alternative A 

was appropriate for the directive. He concurred in much of the 

analysis of the domestic situation offered by Messrs. Bopp and 

Hickman. It seemed inevitable to him that declines soon would 

appear in some economic statistics--for example, in the figures 

for housing, automobiles, and steel--even though total industrial 

production might be little changed. He would have no objection 

to increasing domestic short-term interest rates if he thought 

that would help bring the balance of payments under control, but 

he did not think that it would. It was desirable, in his judgment, 

for Euro--dollar rates to rise in order to use the market mechaiism 

to induce central banks in Europe to withdraw their holdings from 

the U.S. and sell them to their commercial banks to invest in the 

Euro-dollar market (with the result that U.S. liabilities would 

be to commercial banks abroad rather than to central banks). A 

competitive rise in domestic short-term rates might weaken the 

market incentive to reduce holdings of dollars in the United 

States given to the central banks by rising Euro-dollar rates.  

Funds had to be shifted from New York to the Euro-dollar market 

for the present problem to be solved, and the unwillingness of 

European central banks to hold dollars had to be faced by relieving 

them of dollars. An opportunity to get some reluctant holders



3/23/65 -69

out of dollars appeared to be opening up as U.S. corporations 

and banks withdrew from the Euro-dollar market; given some market 

incentive the gap might be met in part from the deposits in the 

U.S. of foreign central banks.  

Mr. Shepardson said that the oral presentations today 

and the staff's answers to the questions, as he interpreted them, 

all indicated a continuing high level of economic activity. There 

was a possibility of some letdown at a future date as a result 

of a steel settlement and other factors that had been mentioned, 

but at present practically all elements seemed to be moving at 

a high level. The Committee had been concerned because the money 

supply had not risen over the past few months, but according to 

the figures for early March it was expanding at a high rate again.  

The growth rate of money often showed large short-run changes for 

reasons that apparently were not wholly understood.  

Bank credit was expanding at an unduly high rate, Mr.  

Shepardson continued. That fact, together with the balance of 

payments problem, led him to conclude that it would be appropriate 

to move to somewhat firmer conditions. To the extent that the 

reflow of funds from abroad continued, he noted, there would be 

additions to the supply of funds to be disposed of domestically.  

While Mr. Shepardson favored the type of policy called 

for in alternative B of the staff's drafts, he thought a different 

sequence for the statements in the first paragraph would be



3/23/65

preferable to improve the emphasis. Also, he would consider it 

desirable to replace the words "to assure full success of' (the 

voluntary restraint program) with the words, "to reinforce"; 

while the Committee could make a contribution to that program, 

it was not within its capacity to assure its success. Specifically, 

he proposed the following language for the first paragraph: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate a generally strong further expansion 
of the domestic economy and the continuing need to improve 
our international balance of payments, as highlighted by 
the heavy gold outflows in recent months. In this situa
tion, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current 
policy to seek to reinforce the voluntary restraint pro
gram to strengthen the international position of the 
dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures 
while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

Business activity seems to me to be continuing to 
expand at a rate that does not call for any change in 
monetary policy. We have two major industries where 
activity seems unsustainably high--autos and steel. But 
we also have another industry, housing--every bit as 
important as these two--where activity ought to be regarded 
as unsustainably low.  

I would no more favor a tighter monetary policy just 
to damp down autos and steel than I would vote for an 
easier policy simply in order to bolster housing activity.  
These special industry developments ought to be allowed 
to work out their own natural adjustments to changing 
market conditions, so long as these developments are not 
so extreme as to upset the whole economy. And, in fact, 
a few early signs of remedial adjustments in each of these 
areas can be seen. The economy as a whole meanwhile seems 
to be resisting the destabilizing pressures from these 
particular industries very well. Commodity prices continue 
stable on average, and I gather the outlook for further 
GNP expansion through the rest of the year is now for a

-70-



3/23/65 -71

somewhat steadier and more assured advance than might 
have been expected a month or two ago. All this adds up, 
in my mind, to no reason for change in monetary policy 
for domestic reasons.  

On the balance of payments side, signs of the con
structive effects of the new program of restraint seem 
to be multiplying. Now if we can hold firmly to this 
line for a reasonable period of time, our problem of 
capital outflows will be very much ameliorated. The 
implication of this for monetary policy, I believe, is 
that we should hold our course steady at this juncture--neither 
tightening to compound the effects of the program, nor easing 
because of the extent to which our payments problem has been 
reduced.  

I think we need to be very careful, however, to think 
through what is a monetary policy of "no change." In 
focusing as much attention on the three-month bill rate 
as we have in this and recent sessions, we come very 
close to a "bill rate only" policy. And we ought not 
to blind our eyes to that fact. Even setting asidelong-run 
considerations of principle, the practical considerations 
of the moment counsel against "bill rate myopia." Such 
arguments as have been advanced in the past for special 
attention to the bill rate have depended importantly, as 
I understood them, upon two assumptions: (1) that covered 
differential yields on three-month bills were a good measure 
of the rate incentives to international capital flows; and 
(2) that net movements of liquid funds out of the United 
States were a critical weakness in our payments position.  

Whatever merit they may have had in the past, neither 
of these assumptions is appropriate now. Our technicans 
have been warning us repeatedly that the covered bill rate 
differential is inadequate and undependable as a measure 
of the rate incentive to capital flows, and that is 
certainly true at the present moment when bill rates in 
this country are low relative to other money market rates.  
Second, some reflux now seems to be taking place in liquid 
funds, which were moved abroad earlier for reason of interest 
rate differentials. I suspect it is a good deal easier for 
banks and businesses to decide to move these liquid funds 
back home than it is to alter longer-run lending, investing 
and borrowing programs.  

I regard bank lending as the critical part of our 

program, and I think we should be watching very closely 
those conditions that alter bank willingness to lend. But



3/23/65 -72

here the bill rate is not the most indicative measure.  
The most relevant money market conditions to observe are 
how much banks are being led to borrcw at the discount 
window, and at what rate; the amount of Federal funds 
available and the prevailing funds rate; what it costs 
banks to sell certificates of deposit, and how much they 
are managing to sell; and what banks are moved to charge 
for whatever dealer lending they are willing to do. It 
is this whole complex of measures that we should have in 
mind when we tell the Manager to maintain money market 
conditions about the same as have prevailed in recent 
weeks. In point of fact, all these measures except the 
bill rate have remained firm or even tightened somewhat 
over the March tax and dividend period. I would not like 
to see them made tighter, but allowed to range around their 
late February-early March levels, even if the bill rate by 
itself sagged a bit more for a time. I would assume all 
this might involve free reserves fluctuating moderately 
around zero, but not consistently negative. It is with 
this understanding that I would vote in favor of the 
"no charge" version of the current directive as drafted 
by the staff, alternative A.  

Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business had continued 

to expand about in line with trends in the nation as a whole. The 

Reserve Bank's latest survey indicated a further rise in optimism 

among businessmen and bankers, and manufacturers again reported gains 

in new orders, shipments, and employment. Most textile and furniture 

plants continued to push capacity to the limit to meet delivery 

schedules that. extended further into the future than ever before in 

recent years.  

Nationally, Mr. Wayne said, business activity apparently 

continued at a very fast pace, accompanied by rising optimism on the 

part of businessmen. To the extent that such spreading optimism 

colored recent surveys of plans for spending on capital equipment



3/23/65 -73

and inventories the latter were suspect as guides for forecasting.  

Such plans were subject to continous adjustment in the light of 

business developments. Mr. Holland had suggested a fair degree of 

stability in the private sector reflecting moderation in inventory 

and wage policies. The net result was that the surveys gave a fairly 

strong indication of some increase, especially in the first half of 

the year, but left much uncertainty as to the amount of the increase.  

Several preliminary indications of the effectiveness of the 

voluntary restraint program on foreign lending were encouraging, 

Mr. Wayne remarked, and they gained significance because they fitted 

into a logical pattern of what might have been expected. To some 

extent, impossible to define, those preliminary developments might 

have been the natural result of the cessation of the heavy lending 

which had preceded the inauguration of the program rather than a 

consequence of the program per se. The System should be encouraged 

by the early results but not enough to reduce its efforts.  

In the past three weeks financial markets had been definitely 

stronger, Mr. Wayne observed. Bill rates had declined, contrary to 

the normal seasonal pattern, and the tax-exempt market, which recently 

had been heavily congested, had shown a substantial recovery. While 

those developments were unfolding here, the voluntary restraint 

program had brought a definite tightening effect abroad. Interest 

rates were distinctly higher in Europe and in other parts of the 

world. As a result, the interest rate differential between the



3/23/65 -74

United States and Europe was now greater than it had been three 

weeks ago.  

Mr. Wayne thought the Committee should continue to support 

the voluntary restraint program by maintaining firm conditions in 

the domestic market. That migh: well require a reserve availability 

somewhat below the levels of the past two weeks. Conditions in the 

domestic economy would seem to permit if not to justify such a 

reduction. The pace of activity in a number of major industries 

could hardly be described as less than feverish. Those industries 

included automobiles, steel, textiles, furniture, and aluminum, and 

perhaps others. The growth in bank loans in the past two months 

indicated that funds had been readily available to encourage that 

feverish pace. It appeared to him that the Desk had maintained 

reserve availability within the range indicated by the Committee at 

the previous meeting but that rate of availability had not produced 

the degree of firmness which he understood had been indicated in the 

directive. Hence, he would favor returning to that degree of firmness 

by reducing reserve availability. He wished he could agree with 

Mr. Mitchell, but he felt that a widening of the rate differential 

between the U.S. and Europe might subject the voluntary program 

to irresistible pressures and bring it tumbling down like a house 

of cards.  

Alternative B for the directive appeared to Mr. Wayne to

express the posture which he considered appropriate.



3/23/65 -75

Mr. Clay remarked that the staff analysis of business 

activity covered the situation very well and indicated the rather 

pronounced uncertainties concerning some sectors of the economy.  

It had to be assumed that the pace of activity in steel and autos 

was not sustainable and that the recent rate of increase in 

aggregate economic activity would not continue. Unless offset 

by significant expansion in other sectors, readjustment in steel 

and autos could have a pronounced impact upon the overall level 

of economic activity. The timing of that impact was not clear, 

and its degree was clouded by both the uncertainty of timing and 

the question as to whether the readjustments in steel and autos 

would converge. Those forthcoming developments were destabilizing 

in nature and could prove dangerous to a continuation of the 

business upswing at the present advanced stage. However, the 

underlying trends in the economy were rather reassuring, despite 

the possibility of an irregular pattern of economic activity over 

the course of the year.  

While preliminary indications as to recent international 

payments developments probably told little as to the success of 

the Administration's program, Mr. Clay said, the short-run evidence 

was on the positive side. Or, to put it another way, it would be 

discouraging if the new program, the expectations created by it, 

and the initial financial responses had not made a noticeable mark on



3/23/65 -76

the various markets involved. On the other hand, concrete evidence 

as to the effectiveness of the program was going to require con

siderably more time to develop.  

Tenth District city banks appeared to have responded to the 

changes in financial environment in much the same way as outlined 

in the staff comments, Mr. Clay continued. Contrary to much of 

last year when business loan demand deviated from that in the 

nation, business loan demand had been strong in District banks this 

year. Moreover, the expansion had rot been confined to primary 

metals and automobiles, but had been spread throughout the range 

of business loan categories. Selective interest rate increases 

had been made in recent months, but it apparently had not been 

possible for District banks to increase interest rates on loans 

to national firms with prime credit ratings. The faster pace of 

time deposit growth following the modification of Regulation Q 

had slowed down recently at District banks. Portfolios had been 

readjusted so as to increase holdings of municipal securities 

and reduce somewhat holdings of Governments, and to lengthen the 

maturities of the Governments held.  

Special factors affecting loan expansion and lack of direct 

evidence as to the effect of international payments developments 

complicated the making of a judgment as to monetary policy, Mr.  

Clay said. Those factors particularly complicated the selection



3/23/65 -77

of the targets for monetary policy implementation. In the present 

state of flux, it would seem logical to him to attempt to maintain 

policy essentially unchanged, about in line with the decision made 

at the previous meeting of the Committee. The Treasury bill rate 

had declined slightly since that time. With the uncertainties 

involved as to all of the factors impinging on the bill rate, however, 

it would not seem appropriate to instruct the Manager to reduce credit 

availability to whatever extent necessary to bring about a 4 per cent 

bill rate, even though a bill rate approximating the discount rate 

remained the Committee's goal. While the Committee was not seeking 

a continuation of the rate of increase in bank credit that had 

occurred in January and February, that was not likely to continue 

in view of the slower rate of growth in time and savings deposits.  

Alternative A of the draft current economic policy directive would 

fit such a policy prescription, Mr. Clay said. No change should be 

made in the Federal Reserve Bank discount rate.  

Mr. Scanlon turned directly to the staff questions.  

1. Economic activity in the Seventh Federal Reserve District 

continued to rise, he said, paced by autos, steel, and producers' 

durables. While the outlook for autos and steel continueduncertain, 

the outlook for machinery and equipment was strong and appeared to 

be getting stronger. Midwest businessmen were generally optimistic, 

as were consumers. Some capital expenditure programs of steel and 

machinery producers were falling behind schedule because of shortages



3/23/65 -78

of skilled workers at both the construction site and the machinery 

manufacturing plants.  

Mr. Scanlon believed those developments were generally 

consistent with the Board staff's comments on the first question.  

He detected a somewhat greater feeling of strength in the economy, 

but that might be because of the importance of the durable goods 

industries in his District.  

2. Mr. Scanlon thought it was too early to get any meaningful 

fix on the effects of the voluntary restraint program on the balance 

of payments, but the evidence he had seen and the reactions he had 

encountered were consistent with the staff statement. Bankers and 

other businessmen appeared to be taking the program seriously and 

were reviewing their portfolios to find ways to meet the guidelines.  

There was concern on the part of some of the banks that the Commerce 

Department program might be less restrictive and, consequently, less 

effective than the Federal Reserve program. Those banks that had 

estimated they were above the target levels as of mid-February now 

indicated they hoped to be close to target levels by the end of 

March. As would be expected, those banks which had recently been 

expanding their foreign business rapidly, especially some of the 

medium-and small-size banks, had the greatest difficulty in making 

necessary adjustments.  

3. On balance, Mr. Scanlon observed, banks had sold U.S.  

Government securities and acceptances, had reduced dealer loans,



3/23/65 -79

and had paid somewhat higher rates for time deposits in order to 

meet loan demands. But they also had added to their municipal 

and agency securities. Weekly reporting banks in the Seventh 

District showed a smaller net rise in total credit since the 

end of January than a year ago, but that might reflect repay

ments on the unusually large loan increases of the two previous 

months. Reserve positions of the District's money market banks 

were more comfortable than he had anticipated.  

Considering the large increases in seasonally adjusted 

reserves and bank credit, as estimated for all member banks for 

January and February, Mr. Scanlon found it difficult to see how 

the situation could be described as one of reduced reserve 

availability. To some extent, higher average borrowings had to 

represent a substitute for other short-term sources of funds on 

which rates had risen. At the same time nonborrowed reserves had 

been increased.  

4. Mr. Scanlon said he had nothing to add to the staff's 

comments on business financing developments in recent weeks except 

to note that widespread discussion of the balance of payments 

program might have had some effect on expectations of both borrowers 

and lenders and thereby tended to boost availability of funds in 

domestic markets. The strong demand for business loans and the 

moderate sales of Treasury bills over the tax date appeared to give



3/23/65 -80

conflicting signals with respect to corporate liquidity. He 

thought it quite likely that more than the usual amount of con

flicting indicators might be seen in the weeks ahead as the voluntary 

restraint program took hold.  

5. With respect to money market and reserve conditions, 

Mr. Scanlon thought that two factors might play an impotant role 

during the next few weeks. Repatriation of funds in consequence of 

the balance of payments program might heighten interest in Treasury 

bills and might exert downward pressures on bill yields. At the 

same time, the expected cutback in foreign lending combined with the 

disappearance of such special factors requiring financing as the 

dock strike might lead to slower growth in loan demand. It seemed 

to him that the impact of those forces would be for a given level 

of free reserves to be consistent with both somewhat lower bill 

rates and a somewhat slower rate of credit expansion than in 

recent weeks.  

Under current conditions, Mr. Scanlon said, he would like 

to maintain the firm tone in the money market of the past week 

but he would dislike seeing the bill rate pressed any lower. His 

feelings regarding policy were similar to those expressed by Mr.  

Daane; he would not favor overt action today but would like to 

see firmness maintained, and he judged that that program could be 

accomplished under alternative A for the directive. By the next



3/23/65 -81

meeting, the Committee should have a better opportunity to judge 

the effects of the voluntary credit restraint program and should 

have some clarification on the disparity between short-term bill 

rates and other short-term rates.  

Mr. Strothman commented that the Ninth District apparently 

was about to close its books on a very good first quarter--a quarter 

marked by a continuing economic expansion and, moreover, a balanced 

expansion. According to the Reserve Bank's most recent survey, 

District manufacturers were expecting first-quarter profits and 

output and, to lesser extent, employment, to be above their 

fourth-quarter levels. It was quite possible that the increase 

in profits would be substantial.  

Current but fragmentary information suggested that District 

employment was continuing to grow and that unemployment was con

tinuing to decline, Mr. Strothman said. That was what State 

employment offices across the District reported. Also, the District 

"help wanted" index seemed to indicate that demand for labor was up 

rather sharply.  

Mr. Strothman had observed no marked change in prices in 

the District. Although there were reports of price increases, both 

for raw materials and finished products, the modal response continued 

to be "no change." 

With respect to factors bearing on future prospects, 

Mr. Strothman said he had only two comments to make. First, there



3/23/65

had been some buildup of inventories among District firms; and 

second, fragmentary evidence suggested an increase in new orders 

and in the backlog of orders. The increa.e in new orders was 

impressive; the inventory buildup likewise was impressive, but in 

an undesirable way.  

Generally speaking, then, Mr. Strothman concluded, it 

appeared than the current general economic posture and outlook in 

the Ninth District were much like those of the nation.  

Turning to the financial scene, Mr. Strothman remarked 

that perhaps he should start by saying that the demand for 

commercial and industrial loans evidently was still strong. He 

attributed the strength, at least in part, to the continuing 

inventory buildup. The mid-February to mid-March increase in 

commercial and industrial loans for reporting banks had been much 

greater than seasonal. However, other forms of bank credit had 

decreased in recent weeks, with the result that total bank credit 

of reporting banks also had declined sharply, not only on a 

seasonally adjusted basis but also absolutely. That development 

reflected the sharp contraseasonal decline in bank deposits, both 

demand and time, that had occurred in the last few weeks. The 

decline was particularly reflected in the recent reduction in 

reporting-bank holdings of short-term Treasury securities. The 

declines in total credit at reporting banks, and in their demand

-82-



3/23/65 -83

and time deposit totals as well, came after increases for all 

Ninth District banks which persisted from the beginning of the 

year through mid-February. Only the trend of commercial and 

industrial loans had continued uninterrupted. When the numbers 

became available, Mr. Strothman said, it would be interesting 

to see whether the recent trend-breaking declines also had been 

experienced by nonreporting banks in the District.  

Mr. Swan said that in California and Washington, the only 

States for which February data were as yet available, agricultural 

and nonagricultural employment had increased and the unemployment 

rate had declined--a reversal of the situation in January. The 

farm labor situation still was quite unsettled, but it could lead 

to a considerable reduction in truck crop acreage, particularly of 

tomatoes, and to considerably less credit to finance processing.  

However, it still was early enough for the situation to change, and 

exactly what the ultimate outcome would be remained to be seen. As 

the Committee knew, Secretary of Labor Wirtz was visiting the area 

now to see whether there should be any change in policy with respect 

to bracero labor.  

In the three weeks ending March 1C, Mr. Swan remarked, total 

credit extended by weekly reporting banks in the District increased.  

A rise in holdings of other securities more than offset a reduction 

in holdings of Governments and a substantial decline in loans,



3/23/65 -84

including business loans. The business loan decline, which was 

rather widely distributed and in total about twice that of a year 

earlier, was in marked contrast to the increase in the rest of the 

country. Moreover, the increase in holdings of other securities 

in large measure reflected a special situation involving a substantial 

purchase of Federal Housing Authority issues by one bank.  

Twelfth District banks had not been borrowing heavily from 

the Reserve Bank, Mr. Swan said. In fact, during the six weeks 

ending March 17 the District's weekly percentage of national member 

bank borrowings ranged between 4 to 1 per cent. District banks 

also had been in the Federal funds market as sellers and had been 

making advances to security dealers. On the other hand, reports 

of the banks participating in the business loan survey supported 

the national indication of some firming in rates and other con

ditions on loans.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he agreed with the staff statement 

in reply to the first question, that recent information "suggests 

that expansion in overall economic activity will continue in the 

near future, although probably at a more moderate pace than in 

the first quarter." Granting all of the present uncertainties, 

that seemed to him to be the most reasonable conclusion.  

Although there was no conclusive evidence as yet regarding 

the effectiveness of the voluntary credit restraint program, Mr. Swan



3/23/65 -85

said, the Reserve Bank had received every indication of support 

from member banks in the District. It appeared, however, that 

most of the District banks would show an increase from the end of 

January to the end of February in foreign credit extensions and 

commitments, undoubtedly because of activity in early February.  

As Mr. Shuford had reported was the case in the Eight District, 

some banks in the Twelfth District reported calls by some foreign 

borrowers investigating opportunities for new or increased credit 

lines.  

It seemed to Mr. Swan that, with the business situation 

strong but, if anything, moderating slightly rather than accelerating, 

there was no basis in the domestic situation for a firmer policy.  

Nor did he see any basis for such a policy in the foreign situation, 

with the voluntary credit restraint progran just getting underway 

and with the early indications that it would be effective. Con

sequently, he favored no change in policy; he would like to see a 

continuation of current conditions in short-term markets. The bill 

rate had been declining recently, but as the Manager had reported 

there were definite indications of firmness in other money market 

conditions. He was not particularly concerned about the bill rate 

decline; he would be concerned if the easing extended throughout 

the short-term area, but as far as he could see there were no 

indications of such a development at this point. He was inclined



3/23/65 -86

to expect the bill rate trend to reverse, but he would not be 

concerned if the rate temporarily fell somewhat below its present 

level and he saw no reason for acting for the specific purpose of 

raising it. Along with Mr. Robertson, he would hope that current 

money market conditions could be maintained with free reserves 

fluctuating around zero.  

Mr. Irons reported that most economic conditions in the 

Eleventh District were strong; although there were minor changes 

in both directions, business activity was moving within a narrow 

band at a high level. Employment and industrial production were 

up a bit, and construction was down, but it was hard to determine 

in the shortrun how significant such changes were.  

At banks, Mr. Irons said, commercial and industrial loans 

had been strong during the recent period. Among the major loan 

categories, only construction loans had not increased. Investments 

were off a bit, with sales of U.S. Governments more than offsetting 

increases in other investments. Demand deposits were down slightly, 

but time and savings deposits had shown substantial increases.  

The positions of banks apparently were a little less liquid than 

before. Banks were not increasing their borrowings from the Reserve 

Bank, but they had substantially increased their net purchases of 

Federal funds. Bankers reported that their rates on loans were 

edging up on an individual borrower, negotiated basis. He also



3/23/65 -87

had heard some general observations to the effect that there was 

deterioration in the quality of some of the bank credit being 

extended.  

National business conditions also were strong, Mr. Irons 

continued. There were a number of uncertainties in the picture, 

but in his judgment the elements of weakness were outweighed by 

those of strength. Demand was at a high level and industrial 

production was continuing to rise. Planned plant and equipment 

expenditures were large. Inventory accumulation had not been 

quite as great as had been believed, and stock-sales ratios 

continued low.  

Mr. Irons said that the indications for the voluntary 

credit restraint program seemed favorable both nationally and in 

the District. He had received unqualified statements of support 

for the program from the 13 or 14 banks with which he had talked.  

However, almost all of those banks had asked for additional 

reporting forms so that they could rew.rk their December figures; 

it seemed that some loans had been overlooked in the original 

reports. That introduced a new kind of uncertainty. A week ago 

he had thought that many of the District's banks were not over 

the 105 per cent guideline level, but he could not say how the 

picture would look when the revised forms were received.  

Mr. Irons thought that fairly good cases could be made 

both for maintaining the present posture of policy and for



3/23/65 -88

shifting a bit further toward a firmer policy. But the range of 

difference ir. the alternatives under discussion seemed to him to 

be quite small. In view of the many uncertainties in the situation, 

his inclination at present was to maintain the posture of policy 

about as it had been during the past three weeks; that, in his 

judgment, would not be damaging to the international situation 

or to the domestic economy. He would favor net borrowed reserves 

in the zero to $50 million range and would not be disturbed if 

there was some rise in member bank borrowing. He would expect 

the rate on Federal funds to be at levels of 4 - 4-1/8 per cent.  

He was not sure what Treasury bill rate would result because of 

the various factors affecting it at present; while he would prefer 

no further decline in the bill rate he would not advocate deliberate 

action to increase it unless greater difficulties developed in the 

market than there had been in the past three weeks. He would not 

change the discount rate. It might be possible to continue the 

current directive--there was something to be said for not changing 

it--but he had no particular objection to alternative A of the 

staff's drafts.  

Mr. Ellis reported that the New England economy continued 

to expand steadily as measured by employment, production, and 

construction data adjusted for seasonal and irregular influences.  

The newest and strongest evidence of such growth appeared in the 

results of the Reserve Bank's annual survey of capital spending



3/23/65 -89

intentions, which covered a sample of New England manufacturers 

accounting fcr one-fifth of the District's manufacturing employment.  

Tabulations were still incomplete, but present indications were 

that manufacturers planned to increase capital expenditures in 

1965 by about 20 per cent over last year's outlays. As a 

reference point on accuracy, a similar survey last year suggested 

a projected 16 per cent increase, while a still imcomplete tabu

lation indicated that the actual gain in 1964 was a little over 

12 per cent.  

Turning to the first of the staff's questions, concerning 

business activity, Mr. Ellis said that he had found Mr. Holland's 

report today to be highly perceptive, but it was not conclusive 

with regard to the outlook. Mr. Ellis' own judgment was that 

economic expansion was likely to be sustained throughout the year 

with a discernible inventory bulge traceable to the steel wage 

negotiations.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that, even though the staff's answer 

to the first question asserted that recent survey results "all 

imply continuing growth" in capital outlays, the capital investment 

prospects were clouded by conflicting evidence. The National 

Industrial Conference Board's survey of capital appropriations 

indicated a decline in appropriations in the fourth quarter of 

1964, which suggested an investment slow-down concentrated in the 

second half of 1965. However, the more recent Commerce-SEC survey 

offered contradictory evidence of growing investment outlays



3/23/65 -90

throughout the year. On balance, Mr. Ellis preferred to rely on 

the more recent survey, at least until there was further confirmation 

of the level of appropriations.  

Mr. Ellis noted that no solid evidence was available as yet 

regarding the effect of the balance of payments program on inter

national capital flows. He could offer only the reports of two 

large insurance companies that they had put a dead halt to all 

foreign commitments, at least until such time as the outlines of 

the voluntary credit restraint program became clearer for themselves, 

for banks, ard for corporations. He reported that there was 

widespread concern about the loopholes that might be found by 

nonvolunteers or semivolunteers in the program, particularly in 

the corporate category.  

Concerning bank responses to the combination of forces 

affecting their position, Mr. Ellis reported that District banks 

were expressing satisfaction bordering on surprise with the strength 

of business loan demand beyond that traceable to tax borrowing. It 

was apparent that New England weekly reporting banks had made more 

substantial shifts in the composition of their loan portfolios in 

the past year than was true of the national pattern. He judged that 

that was due to the basic strength of loan demands; business loans 

had expanded by 14 per cent, real estate loans by 17 per cent, and 

consumer loans by 11 per cent. All other categories of loans had 

actually declined at District banks, in contrast to expansions in



3/23/65

those categories nationally. In addition to changing the composition 

of their loans, District banks had moved heavily out of Governments 

and into municipals.  

Mr. Ellis noted that he had been participating in the daily 

telephone conference calls recently but did not have the explanation 

for the current "perverse" behavior of money market variables, to 

use Mr. Stone's term. He suspected that the seeming inconsistencies 

reflected imperfections in the market. But they might also reflect 

more basic forces. For example, if it was true that corporations 

were not sending short-term funds abroad and in some cases were 

returning them, it was natural to expect them at first to put the 

funds into short-term Governments, as Mr. Stone had suggested, and 

for rates on those securities to sag. Later the corporations 

presumably would spread the funds to other markets. Secondly, the 

recent high dealer loan rates at New York banks might reflect the 

distribution of reserves around the country. Member bank borrowings 

during the past three weeks had averaged about $100 million less 

than in the preceding three weeks; perhaps that was traceable to the 

greater availability of reserves away from the money market centers.  

The dealers were reaching out into the Federal funds market for funds 

they needed and, while rates on loans at New York banks had risen, 

dealers were relying less on those banks than earlier.  

The impact of the reflow on the bill rate had resulted in a 

decline of 6-8 basis points since the Committee's previous meeting,

-91-



3/23/65 -92

Mr. Ellis observed, and the rate was continuing to sag. The 

existence of apparent inconsistencies in the variables did not 

relieve the Committee of the need for a choice as to which 

variables it should lean on most in setting policy for the next 

three weeks. It was possible that the seeming inconsistency 

reflected a basic incompatibility between the unrestricted provision 

of Federal Reserve credit required to hold average net borrowed 

reserves at the target level and a 4 per cent bill rate. The 

Committee last had moved from a positive to a negative net 

reserve position in 1958-59 and the corresponding short-term bill 

rate then had been 3 per cent. That raised the possibility that 

the Committee was trying to overdetermine the economic system- to 

borrow Mr. Brill's phrase--in setting targets with respect to both 

net reserves and bill rates.  

Mr. Ellis said he thought the Committee should avoid the 

natural tendercy to wait another three weeks for vision to clear.  

He agreed in general with the staff's specifications of the relations 

that were likely to prove mutually consistent in coming weeks, as 

given in their answer to the final question. And he agreed with 

Mr. Hayes' position on policy. In Mr. Ellis' judgment, the Committee 

should move to soak up some of the repatriated funds to keep domestic 

credit availability unchanged. He favored an attempt to restore 

short-term bill rates more nearly to the 4 per cent level.



3/23/65 -93

As a start, he would expect consistently negative reserve positions 

and would accept net borrowed reserves in the $50-$100 million 

range. He favored alternative B for the directive, and thought 

Mr. Shepardson's suggestions for revising the first paragraph 

were good.  

Mr. Ellis noted that it had been nearly a year since 

Mr. Broida's memorandum analyzing the Committee's directives 

had beer prepared. The Committee had made substantial changes in 

its procedures concerning what had been called "elements 1 and 2" 

of the directive in the subsequent memoranda from Messrs. Mitchell, 

Swan, and himself, but it had not yet succeeded in holding a full 

discussion of elements 3 and 4. He asked whether the Committee 

would judge it helpful to have the staff again review past 

progress and present practice, and prepare a new appraisal of the 

present directive in the light of current needs.  

Mr. Wayne commented that the Committee had discussed the 

matter in question, although it had not reached a conclusion.  

Mr. Ellis replied that the Committee had discussed elements 

1 and 2 at great length, but he was referring specifically to 

elements 3 and 4. A general discussion of the desirability of 

specifying numerical quantities in the directive, as called for 

in the original proposals for the latter two elements, had been 

scheduled repeatedly, but review of the minutes of Committee



3/23/65 -94

meetings since August 1964 documented the fact that such a 

discussion had not materialized.  

Chairman Martin said he thought Mr. Ellis' suggestion was 

a good one. There being no objection, it was understood that the 

staff would proceed with a study along the lines Mr. Ellis had 

indicated.  

Mr. Balderston said that Messrs. Hayes, Bryan, Shepardson, 

Wayne, and Ellis already had described his own prescription for 

policy over the next three weeks. Not wishing to repeat the 

arguments he had advanced at the previous meeting, he would 

simply remind the Committee that over a four-year period bank 

credit had been expanding at an annual rate of 8 per cent, and 

he would reiterate his belief that that rate of expansion was too 

fast for continued safety. It already had contributed to the 

outflow of bank funds abroad and perhaps was setting the stage 

for price advances and other evidences of inflation at home.  

In this connection, he would commend for the members' reading the 

Committee's minutes for the year 1957, which he thought they 

would find of some interest at present.  

In his view, Mr. Balderston continued, the Committee had 

a responsibility to help staunch the hemorrhaging of bank funds 

by providing such conditions as would give the voluntary restraint 

program a fighting chance to succeed. In his judgment neither a



3/23/65 -95

voluntary restraint program, nor even a harness of selective 

controls, could be fully effective if the loans and investments 

of banks continued to rise at such a high rate. To permit the 

present rate of bank credit expansion to continue would strengthen 

the pressure to put bank funds to work in the more lush pastures 

abroad. In his view, if the Committee did not move steadily, 

although smoothly, toward a slower rate of reserve growth, the 

System would have failed to support the voluntary restraint 

program.  

Whatever was to be accomplished had to be done now or 

the chance to help make the program a success would have passed, 

Mr. Balderston said. Relatively easy reserve availability would 

so tempt a few individual banks to find loopholes as to provide 

excuses for others to emulate them. Balancing on the thin edge 

between the urge for profits and the urge to be patriotic, banks 

would find adherence to the guidelines much more expedient if 

the pressure on them to lend and inve.t was reduced. They would 

feel such pressure less if more of their reserves were being 

supplied at their own initiative by discounting instead of at 

the initiative of the System.  

Turning to the domestic scene, Mr. Balderston remarked 

that there were evidences of an incipient inflationary outburst 

that should be heeded now while there was time for precautionary 

measures to function. The index of wholesale prices was 1 per cent



3/23/65 -96

higher than the average prevailing in the first nine months of 

last year; sensitive commodity prices had shown no tendency to 

recede after the run-up last fall; as Mr. Hersey had reported 

today, prices of producers' equipment--which was so important in 

U.S. exports--were 2 per cent higher than 1-1/2 years ago; and 

the papers daily were citing reports of either price increases 

or intentions to raise prices for various industrial commodities.  

Mr. Balderston urged that the free reserve figure be 

lowered progressively and gradually during the period when 

monetary actions could be taken without disturbing Treasury 

financings. If the System was to readjust its posture during 

the current calendar year, time was of the essence. The tightening 

of policy should be gradual enough for the impact upon bill rates 

to be experimental, but steady enough so that the increase in 

bank credit was diminished significantly from the 8 per cent rate 

of the past four years.  

To achieve those ends, Mr. Balderston urged further steps 

now towards firmer money market and reserve availability conditions, 

with the Desk aiming in the next period at a range for net borrowed 

reserve of $50-$150 million. Such a policy would imply some 

increase in member bank borrowing from the System. With that 

policy shift--and he would emphasize that he was calling for a 

shift rather than an easy continuation of the status quo--the bill



3/23/65 -97

rate probably would move above 3.95 per cent and perhaps would 

penetrate the discount rate. He was willing to pay that price 

because he thought the Committee would be unable to stop the 

outflow unless it acted now.  

It was true, Mr. Balderston continued, that the Federal 

Reserve could not by itself bring about equilibrium in the 

nation's balance of payments. But it was equally true that too 

long an adherence to a very modest lessening of ease would fall 

short of the contribution that the System should make. The time 

to curb the outflow of dollars by reducing the supply of bank 

credit was now, while the voluntary restraint effort had youthful 

vigor. In the face of crisis, steady movement in the right 

direction would seem to be called for; the present was a time of 

international crisis. For the Committee to resort again to the 

status quo would verge upon a lack of policy, in his judgment.  

Mr. Balderston concluded by noting that he favored 

alternative E for the directive, with the revisions suggested 

by Mr. Shepardson.  

Chairnan Martin said that in view of the lateness of the 

hour he would confine his comments on the current situation to a 

few observations. First, this was the only year of the current 

business expansion in which he had heard no discussion at all of 

the "February doldrums." He thought that was significant, as an



3/23/65 -98

indication of the strength of business conditions. It was 

necessary, of course, to anticipate a slow-down at some point, 

since the millennium had not been reached. Secondly, he could 

not believe that selective controls ever could be effective 

without some buttressing by general controls. In Chairman 

Martin's opinion the timing of the Committee's policy actions 

had been reasonably good.  

A majority of the Committee appeared to favor a policy 

change today, the Chairman noted, but the magnitude of the shift 

advocated by most was so slight that it was difficult to say 

whether it would prove significant. To call for a change of 

about $50 million in free or net borrowed reserves was to attempt 

to exercise a high degree of precision, and he questioned whether 

such a change would have any real effect or. current conditions 

in the money markets. Nevertheless, he also favored a slightly 

firmer policy. He thought the shift should not be large enough 

to encourage expectations of an immediate increase in the discount 

rate, nor should it be so slight as to encourage expectations 

that the Committee was going to ease policy shortly. He was not 

sure how a change of the indicated magnitude could best be 

accomplished, but he thought it desirable not to have market 

expectations get carried overboard in either direction. Suggested 

alternative B for the directive seemed to come closer to spelling



3/23/65 -99

out such a policy than did alternative A, but the Desk probably 

could operate in the same way under alternative A and still be 

within the framework of the directive. If the Committee chose 

alternative B, he would favor the revisions that Mr. Shepardson 

had suggested.  

By a slight firming of posture today, the Chairman 

continued, the Committee would be indicating that it was willing 

to buttress the voluntary restraint program by using monetary 

policy flexibly. At the same time, the flow of savings was so 

large that there was really little reason for a change in the 

prime rate by banks. Granting the present lack of meaning of 

that rate, there was little or no evidence of any conditions in 

the money markets that would lead to a change. And the flow of 

savings was such that even with a moderately less easy monetary 

policy there might be slight reductions in mortgage rates, at 

the other end of the spectrum. That was an aspect of current 

conditions in the money and capital markets that made it difficult 

to use old benchmarks in deciding on policy.  

Chairman Martin then referred to Mr. Mitchell's observation 

that it might be helpful to have a wider spread between interest 

rates here and abroad, and said that he questioned that conclusion.  

Mr. Mitchell replied that he thought the Committee should 

discuss the question fully some time soon; it was an extremely



3/23/65

important issue. He was convinced that it was necessary to do 

something to reduce foreign central banks' holdings of unwanted 

dollars, and he felt, as indicated earlier, that a higher Euro

dollar rate and a widened spread between that rate and U.S.  

short-term rates was one way of accomplishing that objective.  

Chairman Martin said he agreed that further discussion 

of the matter would be desirable at some point.  

The Committee then returned to consideration of the 

directive. After discussion, the Chairman suggested that a vote 

be taken on a directive with a first paragraph essentially like 

that proposed by Mr. Shepardson and with a second paragraph 

taken from alternative B of the staff's drafts.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York was authorized and directed, 
until otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate a generally strong further expansion 
of the domestic economy and the continuing need to improve 
our international balance of payments, as highlighted by 
heavy gold outflows in recent months. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy 
to reinforce the voluntary restraint program to strengthen 
the international position of the dollar and to avoid the 
emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodating 
moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions over the next three weeks shall be conducted with

-100-



3/23/65 -101

a view to attaining slightly firmer conditions in the 
money market.  

Votes for this action: Messrs.  
Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Bryan, Daane, 
Ellis, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Votes 
against this action: Messrs. Mitchell, 
Robertson, and Clay.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, April 13, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

The Chairman then noted that tentative plans would call 

for the two subsequent meetings to be held on May 4 and May 25.  

The May 4 date, however, conflicted with the Second Meeting of 

the Governors of Central Banks of the American Continent, to be 

held in Uruguay during the first week of May. Several members of 

the Committee and staff were expecting to attend that meeting.  

Accordingly, it might be best to shift the Committee meeting 

tentatively planned for May 4 to May 11. After May 11, the 

Committee could return to its normal schedule, and plan to meet 

next on May 25. There was agreement with the Chairman's suggestion.  

At this point all members of the staff left the meeting, 

and the Committee went into executive session. Subsequently, the 

Chairman reported that in the course of the executive session the 

Committee, upon motion duly made and seconded and by unanimous vote, 

had accepted the resignation of Mr. Robert W. Stone as Manager of 

the System Open Market Account, effective as of the close of 

business March 23, 1965, and had selected Mr. Alan R. Holmes,



3/23/65 -102

Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to serve 

at the pleasure of the Federal Open Market Committee as Manager 

of the System Open Market Account, effective March 24, 1965, on 

the understanding that Mr. Holmes' selection was subject to his 

being satisfactory to the Board of Directors of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York.  

Note: Advice subsequently was received that 
Mr. Holmes was satisfactory to the Board of 
Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York for service in the capacity indicated.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



Attachment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 22, 1965.  

Draft Current Economic Policy Directives for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on March 23, 1965 

Alternative A (no change in policy) 

In light of the economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting, including the generally strong further expansion 
of the domestic economy and the continuing need to improve our 
international balance of payments, it remains the Federal Open Market 
Committee's current policy to accommodate moderate growth in the 
reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply. This policy seeks 
to support fully the national program to strengthen the international 
position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of inflationary 
pressures.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations over 
the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
about the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in 
recent weeks.  

Alternative B (slightly firmer policy) 

In light of the economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting, including the generally strong further expansion of 
the domestic economy and the continuing need to improve our inter
national balance of payments, highlighted by heavy gold outflows in 
recent months, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current 
policy to accommodate moderate growth in the reserve base, bank 
credit, and the money supply. This policy seeks to assure full 
success of the voluntary restraint program to strengthen the inter
national position of the dollar, and to avoid the emergence of 
inflationary pressures.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
over the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to 
attaining slightly firmer conditions in the money market than have 

prevailed in recent weeks.


