









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on

Wednesday, September 8, 1965, at 10:45 a.m. This was a telephone

conference meeting and each individual was in Washington except as

otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those

participating:

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Daane
Mr. Ellis (Boston)
Mr. Maisel
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon (Chicago)
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Clay, Alternate for Mr. Galusha (Kansas City)
Mr. Irons, Alternate for Mr. Bryan (Dallas)
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes (New York)

Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market

Account (New York)
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System

Open Market Account (New York)

Chairman Martin commented that this meeting had been called

to consider certain recommendations of the Special Manager of the

System Open Market Account relating to a proposed program of inter-

national assistance to Britain. He then asked Mr. Coombs to describe

the nature and status of the discussions that had been in progress

and to make his recommendations.

Mr. Coombs stated that, as the Committee members knew,

negotiations had been going on for some weeks past between the United

States and British Governments on a three-point program designed to



9/8/65 -2-

assist the recovery of sterling. The first point in that program

was action by the British Government to stabilize prices and wages,

and last Thursday the British Government announced its intention

to seek statutory authority to require advance notice and possible

deferment of proposed price and wage increases. The second point

in the package was to be foreign governmental expressions of

support for the British economic program, and Secretary Fowler on

Saturday, September 4, gave a strong endorsement of the British

measures. The third point in the package was to be provision of

international financial assistance for sterling.

As originally conceived, Mr. Coombs continued, the financial

support program was to be based on market purchases of sterling by

foreign central banks on a guaranteed or covered basis up to a

maximum of 5 per cent of the gold and foreign exchange reserves of

each participating country. Last week, the British sought to

negotiate such financial assistance with the continental European

countries, but the negotiations bogged down and necessitated the

calling of a special meeting of the BIS group of central banks last

Sunday at Basle. Mr. Hayes and he had participated on behalf of

the Federal Reserve. As a result of that meeting, they were hopeful

that it might be possible to put together an international financial

package of approximately $1 billion, of which the U.S. share might



9/8/65 -3

have to be roughly 40 per cent. He thought that most of the 

European countries would wait for a U.S. commitment of $400 million, 

which it was proposed to divide equally between the U.S. Treasury 

and the Federal Reserve.  

As the members would recall, Mr. Coombs said, at the meeting 

of August 10, 1965, the Committee had approved an authorization for 

covered purchases of sterling up to a total of $50 million. He now 

recommended an increase in that authorization, none of which was 

in use at the moment, to $200 million. Together with a similar 

Treasury authorization of $200 million, tha: would provide a total 

of $400 million. The extent to which those authorizations would 

be used would depend on agreement by the European central banks, 

plus Canada and Japan, to contribute adequately to the program.  

For example, if other central banks failed to provide funds 

sufficient to build up a total package of $1 billion, the U.S.  

share would be cut back to 40 per cent of the total package.  

For the past month, Mr. Coombs remarked, the sterling 

exchange markets had shown distinct signs of recovery--the rate 

had moved up this morning to $2.7925--and he was persuaded that 

concerted intervention to buy sterling could be a major factor 

both in hastening further recovery and in averting any setbacks 

arising from political or other adverse developments.



9/8/65

In reply to a question by Mr. Ellis regarding the period 

of time for which the proposed guarantee would remain in effect, 

Mr. Coombs said that no specific termination date would be 

set at the time of the original transaction. The guarantee 

would remain in effect as long as the System held the sterling 

acquired under it or until the arrangement was terminated by 

mutual agreement of the two parties. He added that such sterling 

holdings would be distinguished from other holdings by the System.  

The funds would be invested in a special account at the Bank of 

England and would earn interest at a rate roughly equal to the rate 

on 3-month U.S. Treasury bills; currently this would be about 

4 per cent. There was no assurance that other central banks 

participating in the assistance program would do so by the method 

of acquiring sterling under a guarantee; they might find it more 

convenient to use some other procedure, such as an extension of 

credit or a swap arrangement.  

Chairman Martin commented that some members of the Committee 

might consider it preferable for the System to participate by 

enlarging the size of its swap line with the Bank of England rather 

than by acquiring sterling under a guarantee, if other central banks 

chose the swap-line route.  

Mr. Daane observed that in his judgment it would be preferable 

to follow the guarantee procedure, and thus demarcate the operation



9/8/65 -5

as market intervention. The exchange market developments of the 

past week clearly indicated the possibilities of making good use 

of that sort of operation. Moreover, other central banks might 

be encouraged by the System's example to follow the same procedure 

rather than the alternative one of a swap arrangement with the 

Bank of England.  

Mr. Coombs indicated that he concurred fully in Mr. Daane's 

observations. He noted that action by the Committee now to 

authorize acquisition of $200 million of sterling on a covered or 

guaranteed basis would not preclude a later substitution of an 

enlarged swap arrangement, if there was reason then to believe the 

swap route would be preferable.  

Mr. Robertson commented that the Manager might be authorized 

to negotiate on either basis, and Chairman Martin observed that 

such an authorization might be desirable.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the System's practice of making 

public announcements of any increases in its swap lines might militate 

against use of that procedure. There had been some feeling in the 

discussions that the operation might be more successful if speculators 

were not sure of the precise amount of assistance being extended to 

Britain. If, however, the Committee authorized an increase in the 

System's swap line with the Bank of England, he would recommend that 

the amount be $250 million, rather than $200 million, so that the 

total line with that Bank would be an even $1 billion.



9/8/65 -6

In response to a question by Mr. Shepardson, Mr. Coombs 

said that, whichever procedure was followed the participation in 

the program of the United States--the System and Treasury 

combined--would be limited to 40 per cent of the total amount 

of assistance granted Britain and was not to exceed $400 million.  

Chairman Martin then commented that the Committee presumably 

would have no objection to an enlargement of the swap arrangement 

with the Bank of England. For present purposes, however, it might 

be desirable to put the question in the form of an amendment of 

the final paragraph of the continuing authority directive for 

foreign currency operations, to increase the dollar limit specified 

there for purchases of sterling on a covered or guaranteed basis 

from $50 million to $200 million equivalent, on the understanding 

that use of the authorization would not involve exceeding the 

limits just mentioned by Mr. Coombs.  

Thereupon, upon otion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the final paragraph of the continuing 
authority directive for foreign currency 
operations was amended to read as follows, 
effective immediately, on the understanding 
that use of the authorization would not 
exceed the limits described by Mr. Coombs: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to make purchases of sterling on a covered or 

guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar up to a total of 

$200 million equivalent.  

The meeting then adjourned.



9/8/65

Secretary's note: On September 14, 1965, Committee 
members voted (those outside of Washington by telegram) 
to authorize use of the authority in a manner that 
would involve U.S. participation in the program of 
assistance to Britain in the amount of $400 million, 
to be shared equally between the System and the U.S.  
Treasury, rather than the lesser of this sum or 40 
per cent cf the total amount of assistance.

Votes for this 
Martin, Balderston, 
Robertson, Scanlon, 
Irons, and Treiber.  
this action: None.  
Mr. Maisel.

action: Messrs.  
Daane, Ellis 
Shepardson, Clay, 
Votes against 
Abstaining:

Mr. Maisel indicated that while he had no objection 
to this action he had abstained from voting on it 
because he questioned the procedure followed of 
submitting it for vote to Committee members 
individually. In his judgment it would have been 
preferable to have had the action considered at a 
meeting of the Committee, to provide an opportunity 
for full discussion of any questions that members 
might have had concerning it.

Secretary

-7-


