









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington on Tuesday, January 12, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 
Mr. Shuford 
Mr. Swan 
Mr. Wayne 

Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, Scanlon, and Deming, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Commit ee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Noyes, Economis.  
Messrs. Brill, Holland, Jones, Koch, Mann, and 

Ratchford, Associate Economists 
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors



1/12/65

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Will.s, Holmes, Eastburn, Taylor, 
Baughman, Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
New York, Philadelphia, Atlanta, Chicago, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively.  

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Fousek and Sternlight, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on December 1 and 15, 1964, 
were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Acccunt on foreign exchange market operations and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period December 15, 1964, through January 6, 1965, and a supplemental 

report for January 7 through 11, 1965. Copies of these reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that 

the gold stock would be reduced by $200 million this week as a 

result of the French decision to step up their gold purchases. On 

the basis of other scheduled orders, the Stabilization Fund was 

expected to end the month with a balance of approximately $35 million



1/12/65 -3

This would be inadequate to take care of other prospective orders 

coming through in February and another sizable reduction in the gold 

stock would have to be made, probably du:ing the first half of 

February.  

At the December 1 meeting, Mr. Coombs said, he had indicated 

to the Committee that the outlook was for a net reduction in the 

gold stock of at least $750 million in 1965. This was a conservative 

estimate; subsequent developments suggested that the prospective 

decline might well be on the order of $1 to $1-1/4 billion, even 

without taking account of the reduction that would be occasioned 

by the increase in the International Monetary Fund quotas.  

There had been a heavy burst of speculation on the London 

gold market last week, owing to two major factors: first, the exag

gerated discussion in the French press of the gold policy of the 

French Government and, second, widespread misunderstanding and mis

interpretation of Mr. Roosa's reference in his final press conference 

to a prospective alteration of the 25 per cent gold reserve require

ment. Buying pressure built up steadily last week, reaching a 

crescendo on Friday (January 8).  

In accordance with a general understanding reached in 1961 

among members of the Gold Pool, Mr. Coombs said, the Bank of England 

allowed the price to rise as a tactical measure up to a level at the 

fixing of $35.15 on Friday. After the fixing there were scattered



1/12/65 -4

transactions in a thin market at prices ranging between $35.16 and 

$35.19. Total turnover on Friday reached $31 million and the cost 

of intervention amounted to $28 million. The statement put out by 

the U.S. Treasury on Friday, reasserting the U.S. determination to 

maintain the $35 gold price and to convert official holdings of 

dollars at that price on demand, helped to restore confidence over 

the weekend. Yesterday, the Bank of England brought the price 

down to $35.14 by forceful tactics, and today the price dropped 

another cent to $35.13. This tactical maneuver of letting the 

price move up and then hitting the speculators had paid off, and 

it would be used again if needed. The heavy intervention made 

last week not only exhausted the Gold Pool reserve, which 

initially was $40 million, but put the Pcol into deficit to the 

extent of $28 million. Accordingly, the Gold Pool selling 

arrangement was reactivated over the weekend at Basle, retroactive 

to last Friday. As the Committee would recall, the U.S. share of 

the cost of intervention was 50 per cent.  

Since the last meeting of the Committee, Mr. Coombs con

tinued, there had been a good deal of downward pressure on sterling 

and upward pressure on continental currencies in foreign exchange 

markets. By now the British had drawn a total of $745 million on 

the credits made available to them under the $3 billion credit 

package. Of this $745 million, $200 million had been used to



1/12/65 -5-

repay prior debts and another $200 million already had been

committed during the hectic days just before Thanksgiving. Thus,

the British had used in the market a total of $345 million, net,

of the package since its announcement. The Bank of England's

forward operations had been more than three times as large as

their spot operations. These large forward commitments, together

with the exchange rate guarantee given on the $1 billion drawing

on the IMF, provided a further major deterrent to a devaluation

of sterling.

Yesterday and today, Mr. Coombs said, the sterling market

atmosphere was somewhat better, and the sterling rate was driven

up above $2.79 through sizable intervention yesterday. Renewed

pressure on the pound might well appear over the coming weekend.

One question in the offing was what Britain's trade figures for

December, scheduled for publication on January 18, would show.

If they indicated a significant decline in imports the market

should behave much better. But if they showed deterioration the

situation might become difficult again.

Mr. Coombs reported that at the weekend meeting in Basle

Governor Carli of the Bank of Italy had discussed with him the

problems arising from Italy's growing intake of dollars during

recent months. The Governor thought it might be desirable to

follow the procedure that had been used in 1962, when the U.S.



1/12/65

Treasury had taken over many of the Bank of Italy's forward lira 

contracts. Mr. Coombs indicated that he agreed, and planned to so 

recommend tc the U.S. Treasury. In addition, Governor Carli thought 

it might be desirable for the System to draw on its swap arrangement 

with the Bank of Italy, and Mr. Coombs considered this suggestion 

also a useful one.  

The atmosphere at the Basle meeting, Mr. Coombs continued, 

was characterized by as much apprenhension [sic] and uncertainty on the 

part of the central bank governors as he had observed at any such 

meeting in the last four years. What the Europeans feared most was 

periodic evidence of simultaneous weakness of sterling and the 

dollar and the possibility of a joint speculative attack on the 

two key currencies. It was important to remember that the resources 

of the Gold Pool were limited to $270 million, and it would not take 

many days like last Friday to run through this amount in short order.  

The central bank governors present at the meeting were 

unanimous in recommending early removal of the Federal Reserve's 

25 per cent gold cover, Mr. Coombs said. They felt that uncertainty 

on this issue had been a major factor behind the recent speculative 

pressures, and they thought it would be preferable to remove the 

U.S. gold reserve requirement in one stroke rather than in two 

steps. Moreover, they thought that in explaining removal of the 

requirement major emphasis should be placed, if possible, on the 

importance of freeing the gold stock for international purposes



1/12/65 -7

rather than on the need to allow for prospective increases in the 

U.S. money supply.  

Mr. Coombs remarked that the central bank governors expressed 

strong feelings on the urgency of this countcy's acting to curtail the 

volume of bank lending to foreigners, particularly term lending, and 

if possible also acting to curtail somewhat the outflow of direct 

investments. This was the position not only of France but of nearly 

all of the Common Market countries. Unless the United States acted, 

there was a clear risk of joint countermeasures by the Common Market 

countries.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs said, many of the central bank officials 

were disturbe by the decision of France to step up gold purchases 

from the U.S. They felt that the manner in which this matter had 

been handled had seriously undermined their own positions with their 

respective governments.  

Mr. Ellis noted that Mr. Coombe had referred to the possi

bility of a "jcint speculative attack" on the pound and the dollar 

and asked what he had meant to imply by that phrase. Mr. Coombs 

replied that the attack on sterling had been interpreted in many 

quarters as also undermining the position of the dollar. It was 

widely accepted in the foreign exchange markets that if specula

tion against sterling led to devaluation of that currency--and to 

competitive devaluations of other foreign currencies--the position 

of the dollar might become untenable and there would be a major



1/12/65 -8

risk of its devaluation also. There also was a risk that certain 

central banks would decide to increase their gold ratios, as France 

had done. Spain had indicated that it would be buying gold, and 

Austria was likely to do so also; and other countries might react 

similarly, as they had in 1960. Along with purchases from the U.S.  

by foreign central banks, there easily could be a convergence over 

a short period of speculative demands on the London gold market, 

and thus on the Gold Pool, 50 per cent of which would be met out 

of U.S. stocks. As he had indicated in his statement, the present 

outlook was for a substantial reduction in the U.S. gold stock in 

1965. It was quite possible that declines would have to be reported 

every month, and this would intensify the prevailing uncertainties.  

In his judment, the dollar now was in a situation of acute danger; 

the progressive erosion of its position over the past five years 

had made the dollar vulnerable.  

Mr Hayes asked if Mr. Coombs wculd express his own views 

on the matters discussed at Basle of the U.S. gold cover and of 

possible means of curtailing U.S. bank lending abroad. Mr. Coombs 

replied that he could not speak to the domestic aspects of the gold 

reserve requirement, but from the point of view of the foreign 

exchange markets he thought a complete removal of the requirement 

would do much to restore confidence. The more thorough-going the 

action the more clearly it would be understood abroad and the 

greater its effect would be.



1/12/65

With respect to curtailing foreign lending by U.S. banks, 

Mr. Coombs continued, he personally thought that some reduction of 

domestic credit availability would be useful. But to add a cutting 

edge, he would favor combining this with moral suasion designed to 

reduce foreign lending on a selective basis. In his judgment there 

were a number of arguments against extending the interest equaliza

tion tax to term loans of banks for this purpose. First, in many 

cases the one per cent tax would not be much of a deterrent; pro

vision had already been made in many loan contracts to allow for 

the tax if it should be extended to bank loans. Secondly, the 

tax was a blunt and inflexible instrument that did not deal with 

the geographical nature of the problem. As he saw it, the main 

problem at present concerned U.S. bank lending to the Common 

Market countries and to Austria and Spain. These countries were 

accumulating large amounts of dollars and were increasingly 

inclined to use them as a bargaining instrument in dealing with 

the United States. But the tax would apply equally to countries 

such as Britain and Japan where it would be undesirable now to 

curtail U.S. oank lending.  

In response to Mr. Mitchell's request for an amplification 

of the suggestion that moral suasion be used, Mr. Coombs noted that 

Second District banks presently reported all of their foreign term 

loan commitments to the New York Reserve Bank. What he had in mind



1/12/65 -10

was urging commercial banks in the national interest not to make 

any loans of relatively large size--perhaps $5 million or more--to 

designated countries. The list of such countries might be modified 

from time to time as circumstances changed. The banks involved in 

lending abroad were aware, of course, that their foreign loans 

added to the nation's balance of payments deficit. However, they 

were faced with a competitive problem; unless they knew that their 

competitors were also being asked to curtail foreign lending they 

were likely to feel that a refusal to make a particular foreign 

loan would mean foregoing a profitable opportunity with no gain to 

the national interest, because some other oank would make the loan 

in question. On several occasions in the past the commercial banks 

had demonstrated their willingness to follow such suggestions. For 

example, all banks had complied with requests not to participate 

in the financing of certain Canadian wheat sales--to Russia on one 

occasion, and to Japan on another.  

Mr. Hickman observed that these earlier examples of the use 

of moral suasion were one-shot affairs, and Mr. Coombs was now 

proposing a continuing program of policing foreign lending by 

banks. He asked whether such a program, to be successful, would 

not require some quid pro quo in the form of a willingness on the 

part of the Federal Reserve to reduce domestic credit availability.  

To his mind, it was the present level of credit availability that



1/12/65 -11

was the basic cause of the problem, although he was not necessarily 

suggesting a reduction in credit availability at this time.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he would not describe reduced credit avail

ability as a "quid pro quo", but he did agree that the administrative 

problems of the program would be lessened if banks had a smaller 

volume of funds to lend.  

Mr. Hickman then noted that it might be difficult to imple

ment the program if the specific objectives were being continually 

modified as the matrix of capital flows changed. Under such circum

stances it might be hard for an individual banker to understand from 

week to week which loans were acceptable and which not unless there 

was some guiding group along the lines of a capital issues committee.  

There also might be some problem in coordinating the program among 

the several Federal Reserve Banks.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he would not expect such problems 

to be serious, The program would not involve a great many details; 

rather, it would amount to suggesting to commercial banks in 

February, say, that they hold back on loans to certain countries, 

and then perhaps indicating in September that they no longer need 

hold back on loans to one or more of these countries. Within the 

System, the Reserve Banks readily could keep in touch with one 

another on the objectives being sought.



1/12/65 -12-

Mr. Mitchell observed that he thought it was difficult to

justify using moral suasion of the sort discussed in a democracy,

particularly if some quid pro quo was to be offered. He noted that

a relatively small number of banks were important foreign lenders.

Mr. Hayes responded that he did not think that any question of a

quid pro quo was involved. What was proposed was to draw on the

great patriotic instincts of bankers--instincts which as yet had

not been tapped. In his judgment it clearly would be unreasonable

to expect an individual banker to curtail his foreign lending if

he did not know that his competitors also were doing so.

In reply to Mr. Hickman's question on the possible useful-

ness of controls on direct foreign investments, Mr. Coombs observed

that these would be more difficult to administer than controls over

bank lending because of the larger number of businesses involved.

In any case, however, such controls would presumably lie in the

province of the Department of Commerce and not the System.

Mr. Mitchell asked whether it was correct that some

European governments were not prepared to take steps to curtail

U.S. investment in their countries. Mr. Coombs replied that

France's present objective evidently was to get the Common Market

countries to form a united front, restricting U.S. investment in

all those countries. When combined with trade restrictions against

the rest of the world, this would tend to make the Common Market



1/12/65 -13-

countries an increasingly self-sufficient and discriminatory unit.

It was in the interest of the United States, on the other hand, to

encourage the assimilation of the Common Market into a broader free

trade area. The situation with respect to particular countries

changed from month to month. When the Italians had been in diffi-

culty last year, for example, a heavy flow of U.S. investment there

had helped to ease the situation. Now the Italians were accumulating

excess dollars. It was because circumstances were so changeable that

he favored a flexible approach to the problem.

In the course of the preceding discussion Messrs. Daane and

Young temporarily left the room.

Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
System open market transactions in foreign
currencies during the period December 15,
1964, through January 11, 1965, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.

Mr. Coombs then noted that two System swap arrangements

would reach the end of their terms on February 8: the $100 million,

three-month facility with the Bank of France, and the $250 million,

six-month facility with the German Federal Bank. He recommended

renewal of the French swap line for another three months and of the

German line for either six or twelve months, depending on the out-

come of discussions to be conducted with the German Federal Bank.

Renewal of the swap arrangement
with the Bank of France for a further
period of three months, and of the swap



1/12/65 -14

arrangements with the Gernan Federal 
Bank for either six or twelve months, 
as recommended by Mr. Coonbs, was 
approved.  

Mr. Coombs reported that two System drawings of Dutch 

guilders from the Netherlands Bank, which already had been renewed 

once, woul mature next month; one on February 4 for $20 million 

equivalent, and another on February 10 for $10 million equivalet.  

At the present moment he saw no possibility of repayment, and con

sequently he recommended their renewal for another three months.  

Renewal of the two d:awings of 
Dutch guilders from the Netherlands 
Bank, as recommended by Mr. Coombs, 
was noted without objection.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that of the $200 million authorization 

by the Committee to engage in forward transactions, a total of 

$154 million was employed at present and another $15 million had 

been committed, for a total commitment of $169 million. These 

forward operations had been extremely useful in reassuring the 

markets and in preventing an undue concentration of gold losses.  

Noting that he might have occasion to engage in additional forward 

operations of authorized types in the near future, Mr. Coombs re

quested the Committee to increase the dollar limit on forward 

transactions specified in the continuing authority directive for 

System foreign currency operations by $75 million, to a total of 

$275 million.



1/12/65

Upon motion made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the second 
paragraph of the continuing authority 
directive for System foreign currency 
operations was amended, effective 
immediately, to read as follows: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized 
and directed to operate in any or all of the foregoing cur
rencies in accordance with the Guidelines and up to a 
combined total of $275 million equivalent, by means of: 

(a) purchases through forward transactions, for the 
purpose of allowing greater flexibility in covering 
commitments under reciprocal currency agreements; 

(b) purchases and sales through forward as well as 
spot transactions, for the purpose of utilizing 
its holdings of one currency for the settlement 
of commitments denominated in other currencies; 

(c) purchases through spot transactions and concurrent 
sales through forward transactions, for the 
purpose of restraining short-term outflows of 
funds induced by arbitrage considerations; and 

(d) sales through forward transactions, for the 
purpose of influencing interest arbitrage flows 
of funds and of minimizing speculative disturb
ances.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securi

ties and bankers' acceptances for the period December 15, 1964, 

through January 6, 1965, and a supplemental report for January 7 

through 11, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed in the

files of the Committee.

-15-



1/12/65

In supplementation of the writter. reports, Mr. Stone 

commented as follows: 

Looking back in the record, I note that at the first 
meeting of the Committee in January of last year I com
mented that December of 1963 showed none of the turbulence 
that often characterizes that month. This time, however, 
we have been experiencing one of the more turbulent year
end periods in recent memory.  

The Committee last met on December 15, the quarterly 
tax date. The money market was quite comfortable at that 
time, as it had been over the preceding few days (which 
included the December 10 dividend date), largely because 
banks in New York and in other major money centers across 
the country had worked themselves into basic reserve posi
tions in which they would be able to meet without strain 
the demands they knew would converge upon them around 
mid-month. This situation was soon to change, however.  
Deale credit demands picked up sharply as the month 
progressed, and these demands have continued into the 
new year as dealers acquired large holdings of rights 
in the advance refunding.  

At the same time, a significant redistribution of 
reserves to country banks occurred. Over the past three 
weeks excess reserves averaged abou, $100 million higher 
than in the preceding three weeks.  

A counterpart of the heavy and persisting credit 
demands and the movement of reserves to country banks 
has been a sharp deterioration of the basic reserve 
positions of major city banks. The large New York banks, 
for example, moved from a basic surplus position in the 
week or two preceding the tax date to a basic deficiency 
position averaging in the neighborhood of $500 million 
over the last two weeks of December; and then to a defi
ciency in the neighborhood of $1 billion for a few days 
last week. Large basic reserve deficiencies have also been 
recorded in a number of other major cities around the 
country. The 38 banks that report daily showed, as a 

group, a basic reserve deficiency averaging $585 million 
in the three full statement weeks since December 15.  

Such a situation in money market banks has, of course, 
meant heavy pressure on the Federal funds market as these 
banks sought actively to acquire funds to cover their 
deficiencies. The volume of funds moving through the

-16-



1/12/65

market has, if anything, been a little larger than usual, 
but the demands have been so enormous that all trading 
has been at 4 per cent, except for two or three hours on 
one particularly difficult day when a major bank bought 
funds at 4-1/8 per cent. Bank lending rates to dealers 
moved up as the banks' reserve positions deteriorated.  
From a general range of 4- 4-1/4 per cent at the time of 
the last meeting, such rates rose to a range of 4-3/8 
4-1/2 per cent by.the end of the year and have remained 
around those levels.  

Our efforts to deal with these heavy pressures were 
complica:ed by unusually wide and unpredictable swings in 
market factors affecting reserves. Indeed, the average 
"miss" per day during the period was about $240 million, 
and on two days the misses were on the order of $1 billion; 
moreover, about three-fourths of the misses were in the 
direction of a lesser availability of reserves than the 
estimates, had suggested.  

Und,r these circumstances, repurchase agreements 
were a particularly useful device for moderating the 
strong pressures that weighed upon the money market 
during the period. And making those agreements at 
3-7/8 per cent--until yesterday, when we made some at 
4 per cent--helped both to keep the bill rate within the 
range indicated by the Committee and to insure the success 
of the Treasury financing. Indeed, I have little doubt that 
in the absence of these repurchase agreements at a 3-7/8 per 
cent rate the bill rate would have moved into the 3.90's 
during the second half of December. This would not only 
have been contrary to the Committee's wishes, but also 
would have posed a serious threat to the Treasury's plans 
for the advance refunding. For a rise in bill rates into 
the 3.90's would have been accompanied by a decline of 
some magnitude in prices of intermediate- and longer-term 
issues, and even a small decline might well have precluded 
Treasury financing within the 4-1/4 per cent interest rate 
ceiling. As it was, the longest option in the refunding 
had to be priced to yield a full 4-1/4 per cent, while the 
1974 issue was priced to yield 4.24 per cent. In short, 
there was little or no room left.  

Turning to the advance refunding itself, the operation 
was well receied by the market. After a day or two of 

some nervousness over developments in gold, the refunding 
closed out with what appears to have been real success in 

achieving debt extension. Dealer holdings of the longer

-17-



1/12/65 -18

issue, however, total over $500 million, and the aggregate 
exchange into that issue was very large. The success 
achieved by the Treasury may be regarded, from a longer
run stancpoint, as a dramatic indication of investor con
fidence in the interest rate outlook. In the short run, 
however, the market might well encounter some difficult 
problems in the process of distributing its large holdings 
to investors, particularly if we should experience again 
the kind of unsettlement in intecnational financial condi
tions that occurred last week.  

Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Stone to enlarge on his reasons for first 

making repurchase agreements at a 3-7/8 per cent rate and then 

shifting to a 4 per cent rate.  

Mr. Stone replied that the 3-7/8 per cent rate had been 

addressed to the special circumstances of unusually heavy seasonal 

pressures which coincided with the Treasury's advance refunding 

operation. He had had no intention of retaining that rate any 

longer than necessary for the purposes of meeting the Committee's 

objectives and of avoiding impairment of the refunding. Yesterday 

(January 11), some relaxation finally became evident in the seasonal 

pressures that had weighed so heavily on the market since the latter 

part of December. As a result, the 3 7/8 per cent rate no longer 

appeared justified and repurchase agreements were made at 4 per cent.  

Mr. Hickman asked Mr. Stone to comment on the usefulness of 

the new program of reserve reports from a sample of country banks, 

in light of the size of the recent misses in reserve estimates.  

Mr. Stone said that the first results of the new country 

bank sample had become available on December 10, 1964. As with



1/12/65

any new survey, there were bugs that had to be worked out; and it 

probably was more difficult to launch a survey of this kind in 

December than at any other time of the year. He had not felt suf

ficient confidence in the early results to rely heavily on them, 

so the new survey as yet had not been particularly helpful. How

ever, he would expect it to become increasingly useful as experience 

was gained.  

Mr. Holland said he felt much the same way. Refinements in 

methods were being made in this "shakedown" period, but the results 

to date were encouraging with respect to the probable ultimate 

usefulness of the new sample in reducing after-the-fact revisions 

in weekly required reserve and vault cash estimates. There was 

still the problem of day-to-day misses in estimates of operating 

factors such as float and currency. There elements were the major 

cause of the big misses Mr. Stone had mentioned earlier.  

Thereupon, upor motion duly made 
and seconded, and b unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period December 15, 1964, 
through January 11, 1965, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.

-19-



1/12/65 -20

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions 

I am afraid my remarks today are somewhat diffuse, since 
there are many facets of the present situation worthy of 
exploration. Out of the welter of words, I hope that three 
points will emerge: (a) the economy is still showing surpris
ing moderation in the face of an inventory bulge of apparently 
very large proportions, (b) the present balance of forces 
appears likely to persist for the next few months, and (c) so 
long as this balance persists, the present stance of monetary 
policy seems to me to be appropriate to domestic needs.  

Now as to the evidence. Before the onset of work 
stoppages last fall, the economy was growing at a rate of 
close to 5 per cent in real terms. Industrial production 
alone was increasing at over a 7 per cent annual rate. After 
the interruption resulting from the GM and Ford strikes, 
activity resumed with great vigor, a, auto manufacturers 
pressed to make up for lost production and steel consumers 
continued to lay in stocks as a hedge against the possibility 
of a spring steel strike. The industrial production index in 
December is estimated to have jumped about 1-1/2 points, to 
a level some 7-1/2 per cent higher than that a year earlier.  
Employment rose to record levels and the unemployment rate 
edged down slightly.  

A significant part of the December production rise was 
for stockpiling; two-thirds of the point and a half increase 
in the production index last month was accounted for by the 
auto and steel industries. Rough staff guesses put November
December inventory accummulation in the vicinity of an 
$8 billion annual rate.  

Yet, even with this pace of activity and such concentra
lion in inventory demand, it is hard to discern substantial 
evidence of inflation or inflationary psychology. Some up
ward price pressures persist, but they continue to be 
confined to specific areas and continue to be offset, at 
least in part, by decreases elsewhere. For example, pressures 
seem to be abating in the nonferrous metals markets as more 
supplies become available from private production and Govern
ment stocks, and building material prices continue to reflect 
the leveling off of activity in the construction industry.  

On the other side of the ledger, the steel price situa
tion remains touchy as the industry nibbles away at 
Administration resistance. The steel increases to date--at 
least the published ones--have had insignificant effect on 
the broad indexes, but there is always the possibility that, 
emboldened by the mild reaction so far, the industry may



1/12/65

essay more substantial advances. By and large, however, 
there are few signs as yet in commodity markets that 
recent price increases are spreading or becoming cumulative 
or accelerating.  

Neither do we see signs of inflationary psychology 
in security markets. There has been relatively little net 
advance in stock prices since early summer, and bond prices 
at year-end were generally about the same or a little higher 
than a year ago.  

Many reasons can be attributed for this general market 
stability, after another year of substantial economic gain, 
a year in which a significant reduction was made in the 
extent of unutilized resources. I still prefer as an 
explanat:on the rolling readjustment theory. Last year 
we had important shifts in demands, the principal one 
being the shift from the Government to the private 
sectors. Federal spending held about level, while tax 
cuts permitted businesses and consumers to take priority 
in claiming additional resources.. Within the private 
sector there was a shift from residential construction to 
industrial construction. More recently, there was a shift 
in consumer spending from nondurables to durables, and 
within durables from furniture and appliances to autos.  
As one type of final demand leveled off, another surged 
forward, keeping aggregate activity rising at a moderate 
but evidently sustainable pace. Industrial capacity 
utilization increased, thus maintaining incentives for 
continued investment, but not creating enough production 
bottlenecks to incur widespread price instability.  

Most analysts seem to agree that for the next few 
months expansion will continue strong, reflecting a high 
rate of inventory accumulation, rising expenditures for 
fixed capital, and strong car sales. Other demands 
taken together are expected to rise only moderately 
further. Barring new serious work stoppages on the 
docks or the rails, aggregate activity will probably 
make up for the strike losses last fall. It looks as 
though the economy could continue on this path until it 
reaches the next set of hurdles, the first of which comes 
in early April when consumers have to face the bite resulting 
from underwithholdings on last year's income taxes. The 
second hurdle comes on May 1, the deadline for the new steel 
contract. Beyond that, increasing weaknesses loom, but this 
is not the focus of any remarks this morning.

-21-



1/12/65

Assuming such a somewhat unbalanced expansion can 
be sustained over the next two to three months without 
developing significant departures f:om price stability, 
it appears to me that the present posture of monetary 
policy would remain appropriate. Along with a large 
flow of savings, this policy has produced a structure 
of interest rates admirably sited to domestic require
ments, Stable-to-declining long-term rates continue 
to encourage investment by businesses and State and local 
governments, while not subjecting already reduced housing 
activity to financial pressures. I. relatively high short 
rates are having any domestic effect, it must be in the 
desirable direction of inhibiting some financing of 
inventories, although probably this impact is minimal.  

The critical question is what specific policy 
objectives would contribute to maintenance of the present 
set of rate relationships. What volume of reserve addi
tions would produce the appropriate banking system 
contribution to credit flows? Here we have to look to 
all the sources of funds banks can muster. Savings 
deposits, which spurted in November when consumers 
awaited the availability of new autos, apparently 
declined a bit from this peak but stayed relatively 
high in December, and may continue to expand rapidly 
as the new higher rates offered by banks exert a tug 
on furds which might otherwise flow to nonbank finan
cial intermediaries.  

However, faster gains in savings accounts may be 
offset in part by smaller rates of increase in CDs.  
The high cost to banks of CD money since the November 
rise in short-term rates appears to have discouraged 
aggressive issuance by many prime banks, and other 
important issuers had already curbed their CD activity 
starting last spring. Also, corporations seem to be 
displaying less interest in the CD market, perhaps 
reflecting a developing squeeze on the availability 
of liquid funds.  

Thus, while banks may be, on balance, the 
recipients of a somewhat larger net inflow of time and 
savings accounts, some of this rising inflow will have 
been bought away from other lenders and will not repre
sent a net contribution to the over-all supply of 
loanable funds. To balance fund supplies against 
prospective demands at current costs of credit, and 
to meet apparent cash balance preferences at current

-22-



1/12/65

rates of return, would appear to require at least as 
large an expansion in private demand deposits over the 
next few months as occurred last quarter. It should be 
recalled that this fourth-quarter rate of expansion was 
well below that for the year as a whole. Possibly a 
more rapid pace will be in order for a while, if dis
tribution of the present Treasury financing operation 
requires extensive and extended bank underwriting.  
But we should be able to read promptly from financial 
market performance if such reserve objectives are wide 
of the mark.  

Mr. Holland then made the following statement concerning 

financial developments: 

I should like to concentrate my remarks on just 
one or two issues this morning, taking advantage of 
the enhanced flow of information to the Committee in 
the form of the green book 1/ and the draft staff 
answers to the agenda questions.2/ Before turning 
to the main thrust of my remarks, however, I should say 
that reports from outlying banks have made us revise 
do n our estimate of December commercial bank credit 
growth to $1.1 billion from the $1.5 - $2.0 billion 
estimate in the green book, This reflected loan ex
pansion about in line with the 11 per cent rate for 
the year as a whole, and some decline in securities 
holdings. Indeed, commercial bank additions to 
securities holdings over the fourth quarter as a whole 
averaged only about $200 million a month, well below 
the $800 million-a-month spurt in the third quarter.  
Such a characterization of bank credit expansion is 
somewhat less vigorous than one might have been led 
to make on the basis of weekly reporting member bank 
data alone, and reflects the fact that country bank 
credit expansion has lagged behind city bank expansion 
in parts of this period, most recently in December.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff, 

2/ The staff's prepared comments on certain questions considered 
by the Committee at this meeting, given at a later point in 
these minutes.

-23-



1/12/65

The large Treasury advance refunding clearly calls 
for an "even keel" policy, as the staff answer to 
Question 6 points out, probably until the next meeting 
of the Committee. But in the current circumstances, I 
think "even keel" can be construed to extend over a 
substantially wider range of events than in some previous 
financings. Let me explain what I mean. I think most 
discussions of the definition of "even keel" have boiled 
down its essential meaning to, "no change in money market 
or reserve conditions (or in any other arena of System 
action) that would be construed by the market as signalling 
a change in monetary policy." 

Given the recent large oscillations in free reserves, 
the market obviously is now paying less attention to any 
change of, say, $50 million than it did earlier this year, 
and so we have acquired a correspondingly greater degree of 
freedom here to use if we wish. Similarly, short-term 
interest rate fluctuations seem to have been greater since 
the discount rate increase, and not always in the same 
direction. Thus, the three-month bill rate moved up rela
tively high in the cluster of short-term rates under 
seasonal and expectational influences earlier in December; 
and thereafter it has dropped relatively low in the money 
market rate structure as these earlier special forces were 
reversed, and additional downward pressure developed from 
"rights" sales in the advance refunding and also from less 
aggressive competition from bank sales of CDs. In the 
circumstances, I think further bill rate changes of 
several basis points either up or down would not upset 
the market, so long as the changes evolved from under
standable changes in supplies and demands for bills and 
were not linked to actions in the monetary authorities.  

Perhaps the least elbow room for maneuver in an 
even keel context attaches to such day-to-day financing 
rates as those on dealer loans and Federal funds. These 
have moved up to new highs since the turn of the year, 
under the twin impetus of the strong shift of reserves 
away from money market centers and the need for dealers 
to finance their large operations in connection with 
the Treasury refunding. Relatively sizable borrowings 
by city banks have also been a consequence of these 
events. Such developments have been fairly well under
stood by the market as natural sources of temporary 
pressure, and so produced no flurry of talk of changed 
Federal Reserve policy. Nonetheless, if such pressures

-24-



1/12/65

are not relaxed a bit over time, particularly as dealers 
manage to work down their need for bank financing and if, 
as is expected, reserves do drift back to the money centers 
from out in the country, then market participants are likely 
to become increasingly of the view that it is monetary 
policy and not natural forces that are behind the persisting 
tightness, and this revision in attitudes and expectations 
could give rise to liquidating pressures in the short-term, 
and especially in the long-term, markets. I think, the:e
fore, that the most practical operational constraints for 
even keel in this period might be to allow day-to-day 
financing conditions to slip back a shade toward pre
refunding levels. The degree of such decline could be 
either slight or more appreciable within an even keel 
context. and perhaps a middle-of-the-road view would be 
to allow day-to-day financing rates to go no higher than 
at present, and gradually to allow Federal funds rates to 
slip occasionally below 4 per cent and dealer lending rates 
to slide back toward 4-1/8 - 4-1/4 per cent and sometimes 
lower as January proceeds. This may seem to be focusing 
attention very narrowly, but I see no assured alternative 
to such a procedure, given the size of undigested new 
bond holdings that have been inj cted into the market by 
the unexpectedly appealing Treasury refunding. In particu
lar, so large an addition to long bonds in dealer hands, 
financed by increased demands for day-to-day money, has 
served to tighten up very much the sometimes quite loose 
linkages between the money market and the long bond markets.  
For a time at least, for better or worse, any further 
instalment of "Operation Twist"--that is, any further 
upward push in money market rates without an increase 
in long rates--seems out of the question.  

In so concentrating operational attention upon day
to-day market rates rather than on the 3-month bill rate, 
I recognize I am suggesting a departure of sorts. But 
I think there are reasons for believing that the bill 
rate currently is a less pertinent measure to both the 
Committee's international and domestic objectives than 
are day-to-day money market and bank reserve conditions.  
The statistics for this past year show a considerable 
willingness on the part of private foreigners to hold, 
in one form or another, the dollars that reached their 
hands as a consequence of our balance of payments 
deficit. Thus the interest rate and other attractions 
to them to hold dollar balances did not appear seriously

-25-



1/12/65

inadequate. If policy is thus still reasonably free to 
concentrate on dealing with the causes of the deficit, 
rather than simply trying to keep it financed, then 
among the sources causing the deficit, the one most 
amenable to further influence by monetary policy--either 
general or selective--seems to me to be bank lending 
abroad. Bank lending policies can be :hanged over time, 
and money market and reserve conditions can contribute to 
such changes. We already have evidence, in the September 
and December surveys of bank lending practices, that 
both customer standards and costs of credit for some 
business borrowers are being tightened somewhat by a 
substantial portion of big banks. It is moot, however, 
whether such tightened lending p:actices affect foreign 
or domestic customers more. And the financing of orderly 
domestic expansion continues to depend upon the avail
ability cf both bank loans and also longer-term credit.  
The yields and terms in longer term markets are 
currently very much tied to day-to-day money market 
conditions because of the large dealer positions 
arising cut of the advance refunding.  

I conclude that both the international and domestic 
concerns of the Committee at the momen: are more tightly 
related to the cost and availability of day-to-day financ
ing in th market than to any other operational variables.  
Whether the Committee should choose to have such financing 
conditions tightened, eased, or left the same when the need 
for an "even keel" fades has to depend upon a balancing of 
international and domestic considerations. Whatever way 
that choice may be resolved, I think a case can be made 
that the safest way to communicate with the Manager in 
these weeks is in terms of desired day- to-day money 
market conditions.  

Mr. Ellis referred to the question that Mr. Holland had 

described as "moot," and asked if he had any evidence as to whether 

the effects of a general reduction in the availability of funds 

would impinge primarily on foreign lending by banks. Mr. Holland 

responded that he knew of no reliable evidence on this question 

despite efforts such as he was sure everyone around the table had 

made to obtain it from the available statistics. At the moment,

-26-



1/12/65 -27

perhaps talking with bankers was the best method of getting clues 

as to how they would react to a reduction in the availability of 

funds. From discussions he had had with some bankers he suspected 

that both domestic and foreign loans of banks involved marginal and 

inframarginal cases. He emphasized that this judgment was based on 

hearsay and not on any firm evidence.  

Mr. Hayes agreed with Mr. Holland that the most useful way 

of getting at the subject of bankers' probable reactions was to talk 

with them. He had talked about this with various New York bankers 

many times, and he had obtained the impression that their foreign 

lending was considered to be a more marginal activity than their 

domestic lending and would be more susceptible to curtailment by 

a reduction in the availability of funds, 

Mr. Ellis remarked that there was another aspect to the 

problem--some banks outside of New York appeared eager to get into 

the foreign lending field. If New York banks cut back their foreign 

loans they might find the gap was being filled by other banks unless 

something was done to minimize the spread of this activity.  

Mr. Hersey presented the following statement on the balance 

of payments: 

Looking back at 1964, one of the most striking 
features of our balance of payments was the unusually 
large build-up in U.S. short-term liabilities to com
mercial banks abroad, which last year was of the order 
of magnitude of $1-1/2 billion. This represents an 
increase in interbank balances, including liabilities



1/12/65

of American banks to their branches abroad and liabilities 
of foreign agencies and branches operating here to their 
head offices, plus any increase there may have been in 
holdings of short-term money market paper in this 
country for the account of commercial banks abroad.  
The countries concerned in this increase were primarily 
Britain, Canada, Japan, Switzerland, and Germany.  

Because of this inflow of private banking funds, 
we had in 1964, at one and the same time, a deficit on 
"regular transactions" (the concept we have ordinarly 
focused on) of the order of magnitude of $2-1/2 billion, 
and a deficit on the "official settlements" basis of the 
order of magnitude of $1 billion. There was a striking 
contrast also in the trends within the year. The annual 
rate of deficit on regular transactions rose from under 
$2 billion in the first half of the year to over $3 bil
lion in the second half. On the other hand, the annual 
rate of "official settlements," adjusted for seasonal 
variation as well as we can, dropped from somewhere near 
$1-1/2 billion in the first half to $1 billion and per
haps less in the second half. This difference in trends 
within the year reflects the fact that the large build
up of commercial bank balances was heavily concentrated 
in the second half of 1964, starting in fact in July and 
continuing in every month but September and December.  
A seasonal run-down is normal in December.  

I have had to state all these figures in very 
approximate terms because we do not yet have compre
hensive figures for the month of December, but only 
incomplete figures for the weeks ending on Wednesday.  
I should also point out that the difference between 
the two kinds of deficit is not due solely to the 
behavior of commercial bank balances. In addition, 
there was a much smaller normal growth of short-term 
balances belonging to private foreigners other than 
banks, but this was pretty well offset last year by 
a decline in the liquid assets held in this country 
by the World Bank and other international agencies.  

Why did commercial banks help us out so greatly in 
the financing of the deficit on regular transactions in 
the second half of 1964? What does this development 
portend for 1965? If we could get a good answer to the 
first question, it would help in answering the second.  

Previous large build-ups in commercial bank balances 
occurred in 1959, 1961, and 1963. The first was of the 
order of magnitude of $1 billion, but the other two were

-28-



1/12/65

only of the order of magnitude of about $1/2 billion.  
A large decline occurred in the second half of 1960, 
after a very wide spread had opened up between U.S. and 
British short-term interest rates; that was also the 
time of the first flare-up in the gold market. I mention 
those earlier movements to emphasize that last year's 
build-up was relatively very large. Also, in contrast 
to the earlier movements, last year's build-up does not 
appear to have been stimulated in large degree by special 
inducements that foreign central banks, particularly the 
Bundesbank, gave their commercial banks to acquire and 
hold dollar balances in the United States or in the Euro
dollar market.  

The plausible available answers to our first 
question are of three kinds. First, one might associate 
increases in foreign commercial bank balances here more 
or less directly with borrowing cperat.'ons in the United 
States by those banks or their customers, in so far as 
the proceeds were not needed immediately for trade 
financing or other purposes. Canadian issues in our 
market were very large in the fourth quarter, and term 
lending by U.S. banks was heavy all through the second 
half. But when one pursues this explanation in terms 
of the countries involved or in terms of comparisons 
with earlier periods, it seems to be at best only a 
very partial explanation.  

Seccnd, one might be tempted to look for an explana
tion in terms of the placement of funds in New York by 
Canadian banks obtaining deposits denominated in U.S.  
dollars from U.S. corporations. Certainly for some of the 
monthly mvements this explanation is valid. By half-years, 
however, it breaks down. The net outflow of U.S. corporate 
liquid funds into dollar deposits abroad was fairly large 
last year, but it was probably not significantly larger 
after midyear than before.  

Third--and this may turn out to have been a fairly 
important factor--banks operating in the Euro-dollar 
market in London and elsewhere may have found the volume 
of U.S. dollar funds coming to them from all sources 
larger than they wished to employ in Euro-dollar lending 
abroad. In the case of American bank branches abroad, 
the relatively low rates they could pay on very short
term Euro-dollar deposits may have allowed them to 
obtain funds abroad for their head offices in this 
country at a cost below that of borrowing on 90-day

-29-



1/12/65 -30

CDs here. An important element in this third explanation 
is the thought that the aggregate volume of Euro-dollar 
deposit, was rising strongly after midyear, and British 
statistics do support this assumption.  

Underneath all these complexities we are warranted, 
it seems to me, in seeing at the least an undiminished 
willingness of private foreignens to hold dollar balances, 
at least on into December. Possibly we can infer even more, 
that the uneasiness about sterling which began to develop 
last autumn contributed to the increase in foreigners' 
dollar holdings in the form of Euro-dollar deposits and 
so to the increase in commercial banks' balances in this 
country.  

The implication of this line of thought is that in 
1965, as and when confidence in sterling is restored, we 
may see some unwinding of the 1964 developments. In any 
case, it seems very unlikely that the build-up of commercial 
bank balances would again be as large as it was last year.  

The aftermath of the sterling crisis may also affect 
other elements of the balance of payments in 1965. As 
British imports are cut back we will have one definitely 
unfavorable factor thrown into the pot of uncertainties 
about the outlook for the U.S. trade balance. While the 
outlook does seem favorable for a further general expan
sion of world trade, and for further gains in the U.S.  
share of exports in some markets, British measures of 
restraint, added to continuing French efforts to check 
inflation even at a sacrifice of near-term economic 
growth in France, could begin to modify this outlook 
somewhat. In the next few months, also, we may see more 
of a rise in U.S. imports than was occurring from last 
spring through October. We have just learned that in 
November imports were up sharply to above a $20 billion 
rate, from under a $19 billion rate in the late summer 
and early autumn. But in considerable part this was 
due to a speeding up of shipments to get ahead of the 
threatened port strike.  

All things considered, it looks likely that our over
all deficit on the official settlements basis will be 
higher in 1965 than the $1 billion level we have had in 
the past year and a half. This will tend to produce a 
further swelling of U.S. gold sales. To counteract these 
tendencies, and to help cope with the international political 
as well as financial problems they will involve, it will 
become increasingly necessary this year to look for policy 
measures that hold promise of halting the spill-over of



1/12/65

bank reserve availability and of time deposits into 
foreign term loans and other foreign credits.  

The seriousness of this problem of spill-over into 
foreign lending is indicated by the confidential data on 
foreign term loan commitments gathered by the Treasury from 
U.S. banks. These data show substantial increases in commit
ments since the middle of last year, to Europe as well as to 
other areas, and they suggest the continuation of the outflow 
on term loans at an annual rate in excess of $1 billion.  
This compares with an average rate of about $3/4 billion from 
the spring of 1963 to mid-1964. But since midyear the rate 
has been about $1-1/4 billion, 

The sterling crisis is for us a timely reminder that, 
if not now, then perhaps later, acute problems can arise 
for a reserve currency country with a persistent disequilib-
rium in its international accounts. Perhaps we need a 
different mix of fiscal and monetary policies than any we 
have yet tried out.  

Prior to this meeting the staff had prepared and distributed 

certain questions and responses for consideration by the Committee.  

These materials were as follows: 

1. Business activity. In view of the length of this expan
sion period, are there indications of developing imbalances-
in inventories, production relationships, or the composition 
of consumption--that suggest the possibility of either a 
cyclical topping-out or an overheating of the economy in the 
relatively near future? 

The well-balanced expansion through September 1964 has 
since been disturbed by auto strikes and the possibility of 
a steel strike in the spring. Auto output is scheduled to 
be maintained at very high rates for some months ahead, at 
a time when steel output is responding to enlarged demands 
for precautionary stocks. Subsequently, we may face 
sharply reduced auto and steel output. Nevertheless, the 
bulge in inventory buying as it has developed thus far does 
not seem to be leading to overly buoyant business expecta
tions and commitments or to a subsequent cyclical topping
out.  

Limiting the overheating possibility are the facts that 
the labor force and industrial capacity are growing more 
rapidly than earlier and are adequate to meet most current

-31-



1/12/65

and deve.oping demands. For some of the nonferrous metals, 
the supply situation, which had been very tight, is improving.  
Consumer purchases of durable goods other than autos have 
been on a plateau for six months, and the earlier rapid rate 
of expansion in spending for nondurable goods has slowed.  
While reidential construction activity may have bottomed 
out after its decline of last year, it is hardly an expansive 
factor. Federal purchases seem destined to change little in 
the months immediately ahead.  

Other final demands, however, remain moderately expan
sive. Consumer incomes are rising at a fairly steady pace 
and consumer demands for autos appear strong. Business 
spending for fixed capital is still rising, as is State and 
local government spending. Such a balance of forces would 
be likely to result in a continued substantial increase in 
over-all output for several months, with the possibility of 
some slowing in the pace of exparsion later in the year.  

2. Labor markets. To what extent have recent labor contract 
settlements and recent developments in productivity been 
exerting upward pressures on unit labor costs? 

Only a few major contracts have been negotiated since 
the auto settlement. Some of the settlements have provided 
for larger than guidepost increases, while others have pro
vided for smaller gains, but the average appears to be about 
in line with over-all changes in productivity.  

With the auto settlement not providing for any increase 
in hourly money wages this year, average hourly earnings in 
manufacturing have shown no acceleration in their rate of 
rise. At the end of 1964, average hourly earnings in all 
manufacturing were only 7 cents, or 2.8 per cent, above 
December 1963, a smaller rise than in the previous 12-month 
period.  

Fringe benefits have been rising more rapidly than money 
wage payments; over the past year, fringes increased 4.3 per 
cent per employee in manufacturing. Total compensation per 
employee in manufacturing, including both money wages and 
fringes, was about 3.3 per cent higher in late 1964 than a 
year earlier, close to the guidepost and below the indicated 
rise in output per manhour.  

In recent months, changes in output per manhour in 
manufacturing have been obscured by the auto strikes but 
there is no evidence of a slackening over the past year 
in the high rate of increase of about 4 per cent. This 
increase was about the same percentage as in 1963 and 1962.

-32-



1/12/65

Total labor costs per unit of output in manufacturing 
have been showing no significant trends this year. Unit 
costs in individual months have been up as well as down.  
In September and October unit labor costs rose somewhat, 
partly because of the auto strikes. In November, with 

output at G.M. resumed, they declined. With the automobile 
industry back at full production and with total manufacturing 
output continuing to rise, unit labor costs in manufacturing 

in December probably dropped back to pre-strike levels.  

3. Price developments. Is there any evidence to suggest 
that businessmen are expecting an inflationary price drift 
in the period ahead? Or that demand pressures are extending 
the area of price increases or accelerating the recent slight 
updrift :n the over-all price indexes? 

There are occasional indications in the press that some 
businessmen are expecting an inflationary price drift, but 

these reports are too limited to provide evidence of any 

developing inflationary psychology among businessmen.  

Actual price performance to date has not been such as 

to confirm inflationary expectations. Following a rise of 

.4 per cent between mid-September and mid-October, the 

industrial commodity price index increased only .2 in 

November and .1 in December. The four-h-quarter rise 

reflected primarily recovery in fuels, back to the year

ago level, and further increases among nonferrous metals.  

General spreading of price increases to other markets in 

response to demand pressures does not appear to be occurring.  

However, current strong demands for most types of steel, 

partly to hedge against a strike threat to supplies, are 

sustaining higher prices for some steel products. The 

industry has announced increases of 2 to 3 per cent for 

galvanized products, citing in part the increased cost of 

zinc. The direct effects of these increases on the total 

index is negligible.  

Recently, upward pressures appear to be abating for 

some nonferrous metals. Tin prices fell sharply after 

announcement of an increase in the amount of the metal 

available from the stockpile. Copper production has 

recovered from the strikes and other disturbances of last 

summer and recently prices in the London metal market and 

in domestic markets for futures and scrap have declined 

substantially.

-33-



1/12/65

There is no evidence of acceleration of consumer price 
increases and the consumer index in November continued 
1.2 per cent above a year earlier.  

4, Balance of payments. How have developments with respect 
to the pound sterling affected the U.S. balance of payments 
and the willingness of foreigners to hold dollars? 

So far, Britain's difficulties have probably had little 
net effect on either the U.S. balance of payments or the 
willingness of foreigners to hold dollars. Both favorable 
and unfavorable effects can be identified, although few of 
them can be measured closely.  

During the first 9 months of 1964, Britain's large 
current account deficit contributed to the U.S. current 
account surplus. The U.S. balance on current transactions 
with Britain was $320 million more favorable in this period 
than it had been a year earlier, and U.S. exports to some 
other countries may also have berefited temporarily as a 
result of unsustainably large U.F. imports from those 
countries. As Britain cuts its deficit, these favorable 
influences will be reversed. But there is no evidence 
that such a development was yet making itself felt by the 
end of 1964.  

Postponement of the British Government loan repayment 
at year-end increased the U.S. deficit by $138 million in 
the fourth quarter. But changes in private capital flows 
seem to have worked in the other direction. Short-term 
outflows of U.S. private capital to Britain were reversed 
in the fourth quarter during the sterling crisis, and long
term outflows probably diminished. Fragmentary data on 
securitie; transactions suggest that flows of foreign 
capital from Britain into U.S. noliquid assets stopped 
shrinking during the fourth quarter, ard may even have 
increased.  

There is little evidence of any reduced willingness 
of commercial banks abroad and other private foreigners 
to hold dollars. Flows of foreign private capital from 
all countries into liquid assets in the United States do 
not seem to have changed greatly in total as a result of 
sterling's difficulties; they continued to be exception
ally large through November, and the December reversal 
seems to have been of roughly the usual seasonal 
proportions.

-34-



1/12/65

Some recent central bank decisions to purchase gold 
for dollars may have been influenced by sterling's dif
ficulties and related uncertainties. But France had 
repeatedly intimated its desire to exchange dollars for 
gold for a variety of reasons, although the sterling 
crisis may have provided the excuse and influenced the 
timing. Spain was already exploring the possibility of 
buying gold, in line with its earlier policies, several 
months before the sterling crisis broke.  

Private demands for gold have been stimulated by the 
uneasiness about the future of exchange rates and gold 
parities--an uneasiness generated by the sterling crisis 
and recently accentuated by the prospect of French con
versions of official dollar holdings into gold. Private 
purchases of gold cannot, however, be taken as a reflec
tion of distrust solely of the dollar. Frenchmen, for 
example, have recently been moviig into gold out of 
French francs. Increased private demand for gold in the 
past two weeks makes it likely that the United States will 
be called upon to supply additional gold to the London 
pool.  

5. The money market, bank credit, and money supply.  
(A) How has the mixture of higher short-term rates, including 
the higher discount rate, and the lower member bank borrowing 
affected the rate of expansion in bank credit and money? 
(B) As yar-end money market and bank reserve pressures 
subside, what relationships are Likely to emerge among the 
proximate target variables of policy, i.e., free reserves 
and money market conditions? In turn, how are these likely 
to be re ated to credit and monetary expansion in the 
near-term? 

A. The rate of expansion in bank credit and money 
continued in December at a pace not very far below that 
for the year as a whole, as the influence of higher dis
count rates and associated higher short-term rates was 
counteracted by higher nonborrowed reserves and reduced 
member bank borrowings. The daily average bank credit 
expansion in December, at 7.1 per cent (annual rate), 
however, was considerably slower than November's exceptional 
12.1 per cent; this turn-around was influenced in part by 
bank sales in December of Treasury tax bills acquired in 

late November, and a paring down of Government security 
dealer borrowing. The rate of growth in money also slowed 
in December, and was below the 4 per cent growth for the

-35-



1/12/65

year as a whole, but time and savings deposit growth was 
slightly above its yearly rate, even though major banks 
were less active in the CD market.  

Bas:cally, the continued December money and credit 
expansion was sustained by a substantial increase in the 
growth of nonborrowed reserves supplied by the System, as 
borrowed reserves declined from pre-discount rate action 
levels. In this way Federal Reserve open market operations 
counteracted much of the constricting effect on money and 
credit expansion which might otherwise have stemmed from 
increased member bank reluctance to borrow at the higher 
discount rate. Such operations, undertaken in the context 
of continuing heavy demands for credit and a shift in 
reserves away from city banks in the latter part of 
December, produced larger free reserves in the banking 
system as a whole and prevented tautness in the money 
market from becoming extreme.  

B. Money market and bank reserve pressures normally 
subside after the year-end, but there are more uncertain
ties thar usual in the picture this year. The Treasury 
refinancing operation, discussed in the following question, 
is one. The strength of loan demand is another, as the 
extent of borrowing to finance inventory accumulation is 
not yet clear. The maintenance cf money market pressures 
throughout the second half of December and into early 
January--as typified by a consistent 4 per cent Federal 
funds rate and relatively high dealer loan-rates--may 
ind.cate some continuing heavier than usual credit demands, 
as well as the sharp movement of reserve funds away from 
major city banks.  

The continuing money market tautness has contributed 
to moderating the usual seasonal decline in bill rates 
(intensified this year by demands coming out of the advance 
refunding), and the 3-month bill rate closed at 3.78 per 
cent on Friday, down 11 basis points from its recent high.  
A reflux of reserves to central money markets would tend 
to reduce this tautness, as will the unwinding of the 
financing pressures arising out of the advance refunding.  
Offsetting these easing influences, in part, will be the 
Treasury sale of tax bills later this month and possibly 
also continuing contraseasonal strength in loan demands.  
Given these developments, bill rates might fluctuate 
within perhaps the 3.75 to 3.85 per cent range, although 
the shortest-term money market rates might adjust down
ward. This could be consistent with member bank borrowings

-36-



1/12/65

averaging somewhat above and free reserves somewhat below 
their December levels, but not. back to their fall peaks.  
Money and credit expansion could continue substantial, 
nevertheless, reflecting both the assumed strength in 
loan cemands and the large volume of Treasury financing 
activity this month.  

Should credit demands relax seasonally over the 
balance of January, and particularly if there should 
simultaneously occur a redistribution of reserves from 
country to city banks, free reserves averaging around 
the levels of the past few weeks would probably be 
associated with a bill rate at current or even at some
what lower levels. Federal funds would trade below the 
discount rate more frequently than recently and borrowings 
would be relatively low.  

If the maintenance of a firm Federal funds market and 
the restoration of a higher bill rate is desired, this 
would then probably require an increase in borrowing and 
a reduction in free reserves to around the target levels 
prevailing last fall. It is hard to say how much the bill 
rate might increase with free reserves back to such levels, 
but a reasonable guess might be in the 3.85-3.95 per cent 
range.  

6. Money and credit markets. What is likely to be the 
short-run effect on money and capital markets of the 
current Treasury financing operation, and what constraint 
(if any) does it place on current monetary policy? 

The current Treasury advance refunding, which involves 
$22.1 billion of publicly-held securities and is the third 
largest such offering on record, will place some constraint 
on monetary policy in coming weeks. Books were closed for 
the financing on January 8, and settlement date will be 
January 19. But the terminus of an "even keel" monetary 
policy in a refinancing such as the current one is clearly 
not susceptible to a hard and fast rule. It depends 
essentially on actual market developments in the period 
after the books are closed. At a minimum, however, it 
seems likely that "even keel" will be required for much, 
if not all, of the balance of this month.  

It appears that dealers will come out of the advance 
refunding with relatively large holdings of long-term 
securities. Indeed, early indications suggest that their 
holdings of the 4-1/4 per cent bonds of 1987-92 alone will 
exceed $500 million. International financial developments

-37-



1/12/65

will be among the major factors conditioning the speed 
and price at which dealers will be able to distribute 
these securities to investors.  

In the week following announcement of the current 
refunding, long-term interest rates showed little change, 
although earlier they had risen slightly in anticipation 
of the exchange offering. The mildness of this initial 
long-term interest rate adjustment was similar to exper
ience in the July refunding. But after that refunding, 
long-term rates did come under upward pressure later in 
the summer. Dealers had emerged from the July refunding 
with a record net long position of $1.2 billion in 
securities maturing in more than 5 years. Nevertheless, 
the System did shade its policy very cautiously toward 
less ease beginning in mid-August.  

An advance refunding of large magnitude poses problems 
for monetary policy not only in the long-term market but 
also in the short-term area. In last July's operation, 
bill rates came under considerable downward pressure before 
the books were closed in mid-July. These pressures were 
moderated in some measure by a Treasury bill strip offering; 
and the months following July were a period of rising rates, 
partly for seasonal reasons. By contrast, the current 
advance refunding will be followed by a period in the latter 
part of January and in February when seasonal pressures have 
at times in the past tended to produce lower bill rates.  
But so far in the current financing only moderate downward 
pressure has been in evidence, as dealer bill positions have 
remained substantial, dealer financing costs have remained 
high, and the Treasury has announced a $1-3/4 billion auction 
of June lax bills to raise new cash.  

7. Monetary policy. In light of these and other considera
tions, what policy with respect to bank reserves and money 
market conditions would be appropriate for the next three 
weeks? 

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

I would like to make a brief comment on the new pro
cedure whereby the Board's staff lists specific questions 
for our attention and discussion. While I can see that

-38-



1/12/65

we have gained important advantages by this encouragement 
of a focusing of Committee members' comments on issues of 
current significance in policy formation, I also feel that 
some of the questions, such as that dealing with the bal
ance of payments, were rather narrow--although I realize 
there was no effort to confine our discussion within these 
narrow limits. In several of the areas covered by the 
questions I have purposely ranged over somewhat broader 
territory in formulating my comments.  

1. Domestic business activity. The domestic economy 
moved up coward the end of 1964 in almost automatic response 
to the end of the October-November auto strikes. While the 
year ended on a strong note, not all of the momentum of the 
first three quarters appears to have been regained. However, 
apart from the steel industry, the economy is still demon
strating well-balanced growth; and the outlook for 1965 
remains relatively bright. Strength ir retail sales, which 
seems likely, together with the expected continuing accumula
tion of steel inventories, could well push GNP up very 
rapidly early in the year. High consumption of steel, as 
well as stockpiling, is gradually reducing excess capacity 
to produce unfinished steel; finished steel capacity is 
already tight. The extent of business sluggishness in the 
second half of 1965 will depend importantly on the size of 
the first-half steel build-up, and also on the extent to 
which fiscal policy provides a stimulus in the second half.  
While it is much too early to try to quantify any such 
stimulus, there will doubtless be a corsiderable improvement 
in this respect in the second half, not only because of 
probable excise tax cuts and larger planned expenditures, 
but also because of elimination of the drag arising in the 
first half from 1964 personal income tax underwithholdings 
and the speed-up of corporate tax payments.  

2. Labor markets. Except for the automobile industry, 
most major wage settlements in 1964 appear to have been 
within a range roughly consistent with national productivity 
gains. However, it is too early to judge to what extent the 
more generous auto settlements may set a pattern. The steel 
settlement will be of crucial importance, and at the moment 
there is no indication of its probable terms. It was 
disturbing that the announced increase in prices of galvanized 
steel found an immediate response from the steel union to the 
effect that this would provide an additional reason for a 
generous wage settlement.

-39-



1/12/65

It seems unreasonable at this time to expect any 
material improvement in total unemployment during 1965.  
But as many of us have stressed so often, the problem 
cannot be solved merely by increasing over-all demand 
through expanding credit more rapidly than we have been 
doing--even if other considerations permitted us to 
follow such a path, and of course they do not.  

3. Prices. Price indices continue to show a high 
degree of stability, although industrial wholesale prices 
are still under some moderate upward pressure. Fortunately, 
there has been some easing recently in world commodity 
markets at a time when, domestically, cost pressures are 
threatening to build up. The price threat is still a 
serious long-range danger rather than an immediate problem.  
But I think its seriousness is perhaps minimized a little 
too much in the staff's answers to the relevant questions.  

4. Balance of payments. The international situation 
contrasts sharply with the relatively satisfactory domestic 
picture. I have become increasingly disturbed by the 
uneasy state of international markets, and their suscep
tibility to rumors and distorted interpretations of current 
developments. The dollar is particularly vulnerable in 
this sort of situation, and it has become a matter of first 
priority for us to move our balance of payments far closer 
to equilibrium. While the final data for December are not 
yet available, the over-all deficit expanded sharply in the 
fourth quarter to somewhere close to a $4 billion annual 
rate, and the full-year 1964 deficit is now likely to 
exceed $2.5 billion. Despite the high proportion of last 
year's deficit financed through enlarged private holdings 
of dollars, dollars are finding their way into the hands 
of European central banks which are unwilling to increase 
their holdings, and our gold stock faces significant inroads 
over the coming months. While sterling has of course been 
the main focus of fears in financial markets, the general 
feeling of uncertainty has spread to other currencies, 
with the resulting sharp rise in speculative demand on 
the London gold market--abetted, of course, by the inex
cusably long drawn-out and exaggerated press coverage of 
the French gold takings and by foreign misinterpretation 
of newspaper leaks with respect to the 25 per cent gold 
requirement. The latter might well have been avoided had 
it been made clear at the outset that the main purpose of 
eliminating the 25 per cent requirement would be to show 
the world dramatically that our entire gold stock is avail
able to meet our international obligations.

-40-



1/12/65

We cannot afford to temporize any longer with our 
payments problem, which lies at the root of the erosion 
of confidence in the dollar and the erosion of American 
bargaining power in international economic negotiations.  

As we analyze the composition of our payments deficit, 
we find that an unexpectedly strong gain in our trade 
balance in 1964 was offset by an increase in private capital 
outflows, which can be estimated to aggregate about $5.6 to 
$5.8 billion in the year. Bank loans to foreigners accounted 
for a good share of this total and were especially high in 
October and November, with Europe an important outlet.  
(December data are not yet available). In November term 
loans alone rose by $165 million.  

5. Money supply and liquidity. December data on bank 
credit are always hard to evaluate, and this December is no 
exception. I think it is safe to say, however, that the 
impact of the System's late-November moves has so far 
remained mainly confined to money market rates. Credit and 
the money supply have continued to expand at about the same 
rates over the last two or three years despite the System's 
gradual moves toward lesser ease. As year-end pressures 
subside, somewhat lower bill rates are likely to be associated 
with a given level of free reserves than in the past few weeks.  

6. Money and credit markets, and Treasury financing.  
With settlement for the advance refunding still to be 
completed next week, and with the market ending up with a 
large volume of the longer issues still to be distributed 
to investors, we shall have to avoid, probably for the 
rest of this month, any actior that would unduly affect the 
long-term area. Granted the need for abiding by this limita
tion, we should at least see to it that short-term rates do 
not come under downward pressure. And by the time of the 
next meeting, in view of the routine nature of the February 
refunding, we can probably feel very little inhibition be
cause of Treasury considerations.  

7. Monetary policy. It seems to me undeniable that 
our international problem has advanced closer to the center 
of the stage than a few months ago and that monetary policy 
should be moving to help reduce our deficit. In other 
words we should, I believe, be seeking a somewhat reduced 
rate of growth of bank credit, with open market operations 
directed toward this end. Were it not for Treasury con
siderations, I would like to see a fairly rapid move to 
money market conditions and bank reserve positions that 
would result in a slowdown of bank credit expansion, even 
if this involved moderate net borrowed reserves; but for

-41-



1/12/65

the immediate future, it would probably be best merely to 
counteract any seasonal tendencies toward lower bill rates.  
If we preserve about the present atmosphere in the money 
market, with bill rates in the 3.80 per cent to 3.90 per 
cent range, we shall be providing adequate support to the 
Treasury's program. After the Treasury financing is 
settled next Tuesday this policy would probably result 
in a somewhat reduced level of free reserves.  

The directive should be charged, I believe, to give 
greater emphasis to our concern for the dollar's interna
tional position, and to recognize the Treasury financing.  

I am coming reluctantly to the conclusion that our 
critical balance of payments problem calls not only for 
a less easy monetary policy but also for some form of 
direct restraint on foreign bank lending. To my mind 
some form of moral suasion is greatly preferable to 
extension of the interest equalization tax to cover 
bank loans. Moral suasion would, in my judgment, 
probably be more effective, besides being more palatable 
and less likely to become permanently frozen into our 
financial system. There is only a rather small number 
of banks ready and able to lend abroad in very substantial 
amounts. But it also seems to me apparent that any 
selective effort of this kind will be made a great deal 
more acceptable here and abroad and more effective if 
it can be demonstrated that the System is simultaneously 
doing its part to reduce the prevailing degree of general 
credit availability.  

A policy aimed at reducing the grcwth of bank credit 
from the 8 per cent annual rate that has prevailed for 
some time would not, in my opinion, significantly affect 
the further growth of the domestic economy. But it would 
imply that more of the burden of stimulating growth, if 
such stimulus is needed, will have to be provided by 
fiscal policy. Perhaps this is already in the cards.  

Mr. Ellis said the most noteworthy aspect of New England's 

year-end performance had been a reversal of the relative positions 

of financial compared with production activities. When measured by 

manufacturing output, factory and nonfactory employment, unemploy

ment, construction contracts awarded, and consumer spending, the

-42-



1/12/65 -43

year-end gains compared more favorably with the national performance 

than earlier. On the other hand, when measured by loan, investment, 

and deposit trends, regional expansion since the discount rate 

action in November had lagged both national performance and year

end 1963 activity.  

Boston banks, Mr. Ellis continued, reported across-the

board strength in loan demand and an expectation of a less-than

seasonal run-off during the next two months, partly traceable to 

inventory hedging in steel. Several bankers reported an increase 

in the frequency of customer inquiries on how to hedge against de

valuation, on when and under what conditions gold could be bought, 

and even on what effect could be expected on domestic business if 

the British should devalue sterling.  

Mr. Ellis said he would consider the first three questions 

on the list suggested for discussion today as a group. As to 

whether there was evidence that the economy was heading for either 

a cyclical topping-out or an overheating, in all honesty and some

what begrudgingly he had to conclude that the available evidence 

was not conclusive on either score. The recent run-up from October 

to December in industrial commodity prices had, in his analysis, 

tended to support an expectation that price pressures were about 

to break out, given the recent rate of expansion in bank credit.  

And yet, since the sharp advance in October, the price rise had



1/12/65 -44

virtually petered out in the reported index, although he sensed 

that the pressures were still present.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that the green book analysis of wage 

cost increase; in manufacturing was quite reassuring when related 

to estimated productivity gains, but that analysis applied only to 

the manufacturing sector. It seemed probable that the wage and 

salary advances in services and construction had less opportunity 

to be offset by productivity gains and would show up in price 

pressures.  

Concerning question 4 on the balance of payments, Mr. Ellis 

could only underscore the obvious point that the sharply increased 

attention to the possibility of devaluation of the pound had in

creased concern about the position of the dollar. Release of 

balance of payments data for 1964 could not help but attract 

attention to the deterioration from the first to the fourth 

quarter. He had great sympathy with Mr. Hayes' position that 

reduced general credit availability would tend to restrict 

foreign lending, but he (Mr. Ellis) lacked evidence that the 

initial impact would be on foreign loans. He had some reserva

tions about the usefulness of moral suasion. It would be easy to 

bring suasion to bear on the largest banks, but many other banks 

were ready and willing to make foreign loans. He was unwilling 

to accept the thesis that domestic credit availability should be



1/12/65 -45

reduced for the only purpose of reducing foreign lending. Such an 

approach would be too blunt; more specific neasures were needed.  

He would be inclined to extend the interest equalization tax to 

banks.  

As to question 5, it seemed apparert to Mr. Ellis that the 

recent mixture of interest rates and reserve availability had 

allowed busiress loan expansion to match last year's rapid advance.  

Total bank credit had not matched year-ago advances because of a 

different Government financing schedule, but projected loan demand 

suggested that credit expansion over the next few months would be 

substantial.  

If it were not for the fact that the current Treasury 

refunding required an even keel atmosphere, Mr. Ellis said, he 

would be inclined to emphasize the importance of not allowing 

covered interest rate differentials to open widely against the 

dollar with the recovery of sterling that was expected later this 

month or next month. He would accept the staff's guess that a 

free reserve level in the neighborhood of the targets before the 

discount rate action--about $50-$100 million--would be associated 

with a bill rate in the 3.85-3.95 per cent range. Such bill 

rates, he thought, would be consistent with the goal he had 

described for covered rate differentials. Borrowings under those 

circumstances might rise somewhat from their $170 million average



1/12/65 -46

to about $300 million. But the need for even keel during the 

Treasury financing had to take precedence over his inclination 

toward a higher target for bill rates.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that he personally would prefer to see 

the Committee adopt the staff's draft "trial" directive as its 

official directive for this meeting. However, assuming that the 

majority favored the present format, he would propose one revision 

in the draft of the regular directive prepared by the staff.1/ 

His suggestion was to delete the words "may continue to" near the 

beginning of the second paragraph, and simply say ". . . seasonal 

pressures require a larger than usual degree of flexibility in 

operations . . ." 

Mr. Irons reported that the Eleventh District was experienc

ing a moderate expansion somewhat similar to that in the country 

as a whole, although some indicators were showing slight devia

tions in both directions. Construction had declined a bit in 

the last month or two, but construction of downtown office buildings 

was continuing. Farm cash receipts were estimated to be off this 

year, probably by 7 to 9 per cent. On the other hand, District 

industrial production was strong, and crude oil output was rising.  

Employment was moving up and unemployment down, and retail trade 

was quite strong.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



1/12/65 -47

Mr. Irons noted that member bank borrowings had declined 

recently to levels that often were nominal, and the year-end seasonal 

rise was less than normal. District banks were active in the Federal 

funds market, with purchases recently averaging over $500 million 

and sales almost that much. Use of Federal funds by small country 

banks was increasing; many were playing their reserve margins 

closely, expecting to avoid deficiencies by buying Federal funds 

at the last minute. With respect to District bank credit as a 

whole, loans had increased substantially more than investments had 

decreased. Demand was strongest in the consumer loan category, 

but other loans also were up. Demand and time deposits continued 

to grow. He was concerned by the tendency of some small country 

banks that were not market wise to gain deposits by increasing 

their use of CDs, and he planned to watch developments of this 

type closely.  

Mr. Irons thought that there was an increasing trend toward 

credit pyramiding in the Eleventh District, and cited some illustra

tive examples. He did not know whether this trend was widespread 

nationally, but he thought it might lead to trouble in the future.  

In talking with District businessmen, Mr. Irons remarked, 

he did not get the impression that they were thinking about potential 

inflation in the usual terms, such as rising wage costs. Their 

primary concern was with the position of the dollar and what could



1/12/65 -48

be done about the present difficulties. They also were giving 

thought to the possibility of a rather substantial increase in 

Federal spending in the second half of 1965 after the passage of 

legislation implementing the "Great Society." Their concern about 

potential inflation was related to the international problem and 

to this expected increase in Federal spending.  

Mr. Irons said his views on national conditions did not 

differ greatly from those contained in the staff responses to the 

questions that had been distributed. The over-all situation 

appeared to be one of continuing strength and moderate expansion, 

with few actual imbalances. There were some threats of future 

problems, however, including the destabilizing potential of 

inventory developments and the possibility that wage increases 

and labor difficulties would lead to rising costs. He was inclined 

to believe that the unemployment rate would remain near 5 per cent 

in the next few months. He could see no strong indications of 

inflationary developments in the price sta istics; individual 

prices were going in both directions. He thought, however, that 

the trend would be toward higher prices as rising elements of costs 

began to seep through in the period ahead.  

Mr. Irons observed that the Committee was prevented from 

making any substantial policy change in the next three weeks by 

the Treasury's advance refunding. He thought the international



1/12/65 -49

problem was th most serious of those facing the Committee now.  

It seemed to him that the position of the dollar could not be 

disassociated from that of the pound, and that developments of 

the past several weeks had tended to weaken the dollar. The 

large volume of dollars that had been accumulated by European banks 

represented a potential future claim on the U.S. gold stock, and 

that in itself tended to weaken the U.S. position. He did not 

particularly like the idea of using mcral suasion to reduce bank 

lending abroad, but he thought it might be worth trying before 

applying more formal controls, such as extending the interest 

equalization tax to banks. As he understood it, the banks in

volved in foreign lending were relatively few in number and large 

in size, and he thought they would recognize their patriotic 

responsibilities.  

Mr. Irons favored retaining reserve availability about 

where it was. He thought this would yield a bill rate in the 

3.80-3.90 per cent range, and would bring covered international 

rate relationships roughly into balance. This probably was the 

most the Committee could expect to accomplish in the next three 

weeks. After that period, Mr. Irons would be inclined to place 

greater emphasis on the international situation and to look 

seriously toward some further lessening of credit availability.  

He did not think such a move would damage the domestic economy



1/12/65 -50

if it was not carried to excess. One could not be certain that it 

would help th; international situation, but it would be a step in 

the right direction. In conclusion, Mr. Irons said that the 

staff's draft directive was acceptable to him.  

Mr. Swan said he found little to disagree with in the staff 

comments on the distributed questions and he had little to add on 

these subjects except for a few footrotes relating to District 

developments. One concerned current steel inventory accumulation 

and the possible unsettling effects when it ended. Steel producers 

in his area reported that customers were making little or no effort 

to increase stocks by buying from western mills, in contrast to the 

national situation. The reason, in part, might be that the canning 

industry--which along with construction was the District's largest 

user of steel -expected the steel labor situation to be settled 

before their peak season in the fall. There also had been no 

signs in the District of hedge buying of steel from foreign 

producers.  

Mr. Swan's second point concerned one aspect of the price 

situation. There had been some fairly substantial lumber price 

increases in recent weeks related to shutdowns of mills because 

of flood damage and to interruption of shipments because of similar 

damage to railroads and highways. However, this was a temporary 

development, and the situation should return to normal in a few



1/12/65 -51

months. Flood damage in the lumber industry had been confined 

largely to the redwood area in Northern California, and redwood 

production accounted for about 12 per cent of the total lumber 

production in the District.  

Mr. Swan observed that there was little question about the 

appropriate policy for the next few weeks in view of the Treasury 

refunding. However, he shared the increasing concern about the 

international situation. He was not certain about the extent to 

which the situation might have deteriorated recently but obviously 

it had not improved. He had to admit that he did not have any 

ready solution to the problem. He shared Mr. Ellis' uncertainties 

about the effectiveness of moral suasion and about the possible 

impact of a substantial reduction in credit availability on foreign 

relative to domestic loans. Considering the problems of sterling, 

the question of the U.S. gold cover, the matter of direct invest

ment abroad, and the question of extending the interest 

equalization tax to foreign term loans of banks, it seemed to 

him that some kind of consistent, coordinated approach to the 

problem had to be developed, some elements of which presumably 

would lie outside the Committee's authority. He was not sure just 

how this could be accomplished, but he felt that it would be 

undesirable to take any one of the various possible actions with

out giving considerble thought as to how it would be related to



1/12/65 -52

other possible actions. With respect to the gold cover, he shared 

Mr. Coombs' view that it would be desirable to remove the require

ment entirely and not in part.  

Mr. Swan agreed that in carrying out an even keel policy 

until the next meeting it would be necessary to be concerned with 

money market conditions other than bill rates. But the bill rate 

also had to be considered, and he favored a rate in the 3.75

3.85 per cent area. He doubted that downward seasonal pressures 

were going to be as strong in the coming period as they might have 

been under different circumstances, and he would not be particularly 

concerned if free reserves declined somewhat. The staff's draft 

directive was acceptable to him with the amendment that Mr. Ellis 

had proposed.  

In calling on Mr. Deming, Chairman Martin noted that he 

recently had been designated as Under Secre ary of the Treasury 

for Mone:ary Affairs and consequently that this was the last 

meeting Mr. Deming would attend as a member of the System and 

as an alternate member of the Committee.  

Mr. Deming said that business activity in the Ninth 

District was moving along reasonably well at present, although 

conditions were a shade less expansive than in the nation as a 

whole. Loan expansion was quite strong in December--larger than 

in 1963 and only a little below the record of 1962. The increase



1/12/65

was particularly strong at country banks, where farm refinancing 

was becoming increasingly important. A recent business survey 

revealed about the same degree of business confidence as a year 

ago.  

Mr. Deming's only comment with respect to the staff's 

list of topics was in connection with item 4, on the balance of 

payments. He had no quarrel in general with the facts given 

relative to the immediate effects of the sterling crisis on the 

U.S. payments balance, but the tone of the discussion was con

siderably more optimistic than he felt. The situation was quite 

delicate and was likely to remain so for some time.  

Mr. Deming said he would make no comment on policy for the 

period ahead except to emphasize the possible problems in the 

after-market for the 4-1/4 per cent bond that had been issued in 

the refunding. He had found Mr. Holland's analysis of the 

appropriate definition of even keel at present to be quite 

interesting, and he agreed with it in general.  

Mr. Deming noted that he had been attending meetings of 

the Committee for almost eight years and that recently he had 

read over the record of policy actions for 1964 and had looked 

back over some of the earlier entries. It seemed to him that the 

performance of the Committee was impressive. There was a healthy 

element of self-criticism and the Committee was constantly 

striving to improve its operations. But perhaps the Committee

-53-



1/12/65 -54

was so concerned with shortcomings in such matters as the state 

of knowledge regarding linkages in the economy and the quality of 

available date that it tended to underrate its own performance.  

In his judgment the Committee's record of policy decisions over 

the past several years was one of which it could be proud.  

Mr. Scanlon said he was in general agreement with the 

staff comments on the first three questions regarding business 

activity. He had one regional comment on wges. Wage increases 

in the construction and farm machinery and auto parts industries 

were reported to be causing these firms to attempt price increases.  

Analysts close to those industries believed that recent wage 

increases exceeded gains in productivity. In general, however, 

the strengthening of prices appeared more closely related to 

increased demand for products than to wage adjustments, as, for 

example, in steel.  

His views on question 4 were similar to those of Mr. Ellis, 

Mr. Scanlon remarked. He was certain that a less easy monetary 

policy would eliminate some marginal loans--both foreign and 

domestic. He had been surprised to find a hesitancy on the part 

of some large banks in the Seventh District to agree that such 

action would necessarily change the attractiveness of some of 

their sizable foreign credits. While he was not opposed to 

trying moral suasion he was not as convinced as Mr. Hayes was



1/12/65

that it would be completely effective, in view of the attractive 

rate differential on foreign loans.  

With respect to the U.S. gold cover, Mr. Scanlon observed 

that the attitude of District bankers was quite different from a 

few years ago. To many, the question was not whether the require

ment should be changed but when and how this should be done; and 

some were quite critical that more had not already been done to 

accomplish a change.  

Regarding question 5 concerning the money supply and 

liquidity, Mr. Scanlon agreed with the staff comments in section 

A. He also agreed with the discussion in ;ection B, except that 

he tended to assume a rather strong loan demand whereas he 

inferred that the staff had some uncertainties on this score.  

Despite this difference,he came out at about the same place as 

the staff had. Contrary to the experience in most areas, Chicago 

banks had sold an exceptionally large volume of CDs over the past 

two weeks. This might have been done in anticipation of strong 

loan demand, although that was not certain 

Mr. Scanlon agreed with the staff comments on item 6, 

relating to money and credit markets. He noted that in the 

December returns of the Reserve Bank's quarterly survey of the 

District's ten largest banks, dealing with interest rates charged 

on loans to business borrowers, there was no evidence that rates 

had risen. In fact, some small declines had been reported.

-55-



1/12/65 -56

Mr. Scanlon favored no change in policy. He would continue 

to place primary emphasis on the short-term bill rate and preferred 

a range in the 3.75-3.90 per cent area, with free reserves 

permitted to find their own level. The staff's draft directive 

was acceptable to him and he did not favor a change in the dis

count rate.  

Mr. Clay considered the staffs draft answers to the 

questions submitted for Committee consideration to be well done 

and acceptable as the basis for policy formulation. He thought 

it was obvious that the Committee continued to be faced with the 

dual problems of encouraging expansicn of domestic economic 

activity and alleviating problems cn the international financial 

front. For the period immediately ahead, there also were 

seasonal financial pressures to deal with and Treasury financing 

to take in account.  

Over all, Mr. Clay said, monetary policy should remain 

essentially unchanged for the period ahead In view of the 

Treasury financing activities, it would be desirable to make no 

overt change in policy in any case. Quite apart from Treasury 

financing, in his judgment analysis of the domestic economy 

called for a continuation of monetary expansion. And, in the 

present context of international financial developments, con

tinued pursuit of the interest rate objectives of recent weeks



1/12/65 -57

seemed to be advisable. Thus, it appeared logical to him to 

maintain the general monetary posture adopted at the time of 

the discount rate increase.  

However, Mr. Clay felt the uncertainties of seasonal 

financial developments would require somewhat more latitude in 

open market operations with respect to the range of both money 

market conditions and reserve availability. In his view, money 

market conditions should be the primary guide with a Treasury 

bill rate generally in the range of 3.70-3.90 per cent. While 

reserve availability should be a secondary consideration, it 

should be the aim of operations to provide reserves on a scale 

that wculd permit bank credit to increase on a seasonally 

adjusted basis.  

The economic policy directive draft prepared by the 

staff appeared quite satisfactory to Mr. Clay, and he would 

make no change in the discount rate.  

Mr. Wayne said that recent business developments in the 

Fifth District generally reflected continuation of established 

trends and appeared to be substantially in line with national 

conditions. There were, however, two items that might be of 

interest for future policy considerations. First, this year's 

flue-cured tobacco acreage had been cut nearly one-fifth, but 

the reduction in dollar income would depend on other variables,



1/12/65 -58

particularly on yield per acre which increased sharply last year.  

Second, a change in the sentiment of businessmen and bankers was 

discernible in the Richmond Bank's most recent survey. While a 

sizable majority still expected business to hold steady or 

improve, there was a distinct decline in the strength of these 

expectations.  

Mr. Wayne agreed in general with the staff analysis on 

the first question, relating to business activity. He saw no 

significant evidence of any impending cyclical topping-out or of 

any overheating in the economy in the near future. Available 

data indicated that inventory increases now in progress were 

related chiefly to fear of a steel strike rather than to 

inflationary expectations. Despite a continuing high level of 

business investment, there was yet no evidence of a large build

up of excess capacity.  

On the subject of labor markets, while Mr. Wayne had 

serious reservations about statistical measures of productivity, 

available evidence suggested that recent wage increases generally 

had been about in line with the productivity guideposts. The 

major test in this area,however, was still ahead and the proof 

of the pudding would come with the steel settlement.  

Indications of higher prices, Mr. Wayne noted, were less 

in evidence now than they were four weeks ago. Domestic capacity 

and foreign sources of supply appeared sufficient to prevent



1/12/65 -59

demand pressures from extending or accelerating price increases 

in the immediate future.  

As to the balance of payments, Mr. Wayne remarked that 

if the whole range of forces now pressing on the international 

exchanges were included, it was clear that major consideration 

in policy decisions had to be addressed to the problems found 

here. Mr. Hayes' analysis was most persuasive to him.  

Mr. Wayne noted that the rate of expansion of bank credit 

and the money supply in December appeared to have been slightly 

below that in other recent months. For the next few weeks, 

downward seasonal pressures on short rates, reinforced perhaps 

by money market effects associated with the latest Treasury 

refunding, would probably mean that a lower level of free 

reserves would be necessary if short rates were to be held 

within the recent range.  

Mr. Wayne saw nothing in the currert or prospective 

business situation that suggested the need for any change in 

monetary policy at this time. In the international field, 

however, the situation was much less satisfactory. The 

suggestion by Mr. Coombs that the Committee should attempt from 

month to month, or from season to season, to shift credit flows 

in geographic terms by moral suasion was inherently dangerous, 

he thought. This seemed to him to fall somewhat more clearly



1/12/65 -60

in the field of foreign relations than in that of monetary policy.  

He was impressed, however, with the desirability of some form of 

direct intervention to restrain further flows of credit abroad 

rather than resorting to what he believed would be massive and 

untenable reductions in credit availability to the domestic 

economy if the Committee should rely solely on monetary policy 

to apply this restraint. Perhaps some form of moral suasion 

should be tried, but in his opinion the Committee would have to 

and should underscore its concern by reducing credit availability 

somewhat.  

It seemed to Mr. Wayne that the Ccmmittee had to maintain 

and perhaps raise short-term rates so long as the international 

situation remained as precarious as it was now. In the face of 

the large return flow of reserves to be expected in the next few 

weeks and the apparent net reduction in available supplies of 

short-term securities as a result of the current Treasury 

financing, such a policy probably would require substantially 

lower free reserves than had prevailed recently. He favored 

a continuation of the policy of placing primary emphasis on the 

bill rate, and he would aim to keep that rate within the range 

discussed at the last meeting, i.e., 3.75-3.90 per cent, although 

he would hope it stayed in the upper portion of that range. The 

draft directive was probably acceptable for the next three weeks.



1/12/65

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

I want to say a word of commendation to the staff 
for the material they have supplied to us for this 
meeting. I do not know how much longer they can keep 
this up--coming up with new and relevant questions, or 
even with new answers to the same old questions--but 
I find it very helpful and I would like to encourage 
it. In particular, I appreciate the efforts, in the 
answer to question 5, to nail down a little more the 
possible linkages among money market, reserve, and 
credit variables. I know this is hard to do, but 
it is central to good decision-making on the part of 
the Committee and good communications with the Desk.  

By and large, I find myself in accord with the 
conclusions drawn by the staff in answering the 
questions distributed last week. I am gratified 
by the way the rest of the economy is responding 
with seeming moderation to the spurt of inventory 
accumulation in automobiles and steel. It reminds 
me somewhat of the way the economy earlier with
stood :he potentially inflationary imact of the 
snarp bulge in nonferrous metal prices, with the 
resulting sensible over-all price performance noted 
in the answer to question 3. I have no special comment 
on question 4 other than to question the completeness 
and the significance of the assertion, in the third 
paragraph of the answer, about a reversal of short
term outflows of capital to Britain and the surmise 
about long-term outflows, and to assert that if the 
last sentence of that paragraph is correct, the 
result is not one to have been hoped for in light 
of the British plight.  

I have some reservations about the easy 
assumption in question 5 that a reflux of reserves 
from th, country banks to the central money market 
will occur soon enough to take any lasting sting 
out of the unusual money market tightness of the 
last few weeks. It seems to me that tightness needs 
to be relaxed promptly, and if the natural reserve 
flows should not be quick and sizable enough for 
this, then open market operations should step in.  
In this connection, I suggest the bill rate alone 
will probably not be a dependable guide to general 
money market conditions, just as it has not been 
these past few weeks, under the special depressing

-61--



1/12/65

influences of both the reversal of year-end seasonal 
pressures and the purchases of bills by the sellers 
of "rights" in the Treasury refunding. If bill 
rates should drop so far as to be of concern from 
a balance of payments point of view, there is, as 
all of us know, a selective instrument ready for 
use in coping with such special pressures-
additional Treasury issues of new bills. Similarly, 
there is available another selective instrument-
IET for banks--to resist another development of 
concern, the increased volume of foreign term loan 
commitments by a handful of big banks.  

In applying the general instruments of 
monetary control, our focus should be on general 
market considerations. At this moment, our 
immediate general responsibility should be to 
keep the complex of money narket conditions on 
an "even keel" while the Treasury advance refunding 
is in process. Underlying that responsibility is 
another--not to permit money market and reserve 
pressures to develop in a way that will restrain 
the availability of money and credit at what could 
be a very unpropitious time, given the undoubted 
lags in the influence of monetary policy and the 
prospective change of pace in domestic demands.  

Mr. Robertson added that the proposed directive was, in 

general, adequate. However, he thought it would be desirable to 

amplify the inal clause, which read "open market operations over 

the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 

about the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed 

in recent weeks." This clause, in effect, called for an even 

keel; but an even keel posture could be maintained while leaning 

toward either tight or easy conditions, and he was concerned about 

the possibility of tightness. He thought it would clarify the 

instruction and be helpful to the Manager if a phrase was added



1/12/65 -63

after the words "recent weeks" along the following lines: "and 

to the extent consistent with this, maintaining growth in non

borrowec' reserves at a rate about in line with that of the last 

quarter of 1964." Mr. Robertson noted that the growth rate in 

the last quarter had been 4.9 per cent.  

Mr. Shepardson said he had only one general comment to 

make on the questions suggested for discussion. Although he 

recognized that it was hard to find much evidence in the figures, 

he still had the feeling that potential pressures on costs and 

prices were latent in the domestic situation and that the 

Committee needed to be constantly alert to them. The status of 

the current labor negotiations did not seem to be encouraging 

in that respect.  

Mr. Shepardson agreed that the foreign situation had 

become more serious in recent weeks and that more attention had 

to be given tc it. In his opinion, there were disadvantages 

both to moral suasion and to applying the interest equalization 

tax to longer-term bank loans. Moral suasion was not a particularly 

desirable technique for a supervisory agency to use because it 

gave an advantage to those who did not cooperate. An equalization 

tax on longer-term bank loans probably could be avoided by 

borrowers and lenders through short-term credits made with the 

understanding that they would be renewed on maturity. On the



1/12/65

other hand, he did not know of any alternatives that were likely 

to be effective, and perhaps one or both of these approaches 

should be tried. He thought that if such nethods were used 

they should be accompanied by some reduction in the availability 

of reserves. Reduced reserve availability need not impinge on 

domestic needs for credit if the special measures were effective 

in curtailing foreign lending.  

Mr. Shepardson agreed that the immediate situation called 

for a policy of even keel. He shared Mr. Robertson's view that 

the proposed wording of the directive could be interpreted in 

various ways; it could be taken to call for maintaining market 

conditions as easy as in the last two weeks or for maintaining 

the somewhat firmer conditions of earlier weeks. He would hope 

that the words "recent weeks" would be interpreted to encompass 

this whole period, thus allowing for the possible development 

of market conditions similar to those of three or four weeks 

ago. He favored the draft directive with the changes that had 

been suggested.  

Mr. Mitchell said that an even keel policy was the only 

alternative available to the Committee for the period until the 

next meeting and that he was willing to accept Mr. Holland's 

analysis of the appropriate definition of even keel now. In 

his judgment the bill rate should be permitted to reflect the 

expected seasonal weakness in the market. He suspected that

-64-



1/12/65 -65

the overhang of the securities issued in the advance refunding 

would last beyond the date of the next meeting, and that the 

Committee might be faced with the need fo, continuing to main

tain an even keel then. This was particularly likely if there 

were market rumors of a tightening of policy to supplement a 

program of moral suasion against foreign lending.  

Mr. Mitchell was pleased to note the increased degree of 

acceptance cf the proposition that selective measures were needed 

to deal with the balance of payments problem, which he and some 

other members had advanced for a long time. He agreed with 

Mr. Coombs that some positive steps had to be taken. He thought 

Mr. Coombs' suggestion concerning the gold cover was exactly 

right; it should be removed completely, ard on the grounds of 

making gold available for international purposes. The second 

essential was to get the U.S. balance of payments into the black.  

But he disagreed somewhat with the suggestion that moral suasion 

be used as a major means of achieving this end. In his judgment 

the technique of moral suasion was hostile to the tradition of 

creating an environment in which people could seek their own 

advantage in terms of costs and returns. It was for this reason 

that he preferred use of the equalization tax or something 

similar. Defects of the present tax could be remedied--it could 

be extended to banks, the one per cent tax rate could be increased



1/12/65 -66

by legislation, renewals of short-term credits could be treated 

as long-term lending, and so forth.  

Mr. Mitchell thought that something also had to be done 

to limit direct investment abroad. While the immediate problems 

of taking steps in this area might be more difficult than in other 

areas, it was important to remember that tax deferral privileges 

under present law added to the advantages of foreign over domestic 

investment The previous Administration had been unsuccessful in 

its attempt to remedy this situation, but the present environmen: 

was more conducive to a change in :egislation. However, while 

he disagreed on methods, he considered the question of specific 

techniques to be less important than the need for corrective 

action on the deficit.  

Returning to the subject of moral suasion, Mr. Mitchell 

said he was not sure who would do the persuading but he hoped 

whoever did would not commit the Committee to some particular 

course of action. The Committee had never bound itself to a 

specific policy; it always had taken the position that it would 

make its decisions from meeting to meeting in light of the 

circumstances prevailing at the time. He thought it would be 

extremely unwise to give assurance to anyone that the Committee 

would depart from this principle if it possibly could be avoided.



1/12/65 -67

Mr. Hickman said that, contrary to the staff report in 

the green book, he did not believe that "sustained moderation" 

was an accurate description of the mood an the performance of 

the domestic economy. At the moment the fcrward movement of the 

economy, which in his judgment was neither moderate nor sustain

able, reflected an accidental conjuncture of two unbalancing 

forces--the frenetic post-strike catch-up cf the auto industry 

and hedge buying of steel.  

During December, Mr. Hickman noted, the auto industry had 

produced cars at about a 9 million annual rate, and the steel 

industry had operated at a rate well in excess of 135 million 

ingot tons per year. Neither of those rates, by any stretch of 

the imagination, could be regarded as moderate or sustainable for 

any appreciable length of time. It was his impression that there 

had not as yet been much foreign buying of steel as a hedge 

against a steel strike.  

The behavior of the index of industrial production during 

recent months, Mr. Hickman continued, could be analyzed into a 

subcycle of rapidly changing activity in steel and autos super

imposed on moderate growth of most other sectors of the economy.  

Some indication that steel and autos were the prime movers was 

provided by the fact that, according to the latest figures of the 

Board's staff, two-thirds of the 1-1/2 point increase in the



1/12/65 -68

industrial production index in December was attributable to a 

0.7 point increase in autos and a 0.3 point increase in steel.  

Looking back a bit, the trough of the steel-auto subcycle was 

in October when the General Motors strike occurred. The timing 

of the upper turning point of the subcycle obviously lay ahead-

probably only a few months ahead if one looked to the auto 

industry to finish replenishing dealer inventories and probably 

somewhat further ahead if one looked only to the steel industry.  

If the two industries turned down together, there was apt to be 

a fairly sharp jolt to the economy which would be difficult to 

absorb. The jolt would be somewhat easier to absorb if the 

downturns came at different times.  

Mr. Hickman reported that in the Fourth District almost 

all measures of business activity had advanced in December, but 

like the national economy most advances were due to the rebound 

following the auto strikes. One factor in the District of perhaps 

national interest was a sharp jump in the nonbuilding component 

of construction contracts due to a $175 million electric generating 

plant being installed near Pittsburgh. Th:s was by far the 

largest project reported for the entire nation in 1964 and one 

of the largest on record.  

Mr. Hickman then turned to the staff's questions.  

1. Business activity. In his judgment there was over

heating going on now in the auto and steel industries in the



1/12/65 -69

sense of unsustainable rates of production, pressures on capacity, 

and scrambling for inventories. The direct causes of this over

heating were exogenous (recent auto strikes and impending steel 

negotiations) rather than the length of the current business 

expansion. He noted that in the staff's answer to this question 

overheating was referred to as a "possibility" and the risk of 

a cyclical topping-out was minimized. His own feeling was that 

overheating was an actuality and a cyclical topping-out was a 

very real possibility.  

2. Labor markets. Mr. Hickman said he doubted very much 

that additional costs arising from recent labor contracts were 

fully reflected in the official statistics. Pension costs, for 

example, were difficult to estimate precisely. The wage part of 

the auto settlement would not be included in the figures until 

October. In the absence of a full statistical showing the 

Committee was out back on its own guesses. His guess, which was 

consiste t with strongly-held views of industrialists on the 

Cleveland Bank's Board of Directors, was that if the generous 

auto settlement was passed on to steel and other industries labor 

costs would rise faster in 1965 than productivity, and profit 

margins would be squeezed.  

3. Prices. Mr. Hickman remarked that according to 

Steel Magazine's recent survey, businessmen in metalworking 

industries expected selling prices and unit costs to increase



1/12/65 -70

in 1965 by 1.7 per cent and 3.0 per cent, respectively. Another 

indication of possible price pressures was revealed by the fact 

that the price diffusion index of the National Association of 

Purchasing Agents in November and December was at the highest 

level of the current expansion. Many purchasing agents reported 

that they were attempting to combat future price increases by 

negotiating long-term contracts.  

The staff's answer to this question focused only on 

prices, Mr. Hickman noted, with no reference to cost increases 

that might have to be absorbed. Businessmen appeared to be more 

concerned with upward cost pressures in 1965 than with price 

increases. In short, they were worried about profit margins.  

4. Balance of payments. Mr. H ckman noted that pressures 

on sterling caused a postponement of British interest payments 

to the U.S. in the fourth quarter of 1964, which brought an 

immediate deterioration in the U.S. balance of payments. The 

15 per cent surcharge on British imports would have an adverse 

effect on U.S. exports as long as it was in effect. More 

importantly, British sales of dollars to support the pound had 

added substantially to dollar holdings of central banks. Unless 

the pound strengthened appreciably and the British gained dollars 

and used them to repay drawings on its swap line with the 

System, excess dollar holdings of foreign central banks might



1/12/65 -71

be converted into gold. Against this background, Mr. Hickman 

would be willing to try moral suasion to check the flow of 

foreign credit, perhaps coupled with some slight shift in credit 

availability after the refunding. He felt that the interest 

equalization tax was a blunt and unpalatable instrument, and he 

would consider it a second choice.  

5. Money supply and liquidity. Mr. Hickman commented 

that the Administration's concern about the level of interest 

rates had placed the System in the position of having to main

tain the 91-day bill rate below the discount rate. The discount 

rate had thus become a penalty rate in the sense that member 

banks sold bills and other short-term securities rather than 

borrow at the discount window. Accordingly, to prevent short

term rates from rising, the System had allowed free reserves to 

rise in December, while member bank borrowings declined. The 

net result was that the marginal credit supply increased.  

Despite this, the actual rate of growth in bank credit was not 

excessive in December, reflecting the absence of Treasury 

financing and a sharp decline in dealer loans.  

6. Money and credit markets. Mr. Hickman said the 

Treasury advance refunding had added substantially to the volume 

of long-term securities outstanding in the market and had 

reduced almost equally the amount of short-term issues outstanding.



1/12/65 -72

This was a reverse "operation twist," which increased long-term 

rates and lowered short-term rates. The operation, like other 

debt-lengthening measures, affected economic growth, since it 

reduced the volume of long-term funds available to finance 

private investment.  

In light of the various factors he had discussed, which 

did not all point in the same direction, Mr. Hickman favored no 

change in monetary policy, at least for the next three weeks.  

That was to say, he would attempt to promote an increase in the 

money supply of about 3 to 4 per cent, and in bank credit of 

about 6 to 8 per cent. He thought that this would call for 

free reserves in a range of $75 million plus or minus $100 million 

and a bill rate in a range of 3.75-3.90 per cent.  

Mr. Hickman would accept the staff's draft directive with 

the revision suggested by Mr. Ellis. He favored leaning toward 

the side of slightly less ease during the period of even keel.  

Messrs. Daane and Young returned to the room during the 

course of Mr. Hickman's remarks.  

Mr. Bopp said that rather than comment on each of the 

questions prepared he would limit his remarks mainly to the 

subject of inventories. Perhaps the greatest present threat of 

imbalance arose from the potentially sizable swing from accumula

tion to decumulation of inventories associated with labor



1/12/65

negotiations in the steel industry. He had reviewed inventory 

movements associated with steel contract negotiations since 1953 

and one particularly pertinent fact emerged. Only in 1953 did a 

recession follow immediately after a negotiation period. In all 

other cases, economic activity continued at high levels for a 

considerable number of months following the steel settlement.  

One other fact distinguished the negotiation period in 

1953 from those occurring since then, Mr. Bopp noted. The later 

negotiations all came fairly soon after the beginning of cyclical 

upswings. The talks in 1953, however, began almost four years 

after the trough point in 1949. The record of the 'fifties and 

'sixties, then, indicated that the economy had weathered most 

of the inventory swings associated with steel contract discussions.  

The outstanding exception was the one case when the contemporary 

business expansion had lasted for an unusually long time.  

The record supported one other obvious point, Mr. Bopp 

said. Fluctuations in durables inventories were greater the 

longer a period of negotiation extended and, of course, they 

were severest when a steel strike occurred.  

The Reserve Bank's contacts in the steel industry indicated 

that if the current steel negotiations led to a settlement by May 

there might be about 8 or 9 million tons of extra steel in 

inventory. Superimposed on a normal inventory of 12 or 

14 million tons, this was enough to cause a considerable

-73-



1/12/65 -74

inventory ruroff at a time when a Federal cash surplus also would 

temporarily inhibit further economic advances. Offsetting this 

was the evident strength in total demand. Nevertheless, a 

settlement early in May implied a combination of depressing 

events occurring at the same time.  

If settlement came later in the year, following a Taft

Hartley "cooling-off period" and perhaps a strike, the inventory 

swing was likely to be considerably greater, Mr. Bopp said.  

According to the Bank's local sources, the steel industry now 

found it difficult to supply steel at the rate users wanted to 

accumulate it, but industry estimates were that between 3 and 

4 million more tons would be accumulated by July. This would 

occur after the period of temporary Federal cash surplus, and 

perhaps after Federal action to stimulate the economy through 

new tax reductions and spending programs. But the business 

upswing would then be that much older, and stimulus from 

increased capital spending, according to present estimates, 

might by then be weak or nonexistent. All things considered, 

the potential disturbance to the economy seemed likely to be 

greater the longer a settlement was postponed.  

In any event, Mr. Bopp remarked, whether the settlement 

came earlier or later, postwar history suggested that steel 

negotiations were less troublesome to the economy when demand



1/12/65 -75

was strong. Thus, it would seem the prudent course for monetary 

policy in coming months to provide moderate stimulus to promote 

that demand.  

Turning to the nearer-term future and abstracting from the 

even keel required during the next few weeks, it seemed to Mr. Bopp 

that recent developments provided little basis for any general 

tightening of monetary policy. Over-all wholesale commodity 

prices remained stable; indeed, even the industrial commodity 

component appeared to have leveled off. Moreover, capacity in 

place ard that coming on stream seemed ample to meet prospective 

final demand. Meanwhile, unemployment remained unacceptably high 

and, with large prospective additions to the labor force in 1965, 

might well go higher.  

The balance of payments, of course, remained a difficult 

problem, Mr. Bopp observed. The widening deficit in the fourth 

quarter was discouraging; yet, the special factors responsible 

had to be kept in mind and the dangers of a tradeoff in favor of 

less ease had to be weighed carefully in the present business 

environment.  

On balance, Mr. Bopp would make no change in the general 

posture of monetary policy. He would be prepared to retain the 

recent flexibility in marginal reserve availability if needed to 

maintain substantially unchanged longer-term interest rates and



1/12/65 -76

moderate growth in money and credit. He was agreeable to the 

d:aft directive with Mr. Ellis' proposed amendment.  

Mr. Eryan said there were few developments in the Sixth 

District calling for comment. Trends in the District differed 

a little from those in the nation in a few areas, such as con

struction contract awards, the money supply, and total deposits 

and currency, but none of the differences seemed particularly 

significant. He would make a selective response to the staff 

questions.  

On the first question, regarding business activity, 

Mr. Bryan was perhaps not as concerned with the current inventory 

build-up as some others because, aside from fabricated metal 

products lines, inventory-sales ratios had not changed signifi

cantly. He also was inclined to expect considerable stability 

in productior over the next few months. Because capital 

expenditures were continuing to rise, an abrupt drop in out

put did not seem likely. His general answer to the first 

question, then, was that no great imbalances were obvious at 

the present time. But he would temper this conclusion with the 

observation that it was not the obvious but the obscure hazard 

over which one usually tripped.  

Regarding labor market developments, Mr. Bryan said he 

would withhold judgment for the reason Mr. Hickman had indicated.



1/12/65 -77

As to prices, it seemed to Mr. Bryan that if businessmen 

were expecting inflationary price developments their expectations 

apparertly were moderate and by no means universal. Otherwise the 

evidence of hedging would be clearer; the :iquidity of the economy 

and the Committee's policy of providing reserves would have provided 

ample means to expand as a hedge against an expected inflation, 

and by now the economy would have been tho;oughly overheated. He 

agreed, however, with those who had suggested that there was 

widespread concern about the prospects for the dollar. At a 

meeting of the directors of the Atlarta Bank last Friday many 

questions had been raised on the gold cover and on developments 

in the foreign exchange markets.  

With respect to the balance of payments, it appeared to 

Mr. Bryan that the prospect was for a turbulent situation in which 

massive forces, whose net effects he could not foresee, would be 

at work.  

Mr. Bryan said that at this time of the year he ordinarly 

would expect bank reserve positions to ease and corporations to 

be buyers of securities, but because of recent and prospective 

Treasury financing operations it was by no means certain that the 

Committee could count on such developments now. With an inter

national situation that at best was confused, and with a national 

situation in which there were confusing forces of great magnitude,



1/12/65 -78

he felt that a bill rate objective was once more the logical one 

for the Committee to pursue. He favored a policy of essentially 

even keel, with the bill rate in the 3.75-3.90 per cent range.  

Speaking to the longer term of perhaps three or four 

months, Mr. Bryan believed the money supply and reserves could 

not long continue to increase at recent rates without laying the 

groundwork for a considerable inflationary development. There 

had been an essentially moderate and probably sustainable increase 

in the money supply narrowly defined. Put in his judgment, under 

present circumstances some portion of time deposits should be 

included in the money supply--the Committee had to go back to the 

old idea that money was anything that did money's work. Recent 

increases in time and savings deposits had been rapid; they had 

expanded ac annual rates of over 15 per cent in the last three 

months and over 12 per cent in the last year. When some portion 

of these increases were added to the 4.[illegible] per cent rise that had 

occurred in the narrowly defined money supply in the last year, 

it revealed a development that Mr. Bryan did not think was sus

tainable. Similarly, he did not believe that total reserves, 

nonborrowed reserves, and reserves against private demand deposits 

could continue to increase for long at the rates that had been 

achieved in the last quarter without developing an inflationary 

potential.



1/12/65

Mr. Bryan noted that there had been a great deal of dis

cession today on the relative merits of moral suasion and 

legislation for dealing with capital outflows. He agreed that 

something had to be done. Generally speaking, he disliked moral 

suasion, although he thought it might work in the present situa

tion. But he would much prefer to have the interest equalization 

tax extended to banks, whether by administrative act or by new 

legislation. In his opinion some controls also would be required 

over direct investments abroad. Experience with loan administra

tion under section 13b of the Federal Reserve Act suggested to 

him that there was likely to be a problem of leakage--of loans 

made for nominally domestic purposes that in fact facilitated the 

flow of funds abroad.  

Mr. Shuford commented that economic activity in the 

Eighth District had been on a plateau during the early months 

of 1964 but rose markedly from August to the end of the year.  

District employment increased at a 3.7 per cent annual rate 

from August to November, recovering from the auto strikes in 

October. Manufacturing output rose at more than a 10 per cent 

rate from August to November and spending, as measured by check 

payments, increased at a rate a little higher than 3-1/2 per cent 

in that period.

-79-



1/12/65

Most indicators of banking activity in the District rose 

from August to December, Mr. Shuford observed, continuing the 

growth trend of the preceding eight months Total loans increased 

at more than a 1 per cent annual rate and investments expanded 

at nearly a 4 per cent rate. However, business loans in the 

District declined at nearly a 5 per cent rate from August to 

December, despite a rather marked rise in the St. Louis area.  

Deposits at District banks expanded from August to December at a 

much higher rate than loans and investments. Most of the growth 

resulted fron an increase in time deposits which rose at more 

than a 12-1/2 per cent rate; demand deposits increased at about 

a 7-1/2 per cent rate. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had 

been nominal recently.  

Mr. Shuford commented that he had found the staff questions 

and answers quite helpful, and he had no areas of serious disagree

ment with respect to either the facts or the conclusions presented.  

From discussions about prices with District businessmen and bankers 

he had gained the same general impression others had reported 

today--that there was increasing concern in the business community 

with respect to the position of the dollar and of the U.S. balance 

of payments. However, he had found a little more concern about 

possible price developments than some others had. Many of the 

businessmen with whom he had talked expected price advances as

-80-



1/12/65 -81

a result of the steel situation. They thought that the settle

ment in the steel labor negotiations probably would be in excess 

of the administration's guideline, and they expected the steel 

industry to attempt to raise prices even if the settlement was 

within the guideline. Various factors would, of course, set 

limits to these expected price increases, but they still would 

be in the upward direction and their effects would carry over 

into other areas. In sum, business and other opinion in the 

Eighth District was that there was somewhat more pressure on 

prices now than had been evident earlier.  

Mr. Shuford commented that it was clear from today's 

discussion that everyone recognized the international problem as 

paramount among those facing the Committee at present. He could 

not be sure what course he would favor with respect to moral 

suasion until he had given the question more thought. Like 

others, he would be highly reluctant to see any specific controls 

imposed to restrict the free flow of trade and of funds. But the 

situation was serious, and he felt that the System should take 

whatever helpful actions it could in the areas for which it was 

responsible. He thought that the interest equalization tax 

should be extended to banks with any desirable and feasible 

elaborations of its provisions, but he feared that this might 

take more time than was available in the circumstances. Perhaps



1/12/65 -82

the Sys:em should do what it could in the area of moral suasion 

rather than simply wait for enactment of legislation. Two years 

ago, in a roughly similar situation, the Committee had felt that 

actions outside the area of monetary policy were called for and 

had hoped that monetary policy could be relieved of part of the 

burden. Some actions had been taken by the Administration then, 

but the necessary fundamental improvement had not been achieved; 

even though the balance of trade had moved in a favorable direc

tion the country once more was faced with a serious problem.  

Actions beyond the System's jurisdiction again were called for, 

but the System also had to carry some part of the burden. In 

his judgment both lines of attack should be pursued.  

There were some questions in Mr. Shuford's mind as to 

the best approach, from psychological and other standpoints, to 

the matter of removing the gold cover requirement. However, he 

personally favored removing the requirement. entirely.  

Mr. Shuford favored no change in monetary policy for the 

reasons already discussed, of which the imminent Treasury 

financing was predominant. He appreciated Mr. Holland's analysis 

of the appropriate definition of even keel for this period. How

ever, he would not favor using dealer lending rates and similar 

factors as the main guide to operations; in his judgment short

term rates should continue to be the principal guide for the



1/12/65 -83

Desk, and he favored a bill rate in the range of 3.70-3.90 per 

cent. Mr. Shuford thought he had developed a better understanding 

of the meaning of "tone and feel" of the market from having 

participated in the daily conference call for the last four 

weeks. The Desk had been faced with some difficult problems 

during this period, and in his opinion it had done unusually 

well in dealing with them.  

Mr. Daane said that the prescription for policy in the 

next few weeks seemed crystal clear in light of the size of the 

Treasury refunding and the need for the market to digest the 

securities issued. He thought the current tone and feel of the 

market should be maintained as nearly unchanged in coming weeks 

as was humanly possible. Looking further ahead, he would be 

somewhat concerned about continuing the current degree of credit 

availability in light of the expansion already experienced and 

against the background of the present critical situation with 

respect to the balance of payments and the position of the dollar.  

But it was urnecessary to pursue this subject further at the 

present time.  

With respect to the new procedure that had been followed 

at this meeting and the previous one, Mr. Daane noted that the 

Committee was striving to improve its analysis of the economic 

and financial developments underlying its policy decisions and



1/12/65 -84

to improve its communications. He had fourd the staff questions 

and answers extremely useful in sharpening the focus on basic 

consideratiors. He was somewhat disturbed, however, by the fact 

that there was so much repetition in the discussion. Although 

he had not been present at the last meeting he had read the 

minutes closely and noted that many members seemed to feel an 

obligation to comment on every question in the list. In his 

judgmert, it would be more useful to view the staff's questions 

and answers as a briefing document that was extremely helpful 

in sharpening the Committee's focus on important issues rather 

than to assume that they imposed a requirement on every member 

of the Committee to present his own analysis of each issue. To 

his way of thinking the latter course unduly extended the length 

of the meeting and the length of the minutes. It also posed a 

problem with respect to the policy record entry and it interfered 

with the give and take of discussion.  

Mr. Balderston said he thought it was fortunate from the 

point of view of the Committee's relations with the Treasury that 

another alumnus of the Federal Reserve, in the person of 

Mr. Deming, would be occupying the position of Under Secretary 

of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs. He was prompted to make 

this observation especially because of his pleasure in noting 

that Mr. Mitchell and others had implied in their comments this



1/12/65

morning that finding solutions to the international problem was 

as important to the well being of the country as was the state 

of the domestic economy.  

For the immediate future, Mr. Balderston said, the 

Treasury refunding called for maintaining unchanged the conditions 

in the money market. He could not say now how far beyond the 

next meeting an even keel would be desirable, but he would not 

necessarily favor continuing to protect the Government security 

dealers indefinitely until they had disposed of all of the 

4-1/4 per cent bonds acquired in the refunding. In his view it 

was appropriate to expect the dealers to assume some risk in 

their operations. The draft directive as amended was acceptable 

to him.  

Mr. Balderston said he would like to make two further 

points now because he thought that Committee members should give 

particularly intensive consideration during the coming three 

weeks to the question of what action would be appropriate at 

the next meeting. His first point concerned the possible benefit 

to the balance of payments of moving toward restraint on bank 

credit. Some change in policy seemed vital to undergird what

ever special approaches to the problem were attempted. As long 

as domestic conditions were as strong as they promised to be in 

the first quarter, and as long as the flow of financial savings

-85-



1/12/65 -86

remained high, it appeared to him that monetary policy could make 

some contribution to the international situation without damage 

to the domestic economy. Such a contribution was the responsi

bility of the System. Domestic corporations appeared to be 

relying more on bank credit than on the capital markets to 

finance such investment as could not be financed with internal 

funds. For nearly three years, from 1952 through the third 

quarter of 1964, bank credit had expanded at a relatively stable 

rate, averaging about $19-1/2 billion a year, although the ratio 

of bank credit to total funds raised during that period had, of 

course, dropped somewhat. The annual percentage rate of growth 

was contin:ing at around 8 per cent. He was reminded of the 

willingness of the United States to finance German industry 

after the first World War through bonds yielding 8 per cent, 

knowing that the money was being invested in enterprises that 

would not earn so high a return.  

Secondly, Mr. Balderston said, despite the satisfaction 

ofter being expressed with respect to the health of the current 

domestic expansion, he thought a few telltale signs of illness 

were now beginning to appear. In his judgment one should not be 

content with the facts that the wholesale price index was no 

higher now than five years ago and that the rate of increase in 

the consumer price index had not accelerated; during those five 

years greater progress could have been made in increasing the



1/12/65 -87

price competitiveness of American goods. The rise in the U.S.  

trade surplus was traceable to the fact that other countries had 

inflated more than the United States had. It was not necessary 

that all of the gains in efficiency be translated into increases 

in wages and fringe benefits. The test of these propositions was 

that dollar holdings were being built up in foreign monetary 

centers, and these dollars were being used as bargaining instru

ments aga:nst the United States. He wanted to see this situation 

come to an end.  

Moreover, Mr. Balderston said, even the vaunted price 

stability was showing signs of terminating; in the fourth quarter 

wholesale prices excluding farm and food products rose 0.6 per 

cent. He would not want to say that the economy was faced with 

price inflation but, given the fact that the international situa

tion was the prime consideration at the moment, he thought there 

should be progress in the direction of reducing the prices of 

exportable goods.  

Mr. Balderston observed that bank credit should be used 

constructively, not speculatively, and he noted that earlier in 

the meeting Mr. Irons had expressed a concern similar to that 

which he felt on this score. The present expansion thus far 

had been characterized by balance and by the high degree of 

prudence evident in the decisions of business managers. But



1/12/65 -83

with the change that seemed to have occurred recently in inventory 

policies he sensed that there now was an element of speculativeness 

abroad that the Committee was helping to feed through its current 

monetary policy.  

In a concluding observation, Mr. Balderston said that 

solution of the longer-run problem of the continuing accumula

tion of dollars by European central banks was of vital importance, 

and this problem had to be attacked by both the Administration and 

the System. Much discussion of the problem seemed to blur the 

fact that France had enough dollars to demand substantial amounts 

of gold, to say nothing of Spain and other countries. He would 

like to see the Government's foreign spending and lending 

attacked first; the country was earning a substantial return on 

private long-term investments abroad. He would favor attacking 

next the term loans of banks and direct investments in European 

countries. If moral suasion was to be employed in any form he 

hoped that it would be accompanied by sanctions of some sort 

because otherwise it could have inequitable effects.  

Chairman Martin said he had found the discussion today 

stimulating and worth while; it was good to have the opportunity 

to bring the various viewpoints of members more sharply into 

focus. He thought Mr. Hickman had made a useful contribution 

in his analysis of the staff's answers. Because the matters



1/12/65 -89

being dealt with involved human choice and judgment, there inevitably 

were many imponderables.  

The Chairman said he had little to add to the discussion 

this morning. It seemed perfectly clear that everyone was in 

favor of maintaining an even keel in the money market for the next 

three weeks. There was some disagreement as to how "even keel" 

should be defined under present circumstances, but the Committee 

always was faced with this kind of problem in its deliberations.  

In light of a Treasury financing so successful that it led to 

some complications, he thought it was apparent that the conditions 

in the money narket prevailing during the current period should be 

maintained as closely as possible over the next few weeks.  

Chairman Martin favored the amendment to the staff's 

draft directive that Mr. Ellis had suggested; namely, to delete 

the words "may continue to" in the second paragraph. He noted 

that Mr. Robertson had suggested the addition of a clause at the 

end of this paragraph, but he questioned whether the clause would 

add much in view of the different shades of emphasis around the 

table. He suggested that a vote be taken on the staff's draft 

directive with Mr. Ellis' proposed amendment.  

Mr. Hayes suggested adding the following language at 

the end of the first paragraph: "particularly in view of the 

current unsettlement in financial markets abroad." Mr. Mitchell



1/12/65

concurred in the suggestion, noting that a considerable amount of 

concern on this subject had been expressed in the discussion today.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directd, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive: 

In light of the economic and financial developments 
reviewed at this meeting, and taking the current Treasury 
refunding into account, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's current policy to facilitate continued 
expansion of the economy by accommodating moderate 
growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 
supply, while seeking to avoid the emergence of 
inflationary pressures and to strengthen the inter
national position of the dollar, particularly in view 
of the current unsettlement in financial markets abroad.  

To implement this policy, and recognizing that 
international uncertainties and shifting seasonal 
pressures require a larger than usual degree of 
flexibility in operations, System open market opera
tions over the next three weeks shall be conducted with 
a view co maintaining about the same conditions in the 
money market as have prevailed in recent weeks.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, February 2, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thought the Committee 

was making progress on the matter of the directive. He noted 

that Mr. Daane had spoken about the length of the minutes under 

the new procedure, and he had some sympathy with Mr. Daane's 

comment. However, the Committee did have the problem at each

-90-



1/12/65

meeting of urcovering the various shades of emphasis in the views 

of members. He thought progress was being made in this connection 

also.  

The Chairman noted that the Committee had planned to discuss 

the question of quantification in the directive after conclusion 

of the regular agenda today. He proposed that the discussion be 

deferred until the date of the next meeting, to allow more time 

for members to think about the question. Also, Mr. Mitchell had 

distributed a memorandum on this subject today that would provide 

a good basis for the discussion, and it would be desirable for 

the members to have time to study this document. (Note: A copy 

of Mr. Mitchell's memorandum has been placed in the files of the 

Committee.) 

There were no objections to the Chairman's suggestion.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-91-



Attachment A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) January 11, 1965.  

Draft language for current economic policy directive for consideration 
by the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting 

on January 12, 1965 

In light of the economic and financial developments reviewed 

at this meeting, and taking the current Treasury refunding into 

account, it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current 

policy to facilitate continued expansion of the economy by 

accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, 

and the money supply, while seeking to avoid the emergence of 

inflationary pressures and to strengthen the international 

position of the dollar.  

To implement this policy, and recognizing that international 

uncertainties and shifting seasonal pressures may continue to 

require a larger than usual degree of flexibility in operations, 

System open market operations over the next three weeks shall be 

conducted with a view to maintaining about the same conditions in 

the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks.


