









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 2, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Patterson 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Garvy, Holland, and Taylor, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Mr. Partee, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser. Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



11/2/65

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, 
Jones, Tow, Billington, and Green, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis 

The Chairman reported that the Secretary had received advice of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, St. Louis, and 

Dallas of Mr. Patterson, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Atlanta, as a rember of the Federal Open Market Committee to fill the 

unexpired portion of the term beginning March 1, 1965, and that Mr.  

Patterson had executed the oath of office prior to this meeting of the 

Committee.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, Daniel H. Brill was elected 
to serve as Economist of the Committee until 
the first meeting of the Committee after 
February 28, 1966, with the understanding that 
in the event of the discontinuance of his 
official connection with the Board of Governors 
he would cease to have any official connection 
with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings 
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 
September 28 and October 12, 1965, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period



11/2/65 -3

October 12 through October 27, 1965, and a supplemental report for 

October 28 through November 1, 1965. Copies of these reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs said 

that the gold stock would remain unchanged again this week. This was 

something more than three months without a cnange. The Stabilization 

Fund still had nearly $80 million of gold on hand, which should suffice 

to see the U.S. through the rest of the month unless unexpected new 

orders appeared. He expected the French would be in for no more than 

their minimum monthly order of 30 tons; the Bank of France seemed to 

have taken in no dollars during October and night in fact have expe

rienced some reserve losses. On the London gold market, Russian sales 

had enabled the Pool to pay off the heavy deficits incurred in earlier 

months, and the Pool account was now just about even. Between now and 

next spring it seemed quite possible that the Russians might have to 

sell another $250 million or so of gold. Demand on the London market 

continued to run at high levels, however, with recurrent upward pressure 

on the price, and it was questionable how much of the prospective Russian 

sales would be retained by the Pool for distribution to the member 

central banks.  

On the exchanges, Mr. Coombs continued, sterling had remained 

firm with no need for intervention either by the Bank of England or 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to support the rate. From time 

to time the Bank of England had been able to take in sizable amounts 

of dollars. Judging from the movement of the Bank's account with the



11/2/65 -4

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, it would appear that during September 

and October the Bank of England took in a total of nearly $600 million, 

of which $190 million was used to repay short-term debt to the Federal 

Reserve and U.S. Treasury. In addition to this net inflow of dollars, 

the Bank of England had probably managed to pay off more than $300 

million of maturing forward contracts. Yesterday and today, partly 

reflecting a special gold transaction, the Bank had taken in a further 

$260 million, of which $100 million was used for a further repayment on 

the swap line with the System, thus reducing Bank of England drawings 

outstanding to $600 million.  

On the other European exchanges the markets had been remarkably 

well balanced, with outflows to the U.K. probably serving to offset 

surpluses that might otherwise have appeared. In the case of Switzerland, 

further progress had been made in paying down the System's swap debt, 

which would be reduced by Friday, November 5. to no more than $31 million.  

There was some expectation in the market, Mr. Coombs noted, that 

the year end might see an unusually severe squeeze in the Euro-dollar 

market. The risk had been heightened by the recent appeal of the Com

merce Departmert to U.S. corporations to pull back the bulk of their 

short-term balances abroad. As the Committee would recall, the heavy 

reflux of such balances following the inauguration of the voluntary 

restraint program last February was largely offset, so far as the Euro

dollar market was concerned, by a compensating inflow of short-term 

funds from Italy. If a new squeeze on the Euro-dollar market should



11/2/65 -5

now develop, it would be hard to find a similar source of a new funds to 

help keep the n.arket in balance.  

There followed discussion, at the instance of a Committee member, 

concerning the record of French gold acquisitions and indications of tne 

recent trend in the French payments position.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
October 12 through November 1, 1965, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs then presented several recommendations for the con

sideration of the Committee. First, a System drawing of $100 million 

under the swap line with the Bank of Italy would mature for the first 

time on November 26, 1965, and he recommended its renewal if necessary, 

which as of the moment seemed likely.  

Renewal of the $100 million drawing, 
if necessary, was approved.  

Second, Mr. Coombs recommended renewal of a dra ing of $125 

million by the Bank of England under its swap line, which drawing would 

mature on November 26, 1965, if the Bank of England should so request.  

This would be a first renewal.  

Renewal of the drawing of $125 million, 
if the Bank of England should so request, 
was approved.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs noted that a $5 million equivalent swap of 

German marks for Dutch guilders would mature on November 30, 1965. He 

recommended its renewal for another three months in the likely event



11/2/65

that the System was unable to acquire sufficient guilders in the mean

while to liquidate the transaction.  

Renewal of the $5 million equiv
alent swap of German marks for Dutch 
guilders, if necessary, was approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period October 12 through October 27, 

1965, and a supplemental report for October 28 through November 1, 1965.  

Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

System open market operations have been conducted since 
the last Committee meeting against the background of a 
gradual but persistent erosion in the prices of Government 
securities. In this environment the System has sought to 
maintain an even keel in the money market as the Treasury 
priced and offered for sale the 4-1/4 per cent note on 
which the subscription books closed yesterday.  

In fact, conditions have been som?what more comfortable 
in the money market in the past two weeks than prevailed 
earlier, as the Desk paid increased attention to the 
cautious atmosphere in which short-term rates tended to 
edge higher. Federal funds have traded mainly at 4-1/8 
per cent, but they also traded at 4 per cent or below on 
several days. Pre-week end trading at 4-1/4 per cent has 
been rare and member bank borrowing from the Reserve Banks 
has been more moderate than in a number of months. Dealers 
have generally been able to finance their portfolios at 
lower rates than have prevailed for some time.  

The System's role during most of the recent interval 
was, of course, conditioned by the usual need to absorb 
reserves over mid-month. Thus, open market operations 
withdrew $355 million in the period from October 12 through 
last Wednesday. Since then, we have supplied $1,067 million 
reserves on a commitment basis--and $891 million of this has 
taken the form of purchases of Treasury bills in the market.



11/2/65

The Treasury's offering of a 4-1/4 per cent 18-month 
note yesterday for cash subscription was intended to be as 
routine as possible. However, while the new issue was 
generally regarded as fairly priced, no real enthusiasm 
developed for the issue--partly because the larger banks 
and corporations are reluctant to commit for 18 months in 
the face of expected cash demands upon them. Smaller banks 
and public funds are reported to have nad a fairly good 
interest in the issue, but the Treasury will not have a 
good idea of the size of the subscriptions until later today.  
Market ideas of the allotment percentage on large subscrip
tions have been scattered over an unusually wide range of 
from 25 to 40 per cent, with the weight of sentiment probably 
toward the upper end of this range.  

It is not easy to put one's finger on the forces behind 
the erosion of Treasury note and bond prices since mid-October.  
There has been no extensive dealer liquidation or investor 
selling such as occurred in September. The decline has taken 
place in spite of an apparent subsidence of the fears of an 
imminent shift in monetary policy that contributed to the 
accelerated price decline of later September--although some 
concern on this score may linger on. Market participants 
seem to be impressed instead with the other demands falling 
on their bank and nonbank customers and the very limited 
investor appetite they foresee for Government issues as the 
economy continues to expand. There is as well considerable 
market talk that the volume of corporate bond issues in the 
discussion stage for either public offering or private place
ment is mounting. With a near record volume of bond proposals 
going before the voters today, the municipal market also 
exhibits an air of caution. Thus, the Treasury's new 4-1/4's 
will have to be distributed in an environment where underlying 
expectations are for bond yields to work higher over the months 
ahead. In general, the markets continue sensitive to new 
economic, financial, or other developments.  

In the Treasury bill market the redistribution of the 
March and June tax anticipation bills from the banks that 
bought them to dealers and corporations has proceeded far 
more smoothly than had been generally expected a month ago.  
Corporate demand for the March bills was particularly good.  
At the moment, however, a cautious atmosphere prevails in 
the bill market. In part, this reflects some dealer dis
appointment that the Treasury's refinancing was on a cash 
rather than an exchange basis so that there has been no 
reinvestment demand for bills stemming from the sale of 
rights. System purchases in the market of almost $900 
million Treasury bills during the past three days have 
served to moderate, but not offset fully, the upward pressure



11/2/65

on rates. Yesterday's auction resulted in average issuing 
rates of about 4.08 and 4.22 per cent on the 3- and 6-month 
issues, the highest levels since early 1960.  

Some mention should also be made of a slight stiffening 
in other short-term rates. Certificates of deposit are 
sporadically available at major New York City banks at 
4-1/2 per cent for 3-month maturities, and the 3-month CDs 
of prime name banks are trading at rates just under 4-1/2 
per cent in the secondary market. The major sales finance 
companies have also been adjusting their rate schedules 
higher so that they are now generally offering 4-3/8 per 
cent on paper maturing in over 60 days, up 1/8 per cent from 
the rates prevailing in late September.  

The timing of the next instalment of the Treasury's 
financing program--an offering of $2 to $2-1/2 billion 
June tax anticipation bills--has not been finally deter
mined. The bills will probably be auctioned in two to 
three weeks and paid for a week later. Thereafter, the 
Treasury should be out of the market until early next year.  

Mr. Balderston asked whether Mr. Holmes felt that the degree 

of restraint intended by the Committee's directive had been lessened 

recently, and Mr. Holmes replied that it was hard to make an over

all statement. Interest rates had risen gradually and in an orderly 

way to a higher level, reflecting the pressure of demand on the 

supplies of funds. At the same time, statistical measures of bank 

reserve positions, including net borrowed reserves and Federal funds, 

had reflected a comfortable, though certainly not an easy, situation.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open 
market transactions in Government securities 
and bankers' acceptances during the period 
October 12 through November 1, 1965, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been

placed in the files of the Committee.



11/2/65

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

Little in the way of hard new economic facts has become 

available since the last meeting of the Committee. What 

fragments one can come by, however, might be read to suggest 

even greater current strength and stability in the economy 
than were apparent earlier. Partial data on industrial pro
duction lend hope that the production index for October may 
hold at the slightly reduced September level, even with steel 

output down an additional 10 per cent, and preliminary clues 

on the unemployment picture are encouraging.  

On the demand side, the well-timed moderate fiscal 

stimulus of retroactive and higher social insurance payments 

is being reflected in a resumption of the rise in retail sales, 

after a slight sales decline in August and September. And 

despite continued scattered press reports of price boosts for 

individual commodities, the official indexes have shown little 

change in average industrial prices in recent months.  

This is entirely too comforting a picture, and I have 

been looking for gremlins under the tables and behind the 

charts. One can easily find many. For example, the Bureau 

of Labor Statistics may be deluding us with numbers suggesting 

that prices have stabilized. I don't have to advise this 

Committee to take the official price measures with some 

skepticism, or to suggest that the indexes may have been 

understating the price advance over the past year, as they 

undoubtedly understated the actual price declines of the 

early '60's. The official measures may very well again be 

concealing further advances, and in this connection one must 

note that purchasing agents are reporting higher prices with 

increased frequency.  

But these measures could also be concealing signs of price 

weakness in areas where over-capacity is beginning to emerge.  

Given the mores of industrial pricing practice, which encourage 

publicity about price advances but tend to conceal concessions 

and reductions, and given some known biases in the official 

data collction and manipulation techniques, we can't look 

to measures based on quoted prices alone to provide early 

warning of impending weakening of demands. On balance, and 

taking into account the most recent increases in copper and 

aluminum, my impression is that the general level of prices 

is continuing to creep up--uneven and moderately, but never

theless up.  
Another gremlin threatening to derail the economy from 

the sustainable growth track is the increasing imbalance in 

the structure of production. This imbalance is evident from 

a number of perspectives. For example, over the past twelve



11/2/65

months production of business equipment has increased more 
than twice as rapidly as production of consumer goods, even 
including automobiles. Again, manufacturing industries' 

spending for new plant has consistently outpaced shipments 
of products since 1963, and by a steadily ;idening margin.  
Again, as best as we can estimate, industrial capacity appears 
to have grown by between 5 and 6 per cent this year, as 
against a growth in real final demand for goods of between 
4 and 5 per cent.  

Have we reached the point where businesses are beginning 
to doubt the capacity of markets for their expanded and 
modernized plants? Evidently not yet. The latest survey of 
business capital spending plans will predict capital outlays 
to rise next year about as rapidly as they did this year.  

Such business optimism poses policy makers with a two
edged problem. In the short run, the continued rapid pace of 
spending for plant and equipment will tend to sustain order 
backlogs, and maintain upward pressure on machinery and metals 
prices and on wage rates f6r scarce skilled labor. But over 
the longer run--and I speak here of months, not years--one 
must wonder whether this business optimism will be validated 
by the rest of the economy's performance. The experience of 
1956-57, when plant spending accelerated while final demands 
were slipping, should serve as warning of the dangers of 
business overoptimism. Moreover, even during the rapid 
expansion in activity earlier this year, capacity utilization 
didn't reach the peaks of earlier booms, and with growth in 
industrial output temporarily stalled by steel inventory 
liquidation, the overall utilization ratio has edged down a 
little. We calculate, roughly, that it will take continued 
gains in GNP of $10 and $12 billion a quarter to keep the 
utilization ratio from slipping further.  

I have probably succeeded in finding enough gremlines.  
They shouldn't detract from the very fine performance the 
economy is turning in at the moment, but we do have to antici
pate the challenges to policy that are developing. As I see 
it, the complex of future problems includes the following: 
(1) a need to put final demands--housing and State and local 
outlays, as well as consumer spending--on a faster growth 
track than has been the case recently, in order to avoid 
increasing the imbalance in output; (2) a need to moderate 
the stimuli now operating on business investment plans, so 
that real as well as financial resources will be available 

for increases in other types of spending; (3) a need to repress 
inflationary expectations, which I suspect tend to stimulate 
business capital spending more and sooner than they affect 
consumption habits; and (4) a need to keep total demands, 
for both investment and consumption, moving up at a $10 to 
$12 billion per quarter rate in order to keep resource 
utilization rates from slipping.

-10-



11/2/65

For monetary policy, the problem is aggravated by the 
likelihood that fiscal policy will become somewhat less 
stimulative over the first half of next year. Moveover, 
fiscal changes will bite directly into the kinds of final 
demands that need stimulation; the social security tax 
increase will be offset only in part by the second stage of 
the excise tax cut.  

Frankly, it is difficult to conceive of the monetary 
policy that would reconcile all cf these potential aggrega
tive and compositional problems. Higher interest rates, 
particularly at the long end, are likely to fall as heavily 
on final demands as they are likely to restrain business fixed 
investment. The consequent slowing in aggregate demand might 
kill any budding inflationary expectations, but I see no 
assurance that it would tend to restore balance in the composi
tion of output or keep resource utilization rates high. Alter
natively, rolling back interest rates at this juncture might 
serve to encourage even more expansive business investment 
plans, which in turn would lend aid and comfort to factors 
making for upward price and wage pressures, particularly in 
the sensitive commodity and machinery areas.  

It is probably fortunate, therefore, that at this time 
even keel considerations urge a "no change" policy, or at 
least a policy that would lead to no change in long-term 
interest rates. This is not because I am convinced that it 
is positively the right policy fcr the prospective domestic 
ecoromic scene, but because I see unhappy consequences arising 
from alternative measures.  

In reply to a question, Mr. Brill said the capacity utilization 

rate was estimated currently at about 89 per cent. During the steel 

inventory buildup the rate got close to 91 pr cent, but then it 

began to slip.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Interest rates have edged up in most sectors of the money 
and capital markets over the past two weeks, in an environment 
of continuing investor caution and hesitancy. The Treasury's 
cash refinancing offer, limited to an 18-month -aturity as 
expected, failed to buoy long-term markets, and heavy seasonal 
System buying of bills in recent days met a similar lack of

-11-



11/2/65

response in the short-term area. Indeed, even the announce
ment that the Treasury would be borrow:ng somewhat less at 
the end of this month than had been anticipated earlier was 
greeted without a ripple in market quotations.  

Many market participants evidently are holding firmly 
to the view that any near-term change in interest rates is 
almost bound to be upward. The economic justification for 
this view is basically the same as that which has propelled 
the stock market on to new highs in very heavy trading and 
with growing evidence of speculative exuberance. A continua
tion of vigorous economic expansion well into 1966, dominated 
by rising military expenditures and further substantial gains 
in business capital outlays, seems certain to be accompanied 
by a more than proportional increase in aggregate credit 
demands. But financial saving is likely to expand more 
gradually in line with rising incomes, it is argued, so that 
market forces will tend to bring upward pressures on interest 
rates.  

For these market analysts, the principal uncertainty 
in the near-term outlook is what the response of the Federal 
Reserve to stronger demand pressures might be, since provision 
of sufficient reserves would tend to balance supplies and 
demands at higher aggregate levels. Even with this uncertainty, 
however, the range of possibilities seems to include only 
stable rates at the one extreme to a substantial upward adjust
ment at the other. Hence, these investors see little risk in 
betting on higher rates, at least for a time.  

There is a good deal of evidence, it seems to me, to 
support this view. To be sure, newly available flow of funds 
data for the third quarter show a decline in total funds raised, 
from a first half average annual rate of $71 billion to about 
$59 billion. But this is misleading. Two-thirds of the decline 
came in Federal borrowing and reflected, the absence of a third 
quarter cash financing. Partly as a result, there was an even 
sharper drop in the Treasury cash balance, and funds provided 
to the credit markets by the private sectors of the economy 
actually rose. Another result is the relatively heavy fourth 
quarter Treasury financing schedule, the first instalment of 
which contributed to a large bank credit increase in October.  

The rest of the decline in net credit expansion last 
quarter was accounted for by a slowing in bank loan growth, 
mainly to nonfinancial business. The drop, however, was 
from a very high rate of expansion in the first half that 
had reflected a variety of temporary influences. Perhaps some 
further moderation in business loan growth can be anticipated 
in the current quarter, as the inventory shift in steel and 
related industries proceeds. But business loans in total

-12-



11/2/65

have continued to show considerable strength--though there 
was a more than seasonal decline in New York last week--and 
borrowing by the metals industries has held up surprisingly 
well.  

More generally, it seems to me that business needs for 
external financing are much more likely to be rising than 
falling in the months ahead. Growing capital outlays, expand
ing working capital requirements, relatively thin liquidity 
positions, and a leveling in profits and hence in the flow 
of internal funds are all factors pointing to increased reliarce 
on outside sources of funds. It is difficult to predict whether 
such financing is likely to fall more on the banks or on the 
capital markets, although current interest rate relationships 
the limiced receptivity of the public market, and the presump
tion that market rates are cyclically high seem to me to favor 
the bank loan route. Even so, there is likely to be continuing 
supply pressure in the bond market. Corporate offerings were 
light in October, but the calendar has built up sharply in 
recent days, and a substantial increase is now indicated in 
November volume.  

In view of the continuing weakness in housing starts, 
one might look for some slackening in mortgage lending volume 
This is by far the largest taker of finds in financial markets, 
so that even a marginal reduction could free substantial credits 
for use by other sectors. But residential construction expenc
itures have been well maintained this year, reflecting higher 
values per housing unit, and mortgage debt has continued to 
expand at a steady rate. The three major types of institutional 
lenders for which data are available, moreover, have continued 
to report mortgage loan commitments running well above year
ago totals.  

In other credit areas, too, there seems little prospect 
of significant reductions in the demand for funds. Consumer 
credit has been growing at an advanced rate this year, and so 
long as incomes are rising and sales of cars and household 
durables remain strong, there is little prospect for a slowing 
in credit use. New security issues of State and local govern 
ments have about equaled the 1964 volume, though with some 
month-to-month variations; given the intensity of demands for 
local services, there would seem to be more likelihood of 
increase than decrease in the months ahead.  

Thus there appear to be no important areas in which 
credit demands are likely to wane, except for a temporary and 

probably mild slackening in inventory financing An on top 
of these continuing demands, credit markets must accommodate 
the current increase in Treasury financing and prospective 
further expansion in capital-markets-type business financing.  
More of these credit demands probably could be met, either 
directly or indirectly, through sales to individual investors

-13-



11/2/65 -14

rather than through financial intermediaries, but such a 
development usually is accompanied by rising interest rates.  
If the institutions are to finance a larger share of total 
credit expansion, on the other hand,there will have to be 
some acceleration in deposit growth. This would require the 
maintenance of a competitive interest rate structure-
particularly in the case of CD's--and, for the banks, probably 
a more rapid growth in total and nonborrowed reserves.  

Continuing strength in credit demand thus seems likely 
before long to present the Committee with the problem of 
reconsidering its interest rate, bank reserve, and credit 
growth objectives as relationships among these variables 
continue to shift. For the present, however, the Treasury 
cash refinancing would seem to dictate an even keel policy, 
aimed at maintaining current rate levels and extending at 
least to the mid-November payment date and perhaps for some 
time after, depending on market conditions and dealer progress 
in distributing the issue. Looking further ahead, the decisicn 
whether or not to make an overt change in policy will of course 
rest on broader economic considerations, but developing pres
sures in credit markets could well force the issue.  

In reply to a question, Mr. Partee said he would expect a more 

rapid growth of total bank credit in the final months of 1965 than 

during the summer. On the other hand, nearly everyone expected a 

slower rate of growth than in October. In between there were shades 

of opinion. The consensus seemed to be that the growth rate of non

borrowed reserves might be about the same as the average since March.  

Personally, he leaned a little toward the high side, as his statement 

had indicated.  

Mr. Mitchell referred to Mr. Partee's comment that flow of 

funds data for the third quarter showed a drop to $59 billion in total 

funds raised, from a first half annual rate of $71 billion. He asked 

for further explanation, and Mr. Partee cited as a reason the fact 

that the Treasury cash balance was much lower at the end of September 

than at the end of June. He went on to provide a more detailed analysis

of the figures,



11/2/65

Mr. Hersey presented the following statement on the balance 

of payments: 

Straws in the wind in the past three weeks have given 
us no clear indication of which way the balance-of-payments 
wind is blowing. One quick gust gave us trade figures for 
September that look quite satisfactory But another gust 
showed an adverse balance in September, on current and 
capital transactions combined, that was much larger than 
anyone thought possible who had seen the preliminary 
indicators.  

For the third quarter as a whole, early trials at 
piecing together estimates for the various categories of 
current and capital transactions have foundered on trying to 
guess capital outflow for direct investment. We simply have 
no way of telling whether direct investment outflows were 
nearer a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of a billion 
dollars, which was the average for the first half of 1965, 
or half a billion, as in the first three quarters of 1964.  
A drop to this lower level was hoped for, and seemed con
sistent with the known plans for overseas capital expenditure.  
But if American capital expenditures abroad are still growing, 
and especially if companies are worrying about the possibility 
of new controls or taxes on outflows, then it might not be 
very strange if the level of outflow in the third quarter 
were still rather high. It will be several more weeks before 
we have statistics to clear up this uncertainty.  

The figures we do have show that the temporary causes 
of the payments surplus in the second quarter--large reflows 
of liquid funds and of bank credit, a low level of new foreign 
security issues, and a trade surplus swollen by strike-delayed 
shipments--either were no longer present in the third quarter 
or were much attenuated. Some other temporary factors need 
to be considered, connected chiefly with the sterling situation.  
I will mention these in connection with a longer-range comparison 
I would like to make between the quarter just ended and the 
first three quarters of 1964.  

That base period is before the sterling crisis broke, and 
before the great wave of U.S. capital outflows of late 1964 
and early 1965 got going. The wave of capital outflows in
cluded bank loans and also corporate financing of direct
investment subsidiaries abroad, and some parts of both we e 
motivated by fears of coming governmental interference. The 
interference came, with the activation of the Gore Amendment 
and the voluntary programs, and it successfully halted the 
bank loan part of the wave. If we take the official settlements

-15-



11/2/65

measure of our deficit and apply certain adjustments for 
temporary factors, we will find that there has been an 
apparently significant net improvement over the past 15 
months or so. But the U.S. balance of payments has not 
been brought into equilibrium, and the reserve gains of 
Continental Europe have not been halted.  

In the third quarter of 1965 U.S. liquid liabilities 
to foreign reserve holders rose, U.S. reserves declined, 
and France prepaid debt obligations to us; the total financ
ing by these official transactions was somewhat under $500 
million. Seasonally adjusted (by near y $600 million) that 
meant a small adjusted surplus, on the official settlements 
basis, of about $100 million. But because the statistics 
were affected by the liquefying of the United Kingdom's 
holdings of American corporate securities, we ought to 
adjust the figure again; this brings the adjusted surplus 
up to about $300 million.  

This very considerable surplus was a highly temporary 
phenomenon. It was concentrated in July and August, and it 
was caused by an unusually rapid buildup in the balances held 
here by foreign commercial banks, including U.S. bank branches.  
That buildup, which amounted to nearly $700 million, reflected 
the weakness of sterling during the summer, and also, in some 
degree, the movement of Italian reserve funds through Italian 
commercial banks to the Euro-dollar market. In September the 
movements of Italian funds continued, but sterling's position 
changed very greatly, and it was undoubtedly for that reason 

that the inflow of foreign commercial bank funds to the 
United States fell off in September.  

To get away from these fluctuating special influences 
and closer to measuring the underlying position of the U.S.  
balance of payments in the third quarter of 1965, the device 
I would use is to substitute for the actual inflow of 
foreign commercial bank funds an average amount that might 
reasonably be expected over the years, assuming a strong 
upward tilt in the trend of outstanding balances. I would 
put this quarterly growth expectation at about $200 million.  
The actual inflow in the July-to-September quarter was much 
more than this, half a billion more. Without the abnormal 
extra inflow, the adjusted payments balance would have been 
not a surplus of over a quarter of a billion, but a deficit 
of around $200 million.  

A somewhat similar calculation applied to the first three 
quarters of 1964 gives an adjusted deficit at that time of 
about $350 million a quarter on the average. In the quarter 
just ended the adjusted deficit was appreciably less than that.

-16-



11/2/65

In appraising this change and trying to judge whether 

the improvement will be sustained, we should look at the 

components. The trade surplus, after dropping in the first 
half of 1965, is back up nearly to its earlier level; further 
improvement is likely, but may be slow for a while. There 
has been a great cut in the flows of bank credit and liquid 

funds; these will certainly remain far below the 1964 levels, 
but may increase somewhat. And there has been worsening in 
sone other categories--among these, perhaps, though we can't 

be sure, direct investment cutflcws.  

We emerge with a rather mixed picture, at a time when 

the United States ought to be approaching the coming inter

national monetary reform talks with clear prospects of 

equilibrium ahead. Perhaps we should be asking ourselves 

again some basic questions. For example, is current monetary 

policy doing all it reasonably can, given the primary claims 
of the domestic economic situation, to help bring about the 
long-run realignment of cost levels that is needed if American 
companies are to be encouraged to export more from the United 
States instead of from more and more plants abroad? 

There followed a discussion, at the request of Mr. Maisel, 

regarding the effect on the U.S. balance of payments of swap operations 

as compared with liquidation by the British cf their portfolio of U.S.  

investments.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy 1/. Mr. Hayes, who 

began the go-around, made the following statement: 

1/ In light of the discussion at the October 12 meeting, staff ques

tions and comments relating to factors bearing on monetary and credit 
policy had not been distributed prior to this meeting. As a part of 
a transition to new procedures, however, the introductory section of 
the "green book" (Current Economic and Financial Conditions) had been 

expanded to include additional material of a type simiilar to that 
formerly included in the staff comments on the questions. There had 

also been distributed a "blue book" (Money Market and Reserve Relation

ships), which analyzed in an integrated way the material formerly dis

tributed to the Committee in the staff comments on the sixth question 

and in the memorandum on member bank reserves--past and prespective.  

Copies of the "green book," the "blue book," and the supplement to 

the"green book" have been placed in the files of the Committee.

-17-



11/2/65

Today it is quite obvious that because we are in the 
midst of a Treasury refinancing program we have no alterna
tive but to maintain policy unchanged and thereby facilitate 
the Treasury's operation. The next time we meet we shall 
have additional data at hand which may or may not provide 
support for some prompt change of posture. I would stress, 
however, that a policy change can rarely be justified on 
the strength of developments during only a few recent weeks.  
Usually the evidence of the latest weeks merely serves to 
confirm convictions that have been building up over a much 
longer period on the basis of wht have seemed to be more 
lasting tendencies in the economy. Today offers a good 
opportunity to take a look at some of these more persistent 
factors bearing on policy determination.  

I should like to start with the balance of payments 
and our general international problem, for it is in this 
area that we may see the most urgent need for action in tne 
near future. Clearly, balance of payments developments 
have taken a turn for the worse since our last meeting.  
The current estimate of $465 million for the September 
deficit has dashed any hopes tha, the backslide in the 
third quarter would be held to a minimum. It looks now 
as if the third quarter regular deficit on a seasonally 
adjusted basis might be at the annual rate of $2.4 billion-
although a substantial part of this reflects further liquida
tion of the British long-term security portfolio. The 
deficits for the four weeks ended October 27 aggregated 
about $400 million, with especially heavy payments in the 
third week to Canada and Venezuela. It looks now as if 
the regular deficit for the full year 1965 right easily 
approach $2 billion--perhaps $1.6 billion after special 
items such as debt prepayments. This result strikes me 
as anything but encouraging, especially in the light of the 

firm assurances by President Johnson and Secretary Fowler 
at the recent Bank-Fund meetings that our payments gap will 
be closed. Also, the U.S. is entering into a series of 
difficult negotiations on the future of the international 
financial system--negotiations in which a major premise is 
that our deficit will indeed soon be eliminated.  

There has been a very sharp cut in foreign bank lending 
and a heavy reflux of liquid funds this year, yet we are a 
long way from equilibrium. There is no evidence as yet of 
underlying forces that would close the gap and permit ultimate 
relaxation of the special restraints that have been placed on 
capital exports. And I see no reason why we should assume 
that the economy is to be saddled permanently with such 
artificial restraints. In fact the country has been told

-18-



11/2/65

often that these are temporary measures. For the time being 
they must not only be retained but must in all probability be 
strengthened in view of the payments problem's urgency. I 
believe we should seek a firmer monetary policy both to give 
more support to the voluntary program and to reinforce the 
hope that it may eventually be abandoned. Over the longer 
run this might require a different mix of monetary and fiscal 
policy. This is not the occasion for a detailed analysis of 
the ways in which a firmer monetary policy could help our 
balance of payments. But there is no lack of evidence that 
this probably would be a fruitful approach. Certainly most 
of the other major industrial nations Lelieve we have cone 
too little along these lines, the latest comments in this 
vein having been presented at the recent OECD session in 
Paris.  

Turning to the domestic economy, we find that it exhibits 
considerable underlying strength and that the business out
look remains excellent. The current rundown of the excess 
of steel inventories is depressing some monthly indicators, 
but expansionary forces elsewhere in the economy are strong, 
and total output keeps growing at a good pace. GNP grew 
more rapidly in the third quarter than in the average of 
the preceding three quarters, and the improvement is some
what greater if final demand alone is considered. It is 
striking also that the latest survey of business capital 
spending plans shows considerably more strength for 1966 
thar did the comparable surveys for 1964 and 1965.  

The labor market appears to be tightening further. The 
unemployment rate for married mer has reached 2.2 per cent, 
which means that it is back down to the low range of the 
mid-1950's; and long-term unemployment has been lower than 
at any time since 1957. A further sign of labor tightness 
lies in the attainment of a new all-time high in the help
wanted advertising index. With plant capacity also showing 
a high rate of utilization, there is ample reason to fear 
emerging cost and price pressures. Admittedly the upward 
tilt of the major price indices does not show any recent 
acceleration--but the current state of business profits 
and business euphoria, as reflected, for example, in the 
stock market, is certainly conducive to price increases.  
Cost-price stability is always one of our major objectives.  
In the present international setting this objective becomes 
doubly important. Thus, not only does the economy look 
strong enough to absorb a tightening of monetary policy 
without adverse effects, but also such a policy change may 
even be required in the near future to help prevent an 

inflationary outburst.

-19-



11/2/65

The third major area to be considered is that of bank 
credit and liquidity. Bank credit appears to have expanded 
strongly at weekly reporting banks through the first three 
weeks of October, even after allowance for the effects of the 
October 11 tax anticipation bill financing. For the third 
quarter we find contrasting cross-currents, with bank credit 
growing less rapidly than in the first half while money supply 
and other liquidity indicators, including total nonbank liquid 
assets, rose more rapidly. Many of these intra-year gyrations 
in the relative expansion rates of bank credit, bank reserves, 
and liquidity can be traced to the first-half buildup and third
quarter decline of U.S. Government deposits. By and large, the 
growth of the financial indicators for the first nine months 
remains ahead of last year. For example, total bank credit 
rose at an annual rate of 9.4 per cent, money supply plus time 
deposits at 9.1 per cent. While growth in bank reserves was 
appreciably slower, this is amply accounted for by the sizable 
change in deposit mix. The overriding fact is that the rate 
of growth of the various intermediate financial variables 
this year has been excessive. On several occasions over 
the last few years the Committee has tried to damp down an 
8 per cent rate of growth in bank credit. With the recent 
growth rate even higher, and the margin of safety of unused 
resources in the economy decidedly lower, a renewed effort 
along these lines appears fully warranted.  

As I said at the outset, there is no problem in deciding 
on policy for the next three weeks. Open market operations 
should be conducted to maintain the existing condition of the 
money market, and the directive might well be adopted sub
stantially as proposed by the staff, except that the apparent 
deterioration of the balance of payments should be recognized.  

By the time of the next meeting, however, it is not 
unlikely that we may wish to give serious consideration to 
a possible discount rate increase. Three weeks ago I spoke 
of the possibility of a prompt increase of 1/4 per cent, this 
modest size of increase being suggested by the shortness of 
the period between Treasury financings, solicitude for the 
rather nervous state of the money and security markets, and 
the absence of adequate domestic statistical support for a 

stronger move. However, action at tha: time was not feasible.  

It now seems to me that we should probably be thinking in 
terms of a 1/2 per cent increase, especially because one of 

the prime reasons for a discount rate rise would be to obtain 
beneficial effects on our balance of payments and on psycho
logical attitudes abroad on the dollar and our determination 

to defend it.

-20-



11/2/65 -21

As we have recognized at earlier meetings, another 
factor that may suggest the need for early discount rate 
action is the untenable situation that seems to be developing 
with respect to the Regulation Q ceilings and the growing use 
of bank promissory notes. Our Bank addressed a letter to the 
Board of Governors on this matter last week, and copies were 
sent to the other Presidents. The key point I would like to 
make today is that action to raise the Regulation Q ceilings, 
in the present setting, might well set in motion market 
forces that would make a discount rate increase almost 
inevitable--yet such action on Regulation Q may soon be 
forced upon the Board by the logic of market deelopments.  
All of this tends to confirm my view that the time for 
decision on discount rate action may not be far distant.  

Mr. Shuford observed that economic activity continued to 

advance strongly. Although some commonly used measures indicated a 

pause in recent months, most areas of the economy were still expanding.  

Evidences of pause reflected primarily cutbacks in steel, which inci

dentally were less than some analysts had feared and now appeared to 

have about run their course.  

Because of interruptions and spurts of activity caused by 

strike threats and other factors, the course of activity might be 

clearer if a somewhat longer period was used for comparison. Viewed 

in that manner, activity had been rising markedly. Personal income 

had risen about 8 per cent since a year ago, compared with a 5.4 per 

cent average rate since 1960. Industrial production had increased 

6.6 per cent as against a 5.0 per cent rate since 1960. Employment 

had risen 2.4 per cent since last September while the population of 

labor force age had grown less than 2 per cent. An indication of a 

strong demand at near-capacity levels was that wholesale prices,



11/2/65 -22

which changed little from 1960 to 1964, had gone up 2.3 per cent in 

the last 12 months.  

Eighth District activity had likewise shown strength over 

the past year, Mr. Shuford noted. In the District, steel production 

was of less importance than in some other regions, and the upswing 

in economic activity had continued during the late summer and early 

fall. Payroll employment had risen at a 4 per cent rate since June, 

with relatively sharp gains in manufacturing in the St. Louis and 

Little Rock areas. The unemployment rate had declined since June 

in each of the District's four largest labor markets. Manufacturing 

output in the District had been at a high level recently and rose 

moderately from August to September while production in the nation 

reflected the cutbacks in steel.  

It appeared to Mr. Shuford that the upward trend in national 

economic activity would continue in the near future. In addition 

to the forward momentum and widespread optimism, both fiscal and 

monetary actions had been quite stimulative. The Government had 

increased social security payments, salaries and wages, and defense 

spending, and it had reduced excise taxes. As a result, the "full 

employment budget" surplus had declined from a rate of about $6.7 

billion in the first half of 1965 to an estimated zero in th: last 

half, the lowest level in many years. The money supply had expanded 

at a relatively rapid 4 per cent annual rate over the past year, and

since summer the rate had been especially high.



11/2/65 -23

As to policy, Mr. Shuford felt that additional monetary 

restraint was going to be needed to limit inflationary pressures.  

The economy wa, operating near capacity, and at this time the rate 

of increase in spending appeared to be faster than the growth in 

ability to produce.  

Also, somewhat higher interest rates relative to those of 

other countries should be beneficial to the chronic U.S. balance of 

payments problem, which so far was not being solved but only avoiced.  

The voluntary credit restraint program, as it applied to banks, had 

worked well, but it was only a stop-gap measure. Such restrictions 

on movements of funds were fundamentally undesirable, and other more 

fundamental adjustments must be made. Although many of the needed 

actions were in other areas, monetary policy must continue to con

tribute to the fullest possible extent The change toward a more 

expansive fiscal policy had placed upward pressure on interest rates 

and at the same time reduced the need for stimulative monetary actions 

However, Mr. Shuford continued, it might be premature to take 

an overt tightening step at this time when the economy was adjusting 

to the runoff of steel inventories. Then, too, a Treasury financing 

was going on and, unless the need was urgent, the Committee should 

move slowly. For the next three weeks he favored maintaining money 

market conditions about as they were, but he thought the Committee 

should not be disturbed if there was some additional firming from 

market demands. Although the discount rate was low relative to other 

money market rates, he would not suggest increasing it at this time.



11/2/65 -24

However, he agreed with Mr. Hayes that it would deserve careful 

consideration in the near future. The policy directive suggested 

by the staff appeared satisfactory.  

Mr. Patterson said economic information that had become 

available for the Sixth District since the last meeting of the Com

mittee showed no general change in previously established trends.  

Although District employment statistics for the latest month showed 

a slower rate of gain than characterized the preceding months,neither 

those nor other data suggested any new tendency toward "overheating," 

on the one hand, or a downturn on the other.  

Turning to the national scene, Mr. Patterson commented that 

the people in the room, the President's economic advisers, the press, 

bankers, and others seemed to be unanimous about the desirability of 

not allowing the economy to become so overheated that it would 

eventually end up in a major downturn. There was unanimous agreement 

on the desirability of continuing an orderly rate of expansion. The 

trouble, as the Committee knew, lay in the great divergence of opinions 

about the policies to follow in order to continue the orderly expansion.  

Lack of unanimity about the proper posture suggested that even minor 

changes might have results that could turn out to be quite contrary 

to those desired or expected.  

A discount rate increase to 4-1/4 per cent, with policy 

designed to keep the short-term rate structure just about where it 

was now and an upward revision of Regulation Q ceilings, would be



11/2/65 -25

something that many persons might go along with, Mr. Patterson 

believed. This would recognize the tightening of the money market, 

including the part that was self-imposed, ard might make policing 

of the discount window less difficult. Nevertheless, by making it 

easier for banks to compete for time deposits, such a package might 

restrict bank credit expansion very little. There could, of course, 

be a variation: raising the discount rate slightly but making no 

amendment to Regulation Q. Such a step, by limiting the banks' 

ability to compete for time deposits, would seem to be more effective 

in limiting bank credit expansion.  

On the other hand, Mr. Patterson continued, an increase in 

the discount rate, whether to 4-1/4 or 4-1/2 per cent, accompanied 

by a shift in policy designed to push the short-term rate structure 

near the new discount rate, would be a move that to many persons would 

seem unwarranted by present economic and credit conditions. How 

effective it would be in limiting bank credit expansion might well 

depend on the action taken in respect to Regulation Q.  

There were other possible combinations of those three factors-

raising the discount rate, shifting policy actions in respect to short

term rates, and the treatment of Regulation Q, Mr. Patterson said.  

Nevertheless, it seemed evident that a change in the discount rate 

might or might not be restrictive, depending upon the accompanying 

actions. The basic decision whether to tighten or not remained with 

the Committee despite any action taken on the discount rate.



11/2/65 -26

No new developments since the last meeting of the Committee 

seemed to Mr. Patterson to justify further tightening at this time.  

A continuation of the policy adopted at the last meeting therefore 

seemed appropriate.  

Mr. Boop noted that in recent weeks there had been another 

flurry of announcements and stories in the business press concerning 

price increases and various upward price pressures. As had been 

recognized in Committee meetings on many occasions, it was often 

the price hikes that made news, while little comment was recorded 

on the other side of the ledger. In the past week he had spoken with 

several businessmen in the Third District in an attempt to gain some 

further insight into the extent of any price pressures. What he found 

bore out in di:ection, but not in magnitude reports of recent price 

behavior.  

Representatives of industries ranging from electrical equip

ment, chemical;, and instruments to metals, machinery, petroleum, and 

construction materials described industry conditions as characterized 

by noticeable, but not massive, elimination of price concessions and 

by a few increases in some base prices (offset to an extent by decreases 

in some others). Most companies were finding competition as stiff as 

ever. It was also interesting to note that several of those contacted 

felt that general price pressures might develop in 1966 which later 

would be reflected in their own firms and industries.



11/2/65 -27

Mr. Bopp said he had also spoken with several of the large 

Philadelphia banks to find out more about recent reports of selective 

increases in interest rates. In general, the banks were finding 

credit demand strong and had been making a few selective increases 

in interest rates when possible. Typically, the rate increases ranged 

from 1/4 to 1/2 per cent. Criteria considered in the selective rate 

hikes were varied, but they included such factors as type of loan, 

permanence of a borrower's relationship with the bank, and credit 

rating. Most of the banks had raised their standards of eligibility 

for the prime rate. Fear of unfavorable customer reaction, however, 

was a deterrent to many selective rate increases. As one banker put 

it: "How do you explain to the borrower that he has been selected 

for a selectively higher rate?" 

Turning to policy, Mr. Bopp commented that the Treasury financ

ing of course precluded any action at this time. Beyond that, however, 

he continued to be impressed by the moderation existing at the present 

high level of economic activity. Though demand was strong, capacity 

to produce was keeping pace with output, and price increases were 

holding within narrow bounds. It was true that unit labor costs had 

risen since the steel settlement, but this seemed attributable to the 

decline in production as industries worked off excessive inventories.  

When that adjustment was completed, he would look for a return to the 

pattern of stability characteristic of the past few years.  

On the international front, Mr. Bopp felt that the trend of 

direct corporate investment abroad would bear close watching in the



11/2/65 -28

fourth quarter. The prognosis offered by the staff was uncertain. In 

any event, however, monetary policy was not the most promising method 

of dealing with outflows of direct investment.  

In the current business expansion, Mr. Bopp said, monetary 

policy thus far had contributed to the goal of growth without infla

tion. The longer the present high level of economic activity was 

continued in relation to capacity, especially with some firming in 

prices, the more difficult it became to judge the appropriateness of 

current policy. For the present, however, he was inclined to recom

mend no change. The proposed directive was agreeable to him.  

Mr. Hickman commented that the optimism that emerged at the 

time of the steel settlement in early September might now be moderat

ing. Such a change in sentiment would be welcome and in itself would 

not endanger a continuation of the general business expansion.  

Within that expansion some of the business news was, and would 

continue to be, unfavorable. Steel output dropped about 20 per cent 

in the past two months, and was expected to decline another 10 per cent 

or so between now and the year end. Cutbacks in steel were resulting 

in rising unemployment in major steel centers, particularly in the 

Fourth District. Auto output, although high, would add little to the 

production index in this quarter, and might be a cause for concern 

later on if inventories became excessive. In September, new orders 

for machinery and equipment declined for the second successive month.  

Residential construction remained sluggish, and corporate profits in 

the third quarter were unlikely to show much increase over the second 

quarter level.,



11/2/65 -29

On the price front, Mr. Hickman said, there still was no concrete 

evidence of general inflation, although actual transactions prices might 

be increasing more than the official indexes. Prices, along with busi

ness inventories, were areas where the Committee knew too little. A 

large part of the sharp boost in unit labor costs in September would 

probably prove to be temporary, as was the case last October when there 

was a similar drop in production caused by the auto strike. Even so, 

serious production or labor imbalances were always possible at current 

levels of activity, and either or both of those developments could put 

increasing pressure on prices and profits.  

On th, financial side, some of the recent apprehension in the 

bond market seemed to have subsided, but the market remained nervous, 

and extremely responsive to bearish news of any kind. On the brighter 

side, it was encouraging that corporate demand for Treasury bills had 

reappeared as yields on the 91-day bills moved above 4 per cent. Stable, 

or perhaps even slightly lower, bill rates could result if loan demand 

at commercial banks were to moderate, making it unnecessary for banks 

to sell large amounts of Governments. While growth in bank credit had 

slowed progressively in each quarter of the year, the annual rate of 

gain thus far exceeded that for 1964 as a whole.  

Mr. Hickman recommended no change in monetary policy at this 

time, especially in view of the Treasury financing program ahead. If 

the balance of payments deteriorated seriously, or if he thought that 

tighter money would remedy the present situation, he might support a



11/2/65 -30

more restrictive policy. In the absence of such evidence, and with the 

likelihood that some of the domestic business news would get worse before 

it got better, he saw no grounds for changing policy now.  

Accordingly, Mr. Hickman supported the draft directive. He 

recommended attempting to hold net borrowed reserves below $150 million, 

bank borrowings around $500 million, and the Treasury bill rate close to 

4 per cent.  

Mr. Maisel said that as he reviewed the minutes of the last 

meeting and listened to some of the presentations today, he detected 

three basic arguments for raising the discount rate. (1) The expan

sion of the economy had been too great or might become too great; there

fore, a rise in interest rates and a slowing down of credit availability 

was necessary. (2) Because of pressure fron the Administration, bank 

lending rates had gotten out of line. The banks were not willing to 

fight the Administration by themselves, but would like the Federal 

Reserve to take the lead for them. If rates tended up, banks could 

ration with a different technique. It would mean either that more 

credit would be available or that less credit would be available, 

depending upon which one felt was the better situation. (3) The 

balance of payments deficit required a shift in monetary policy.  

Obviously, how one felt with respect to those arguments 

depended on one's own analysis of the current situation. Mr. Maisel 

believed progress had been good and should be maintained.  

Mr. Maisel did not agree with the concept that there would 

be a recession because the economy was too prosperous. Such a concept



11/2/65

assumed either that demand would run cut or that the type of demands 

would differ so that the economy would slip into a recession before 

they became effective. He felt the needs were too evident. In fact, 

he agreed with the opposite point of view that the most dangerous 

possibility was that demands could rise too high. He might like to 

agree with the idea that the economy was getting too much capacity, 

but he did not agree. Moreover, if the Committee was concerned that 

demand might be too great six months or a year from now, clearly it 

would be best to get as much investment and production as possible 

at present instead of attempting to curtail it through monetary action.  

The Committee should want the fullest possible use of resources and 

additions to supply rather than a waste of resources. He did not agree 

that one could argue that a discount rate increase was necessary both 

because of a redundancy in supply and because of shortages.  

With respect to the balance of payments, Mr. Maisel believed 

that the current approach of depending on specific policies was proper, 

both for the short and long run. He felt that before monetary policy 

was used to deflate the economy for balance of payments reasons, the 

Administration had other and better ways of achieving equilibrium 

through military or aid expenditures or tax policies. Clearly, if 

the balance of payments effects of monetary policy adopted upon a 

careful consideration of domestic needs were favorable, that was all 

to the good.  

Mr. Maisel was not impressed by the views of countries with 

a dismal record of handling their own currencies as to what would be

-31-



11/2/65 -32

good for the U.S. and the world. He did believe, however, that the 

U.S. international posture required a major reorientation with respect 

to what the U.S. and other countries could and would do. The balance 

of payments problems were international. They were based on the greater 

willingness of the U.S. to give military support and aid, and on develop

ing U.S. trade and investment policy to aid foreign countries, without 

an equivalent movement abroad. For those reasons, before raising the 

discount rate for balance of payments reasons in conflict with basic 

domestic goals, he would want a statement from the Administration that 

all other possible balance of payments policies had been considered 

and had been rejected in favor of a belief that tighter monetary policy 

was the best method of correcting the balance of payments problem.  

Mr. Maisel felt that the posture of the Committee for the past 

three weeks had been satisfactory, judging that additional reserves had 

been furrished to help moderate the interest rate rise. He thought a 

further moderalion would be still better and hoped the Committee could 

continue along present lines.  

Mr. Daane noted that an even keel policy clearly was called for 

through the period until the Treasury financing was out of the way.  

Looking beyond that, he would simply reiterate that the question of 

timing was all important, and his personal views were twofold. First, 

the U.S. could find itself at the end of the year with a much worse 

balance of payments for 1965 than it had anticipated or others had been 

led to anticipate. This would weaken the U.S. position in the negotia

tions on international monetary reform now in process. Second, the



11/2/65 -33

System might already have gone too far, in terms of accommodating a 

distorted flow of funds, in meeting those credit demands that, as Mr.  

Partee had indicated, were concentrated on the banking system. On both 

counts, he was worried that the Committee might find itself answering 

Mr. Hersey's question--whether it had done enough with monetary policy 

for balance of payments purposes--in the negative. On the domestic 

side of things, the Committee might find itself in the unhappy position 

of locking the barn door after the horse was stolen.  

Mr. Daane did not think that a discount rate increase, whenever 

it became feasible, would result in deflating the domestic economy. He 

thought, rather, that it would permit a more balanced flow of funds and 

eliminate those market distortions that affected the economy adversely.  

A discount rate increase would not conflict, in his opinion, with basic 

domestic goals; in fact, it could very well prove to be in furtherance 

of those goals, particularly the sustainability of the current expansion.  

For the present, Mr. Daane favored a policy of even keel, and 

he would .ccept the staff draft directive.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that the Commmittee seemed to be precluded 

from considering any change in policy today because of the Treasury 

financing. Therefore, he would reserve his comments until the next 

meeting of the Committee. He did wish, however, to call the Com

mittee members' attention to the summary report of the staff of the 

International Monetary Fund, presented following the recent annual



11/2/65 -34

consultation of the IMF with the United States. (A copy of the report, 

which was distributed to the Committee for its information by Mr. Young 

on a confidential basis, has been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

He especially called attention to pages 10 to 16, dealing with U.S.  

balance of payments policy, which contained a statement of views 

different from those expressed by Messrs. Hayes and Daane.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that the general trend of the econony 

was still extremely strong. He thought the rate of recent expansion 

was unsustainable, and at some point steps must be taken to try to 

dampen it. The Committee, of course, should never be in the position 

of trying to push the economy down. The Committee, however, should 

try to curb the rate of expansion so to avoid excesses that were getting 

more and more to the point of explosion. While the Treasury financing 

admittedly precluded any action at this particular time, he would favor 

taking corrective action shortly.  

On the balance of payments, Mr. Shepardson thought the situation 

was serious and was not showing the improvement that had been hoped for.  

There were many causes, and he agreed with Mr. Maisel that other areas 

should be attacked. Nevertheless, with money as fluid an item as it 

was, and in view of the abundance of credit that the Committee had 

been making available, the situation deserved attention, even without 

regard to the question of closing the interest rate gap vis-a-vis Europe.  

Part of the outward flow of funds was inevitible if excess funds were 

available to flow to Europe. If the excess was cut down somewhat, he



11/2/65 -35

could not believe that people were going to sacrifice meeting the 

needs of their permanent, regular customers at home for whatever 

margin of higher return they might obtain abroad. If excess credit 

availability were cut down at this time, that was bound to have some 

effect on the movement of funds that was aggravating the balance of 

payments problem.  

Mr. Shepardson said he would accept the proposed policy 

directive for this meeting. The Committee had been supplying reserves, 

apparently, at about the rate that the current market situation justified.  

He would let market pressures, as they developed, continue to reflect 

themselves in an interest rate crawl upward.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

It seems to me that we have no basis for changing 
monetary policy at this meeting, either with regard to 
our own independent responsibilities or in terms of the 
consideration we owe others.  

For one thing, we are clearly in a period when the 
considerations of even keel should take precedence. And 
I would argue that the condition ought to prevail at 
least through the next meeting date of the Committee if 
not beyord, given the touchy nature of the current market 
and the fact that it will have to absorb another cash 
financing in bill form even before the current coupon 
issue cash refunding is likely to be fully digested.  

Furthermore, I would argue that--even keel aside-
current economic and financial developments do not call 
for further credit tightening at this time. To sum up 
my views, I see no sign of cumulating price increases 
domestically and no worsening in those balance of pay
ments accounts alleged to be interest-sensitive. At the 
same time, credit conditions have already tightened enough 
over the past three months to make me want to wait to 
judge the extent of that dampening influence on economic 
activity before considering any further steps in such a 
direction.



11/2/65

On this point of judging our influence to date, let 

me say something more. I sometimes detect a note of frus

tration in comments around this table. They point to the 

fact that "bank credit is still rising at an undiminished 

rate" and "business activity is still expanding rapidly," 
and seem to deduce that our monetary tightening to date 

has therefore had no effect and that still further turns 

of the screw are necessary to brng this expansion under 
control.  

On the other hand, the larger bankers repeatedly tell 

us that their primary response now to a reserve squeeze is 

not sales of liquid assets, but more aggressive issuance 

of liquid liabilities--CD's, promissory notes, and the 

like. Thus, the first indicator of a progressive tighten

ing of bank positions is not a slowing of bank credit and 
deposit growth--as it used to be.--but a more frenetic effort 

to push out more bank liabilities, with consequent congestion 
of those market sectors and an accompanying upward escalation 

of money market rates. This makes monetary tightening less a 
quantitative restraint upon the bank credit side of the finan

cial structure, and more a generalized pressure upon interest 
rates and terms throughout our financial markets. This kind 
of credit restraint has a more diffuse influence than before, 
and may be more effective and equitable than in days gone by 

when the effects of credit tightening were reflected more 

directly in the growth of bank credit. Some supervisory 

problems are being spawned by this change in banker reflexes, 
but we should not be fooled into thinking we have developed 
some slippage in our monetary brakes that requires us to 

compensate by jamming down thepedal still harder. If we keep 
trying to slow bank credit down by further and further tighten
ing we may succeed in generating overall financial conditions 

so tight as to make the economy falter.  
Our chances of misjudgment on this score are compounded 

when we allow for the likelihood that any consequent falter
ing will not develop until several months after we act.  
Monetary conditions influence real economic activity with 
considerable lags. Consequently, it is almost irrelevant to 
point out there has been no let-up yet visible in business 
investment as a result of the tighter credit conditions dat
ing from last August. Practically speaking, most of the 
economic statistics we are reading now date back to within 
a month of the rapid interest rate rise in September, and 
several more months are likely to be needed before the avail
able statistics can reasonably be expected to reveal any 

significant response in real business activity.

-36-



11/2/65

To be sure, sometimes the onrushing pressure of events 
denies us the chance to wait for conf:rming evidence of the 
influence, or lack of influence, of our actions. At such 
times, we have to substitute our guess as to likely responses, 
and move on with additional policy measures calculated to 
compound those responses. But this moment, in my judgment, 
is not one in which conditions are deteriorating so rapidly 
that we cannot wait to determine our further actions in the 
light of observed responses. I think we have the time to 
"wait and see," and that not to take it would be a mistake.  

These views also lead me to regard the suggestions 
as to an early increase in the discount rate as being dis
tinctly premature. To the extent that advocates of higher 
discount rate ideas are exercising their frustrations over 
our appa-ent lack of monetary ccntrol, I suggest they are 
looking for results in the wrong places and with the wrong 
timing in mind.  

To the extent that a higher discount rate is felt 
necessary to reinforce the administrative restraint at the 
discount window, I suggest it is simply not needed at this 
juncture. We are indebted to one of Sylvia Porter's last 
letters for reminding us how often and how long our discount 
windows have functioned with discount rates below the three
month bill rate. She has counted 21 different occasions 
when that has happened since the end of 1955, with a com
bined duration of nearly three full years out of the past 
ten. Discount operations may not always have been ideal 
during this period, but they were generally effective. I 
would expect any discount officer today who is worth his 
salary to be able to deal with whatever additional borrow
ing demands are generated by the fact that three-month bills 
have now joined the already long list of many other bank 
assets and liabilities whose interest rates are higher than 
the discount rate.  

Finally, to the extent that a higher discount rate is 
envisioned as simply realigning one or two technical rates 
with the rest of the market, I suggest the underlying mar
ket analysis is badly misconceived. With big banks as much 
in debt to the Reserve Banks as they already are, and with 
so large a volume and variety of other highly interest
sensitive bank liabilities outstanding, I think it is 
reasonable to expect the whole structure of day-to-day mar
ket interest rates to adjust upward almost pari passu with 
the discount rate, with reverberations also extending 
throughout all debt maturity ranges. This kind of policy 
shock might be therapeutic for a speculative "run" on the 
dollar, or a wave of inflationary spending; but these 
emphatically are not our problems now.

-37-



11/2/65

What we need to do now is to be very careful to adjust 
the force of application of our policy tools to the power 
of the excesses we want to curb. Where those excesses are 
as few, as mild, and as conjectural as we face today, our 
policy should be equally gentle and tentative in application.  

I think there is a good chance that the not-so-gentle 
change in credit conditions already effectuated this fall is 
about as strong a medicine as a prudent monetary doctor ought 
to order for a patient in the current rather delicate con
dition. Accordingly, I favor a policy of "no further change" 
between now and the next meeting of the Committee. By "no 
further change" I mean to emphasize that I would want the 
Manager actively to resist--through an easing of bank reserve 
positions--any tendency for either short-term or long-term 
rates to move further upward. With that in mind, I would 
go along with the draft directive as submitted by the staff.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business in the Fifth District con

tinued to improve and prospects for the near-term future remained 

quite favorable. The Richmond Bank's latest survey showed a further 

extension of business optimism, with more than half of the respondents 

expecting better-than-seasonal advance, in the weeks ahead. Business 

loans at the weekly reporting banks had risen more than seasonally 

and, in recent weeks, at a considerably more rapid rate than for all 

U.S. weekly reporters. Rates of insured unemployment were at unusually 

low levels in ll parts of the District, and evidences of tightening 

labor markets continued to be seen.  

So far as the national economy was concerned, it seemed to 

Mr. Wayne that the Committee could be confident of a rising level of 

activity for the remainder of the year.  

In the policy area, while both the domestic business picture 

and the U.S. balance of payments situation might provide some arguments 

for more restraint, the overriding considerations for the immediate

-38-



11/2/65 -39

future were the new Treasury financing, which demanded even keel, and 

the unsettled situation in the capital markets. Mr. Wayne was still 

concerned about the possibility of bottlenecks and rising costs at 

home, and he was impressed by the recent purchasing agents' report 

that the list of goods in short supply was the largest in ten years.  

So far as he could see, the external accounts remained a problem, but 

he had doubts about the contribution that could be expected on that 

score from an extra degree or two of monetary firmness. For the 

present he was reluctant to take any action that might disturb what 

he considered to be a delicately poised situation in the capital 

markets, especially in view of the fact that even keel was obviously 

in order for the next three weeks.  

Mr. Wayne added that he agreed with Mr. Patterson that in 

looking at any discount rate change, careful consideration should be 

given to other policy aspects. A whole constellation of rates was 

involved. The prime rate would surely move up, and the Treasury 

would find itself confronted with the effect on debt management 

imposed by the 4-1/4 per cent statutory limitation on coupon issues.  

A change in the discount rate would create additional problems for 

the Treasury.  

Mr. Wayne concluded by saying that he favored maintaining 

about the same money market conditions as had been experienced over 

the past three weeks, with no change in the discount rate at this 

time.



11/2/65

Mr. Clay reported that the pattern of economic activity in 

the Tenth District continued essentially unchanged, with the agricul

tural performance better than nationally and the nonagricultural 

performance poorer than nationally. The fact that agricultural income 

was showing a larger increase than nationally was attributable in 

part to larger increases in crop output. In addition, the higher live

stock prices over the past year had had a greater impact in the Tenth 

District because of the greater importance of the livestock industry 

in that region.  

Despite the improved agricultural income situation, growth in 

nonagricultural activities compared unfavorably with the country as a 

whole. Nonfarm employment had increased slightly in recent months, 

but the increase was distinctly less than nationally. The employment 

gains that had been achieved were primarily in the Government sector 

and secondarily in manufacturing and services.  

There had been no striking changes in the national economy, 

Mr. Clay noted. Developments were about in line with expectations.  

If there had been any significant deviation from that generalization, 

it was the same that had applied ever since last spring, namely, that 

activity had been somewhat greater than anticipated. That advance had 

been achieved in a relatively orderly fashion and without any marked 

break-through in prices. It must be recognized, however, that the 

sensitivity of price advances was greater under present circumstances 

than earlier.

-40-



11/2/65 -41

In the period immediately ahead, Mr. Clay concluded, Treasury 

financing would appear to call for an even keel unless there were 

compelling reasons to the contrary. Such reasons were not apparent.  

Even apart from the Treasury financing, a ccntinuation of essentially 

the current policy would seem to be in order at this time. The draft 

policy directive appeared satisfactory.  

Mr. Scanlon said that economic conditions in the Seventh 

District continued to reflect overall expansion in output, employment, 

income, and credit. Order backlogs in major industries other than 

steel continued to increase. Labor markets in the District remained 

very tight.  

In contrast with the United States over all, District centers 

had reported in pressive gains in homebuilding permits in recent months.  

Builders and building material firms believed there had been an 

appreciable tightening in the availability of mortgage credit in 

recent weeks, with some credits that banks had been accommodating 

now going to savings and loan associations.  

Price pressures, on balance, continued to be up and appeared 

to be strengthening. The outlook for the agricultural sector remained 

favorable. A sample of country banks reported farm land values had 

continued to rise and in October were up 7 per cent from a year 

earlier. Gains were particularly large in the corn belt, where income 

had risen because of large crops and high livestock prices. Most 

country bankers expected a continued heavy demand for loans to pur

chase feeder cattle and farm equipment.



11/2/65 -42

The continued advance in business activity was reflected in 

the financial sectors, Mr. Scanlon noted. Both the money and capital 

markets remained firm. Short and long-term rates had continued to 

creep upward since the last meeting, while, ntermediate--term rates 

had risen relatively more and, in the Government sector, now exceeded 

yields on long-terms.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon agreed that the Committee's posit.on 

today, because of the Treasury financing, must be one of even keel.  

However, it seemed clear that seasonal forces would be exerting upward 

pressure on rates in the weeks ahead. He hped the Committee would 

not feel it necessary to offset those pressures completely for it 

seemed to him that to follow a rate objective rigidly in a period 

of upward seasonal pressure would, in effect, amount to adopting a 

more expansionary policy. He found the draft directive acceptable, 

and he would not change the discount rate at this time.  

Mr. Galusha reported that Ninth District economic news con

tinued to make pleasant reading. Preliminary reports indicated a 

3.8 per cent uremployment rate for September, which was low even by 

the standards cf earlier this year. Industrial activity, whether 

measured by production worker manhours or use of electrical power, 

continued to increase.  

District cash farm receipts for January through August, up 

6 per cent from a year ago, were at a ten-year high. Crop receipts 

were the same as last year, but livestock receipts were up sharply.



11/2/65 -43-

Further, the likelihood was that cash receipts for all of 1965 would be

up quite sharply from 1964. Prices--both for crops and for live-

stock--would probably hold near present levels. District livestock

output was increasing, though, and crop output should exceed the

1964 output by a fair margin. Cattle traders in the Rocky Mountain

area expected present price levels to hold for 12 to 15 months, with

a gradual weakening as hog numbers built up.

Two other food price components were deserving of mention,

Mr. Galusha added. The field run price of potatoes was $1.75, con-

trasted with the peak of $5 reached last spring. The cost of food

packaging was the one area of price increase. Wheat sales to Russia

and China by Canada had focused attention in the District on the

archaic U.S. farm policy. While the political implications inherent

in this and associated national attitudes bearing on international

trade and the maritime industry were imposing--in fact almost in the

area of the sacred and untouchable--the economic potentials, includ-

ing balance of payments assistance, were impressive.

On the banking side, Mr. Galusha continued, there had been

no instances in the District of which he had knowledge where alloca-

tion of credit had been made other than on the basis of normal criteria.

Two instances had occurred where milling companies were forced off the

prime rate by a national bank, both instances involving First National

City Bank of New York. Twin City banks had been approached by

national companies in increasing numbers to fill credit gaps left



11/2/65 -44

by defecting coastal banks. Because the applicants were usually seeking 

a rate advantage, arguing the social prestige attached to their business, 

their blandishments had been resisted and the usual criteria had been 

generally applied.  

As for monetary policy, it appeared to Mr. Galusha that in view 

of the Treasury financing an even keel was appropriate. He also com

mented favorably on the new look in the green book.  

Mr. Swan said that the Twelfth District economy seemed to be 

progressing, with no marked recent changes. The District was lagging 

behind the country in residential construction, gains in retail sales 

were somewhat less than for the country as a whole, and the unemployment 

rate was higher, but these were all factors that had existed for some 

time.  

The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in the Pacific Coast 

States dropped in September from 5.8 to 5.6 per cent as a result of a 

small rise in employment and a small decline in the labor force. Employ

ment in defense-related industries continued to expand, and the upward 

trend seemed likely to be maintained during the rest of the year. Orders 

for commercial aircraft were playing an important part in the rising 

employment in the aerospace industry, which, even though it produced com

mercial planes, was part of the whole defense industry complex. It was 

of interest to note that despite the District's high overall unemploy

ment rate, one Southern California aircraft company reportedly ,as 

negotiating with the Labor Department for a movement of 1,500 unemployed



11/2/65 -45

workers from the Long Island area, stating that the supply of skilled 

workers in Southern California had been exhausted. Local unions 

reportedly were contesting the company's position.  

Mr. Swan reported that supplies of fruits and vegetables for 

District canners were smaller than in 1964. Canners had been quoting 

higher p-ices than a year ago for a number of items, including peaches, 

pears, tomatoes, and tomato products.  

For the three weeks ended October 20, the increase in District 

bank credit resulted entirely from expansion of security holdings.  

Weekly reporting banks showed a decline in loans, the primary factor 

being a rather sharp decline in business loans. At the same time, 

although reserve positions were somewhat easier, purchases of Federal 

funds rose rather sharply after the middle of October.  

Mr. Swan agreed that the Committee should maintain an even keel 

policy in the next three weeks, given the Treasury financing. He shared 

Mr. Partee's concern, however, that perhaps three weeks from now the 

Committee would be confronted with some difficult questions with respect 

to the relationships between net borrowed reserves, interest rates, and 

the rate at wh ch total reserves were supplied. While the Comittee 

had recently given some increased emphasis to interest rates, this 

seemed to have been accompanied by remarkably little change in total 

borrowing. He did not know what the extent of seasonal pressures would 

be for the rest of the year, but the Committee might have to take a 

rather long look at the situation in the next few weeks.



11/2/65 -46

Mr. Irons reported that there had been relatively little 

change in Eleventh District conditions. The economy continued to 

expand, and for the most part showed reasonable stability and lack 

of imbalances.  

The production pattern reflected increases in durables and 

nondurables, with relatively slight changes in other components such 

as mining. Employment continued strong and the unemployment rate 

was around 3.3 per cent, with increases in employment appearing in 

both the manufacturing and non-manufacturing areas. The labor mar

ket was tightening somewhat, according to random reports heard more 

and more frequently, especially in these areas in which skilled and 

mature workers were needed.  

Constriction was strong in the District. Although the month

to-month changes varied, the gain against a year ago was significant.  

The figures were rather difficult to appraise, but the greatest 

strength centered in the large cities. There were signs of contruc

tion continuing strong for some time into the future, and there were 

beginning to be signs of significant Federal construction expenditures 

in the District. There were also large private ventures in prospect.  

Retail trade was strong, and the agricultural picture was 

good. The western part of the District, where some concern was felt 

with respect to agriculture not long ago, now seemed very promising.  

Banks in the Eleventh District continued to tighten a bit, 

Mr. Irons noted. As in the San Francisco District, bank loans were



11/2/65 -47

down fractionally during the last month and securities investments 

were up somewhat. However, city banks and -nany country banks were 

running with loan-deposit rates around 60-75 per cent or higher.  

They were, therefore, scrambling for funds wherever obtainable. The 

most recent period showed substantial purchases of Federal funds, with 

relatively small sales.  

As to the national situation, it seemed to Mr. Irons that there 

were few soft spots in the economy. Among the soft spots he could see 

were the inventory workdown, which was going along better than many 

had anticipated, private housing, which was lagging a bit, and the 

higher social security rate in 1966. The balance of payments apparently 

was not improving, and it remained one of the major problems. For the 

domestic economy, there might be further expansionary push from the 

fiscal side. Welfare expenditures and military expenditures for 

Vietnam probably would be expansive rather than merely supportive ;or 

the economy. The employment situation nationally was strong.  

There had been a slight persistent tightening in the money 

market during the past three weeks, Mr. Irons observed, and he was 

inclined to feel that this would continue. The demand for funds was 

strong, and the banks were extending credit at a good pace. Obviously 

the Committee should not change position at this time with the Treasury 

in the market, and he did not think it worth while to speculate on 

what might happen over the next three weeks. He would take advantage 

of this period to observe developments until the Committee met again.



11/2/65 -48

Meanwhile, he would maintain an even keel, keeping market conditions 

as steady as pcssible. He would accep: the proposed directive, and 

would make no change in the discount rate at present.  

Mr. Ellis said the New England economy showed continued 

steady expansion. Employment in both manufacturing and non-manufactur

ing activities kept breaking new ground, considering the season of 

the year. Hours of work, income payments, and consumer spending all 

reflected what one expected of high employment. Optimism was un

usually strong. At the time of the Boston Reserve Bank's fall survey 

of capital sperding plans, manufacturers usually had not set their 

sights for the coming year. This fall nine out of ten could indicate 

preliminary 1966 plans. For the first time in 8 fall surveys, New 

England manufacturers contemplated a spending gain.  

In the financial field also, the trends continued as earlier 

reported, with the most notable activity arising in the real estate 

and commercial loan fields, each category having scored a 19 per cent 

year-to-year gain in the latest reports.  

Because monetary policy changes were precluded at this meeting 

by the need to preserve an even keel during the current Treasury 

financing, Mr. Ellis commented instead concerning the new trial format 

of the green book. He thought the new format provided a framework 

that should prove helpful to focusing attention on issues that were 

central to the Committee's responsibility, and the experiment should 

be continued. But the Committee should be aware of a potential 

disability in that approach, by which he referred to the changed



11/2/65 -49

objective of the introductory material. Heretofore the introductory 

material labeled "In Broad Review" had attempted a balanced and com

prehensive summary of major and recent economic trends. It now 

attempted to present major and recent economic developments in an 

analytical framework that was designed to help in formulating answers 

to the perennial questions of monetary policy making. The potential 

drawback of such an approach was that either the analytic framework or 

the developments selected (or omitted) to support the analysis might 

excessively and inadvertently prejudice the Committee's conclusions.  

The Committee's staff was not monolithic in its viewpoints, and it 

seemed appropriate to expect there would be some opportunity for 

divergent views to be expressed in the staff summaries. The Com

mittee, of course, could not expect the staff to catalogue everything 

every time, and he wished to reaffirm his opening comment that the 

experiment was worth a trial--in full recognition of its pitfalls.  

Concerning the Committee's policy decision at this meeting, 

Mr. Ellis recognized the inappropriateness of any material shift in 

monetary policy in the midst of Treasury debt refinancing activities.  

However, he would urge that the Committee adopt a position of readiness 

to supply reserves adequate to meet both seasonal needs and a moderate 

rate of growth. Bank demands for reserves in excess of such provision 

should be allowed to reflect themselves in firmer markets in which 

fluctuating interest rates continued to serve a useful allocation 

function. He endorsed Mr. Mitchell's suggestion about reading the 

IMF staff report, but would call attention particularly to pages 8



11/2/65 -50

and 9 thereof, wherein the System was given substantial credit for 

firming monetary conditions since last spring and maintenance of an 

alertness of monetary policy was suggested.  

Mr. Ellis noted the comment in the blue book that net borrowed 

reserves in the $100-$150 million range might be associated with 

3-month bill rates at 4.00 to 4.10 per cent under a "no change" 

policy. His own targets were the old-fashioned "no change" position 

the Committee held in September. He would prefer net borrowed reserves 

centered at $150 million, with no 4.10 per cent ceiling on 3-month 

bill rates in view of the 4.08 auction rate yesterday. He saw a 

3-month bill rate fluctuating from 4.00 to 4.15 per cent as consistent 

with emerging trends in the market, with borrowings at $550 million 

plus. The draft directive, in his opinion, adequately reflected a 

"no change" policy.  

Mr. Balderston observed that, as Mr. Brill had pointed out, 

one could easily be deceived by official price indexes. What went 

on under the surface must be taken into account. As to the searching 

question with which Mr. Hersey had ended his report, Mr. Balderston's 

answer was in the negative. Monetary policy had not done all that 

it should do, and could do, in connection with the international 

situation in which the country found itself. It was one thing, as 

Arthur Burns had observed, to keep economic advance orderly and 

steady when the economy was operating somewhat below a full employ

ment level. It was quite another thing when the economy was operat

ing close to full employment. If one did not believe Mr. Burns'



11/2/65 -51

observation, he could take a look at the employment surge and the 

cost situation in Britain's manufacturing area.  

Believing as he did that the ability of the U.S. Government 

to exert world leadership turned on curbing U.S. investing, lending, 

and spending abroad, including that of the Government itself, Mr.  

Balderston turned to where the responsibility of the Committee really 

centered. He suggested that it centered in helping American firms 

to expand their export competitiveness, because the ability of this 

country to discharge its responsibilities in the world at large 

would be dissipated if its gold stock dwindled and dollar claims 

against the U.S. built up. The voice of the U.S. in economic meetings 

would then beccme weakened. The ability of the U.S. to manage its 

affairs was affected by speculative ebllience at home as well as by 

waste of resources abroad, either by its own citizens or by foreigners; 

he referred here to the waste involved in giants and so-called loans.  

That there was ebullience at home seemed evident to him, if not to 

some of his colleagues. He called the Committee's attention to the 

volume of daily trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October, 

which averaged 7.8 million shares against 7.4 million in September.  

The latter figure was itself 40 per cent above the year-ago level.  

As to policy, Mr. Balderston supported no change as of today 

in view of the Treasury financing.  

Chairman Martin remarked that the points pertinent to today's 

meeting had been covered quite clearly and that he had little to add.



11/2/65 -52

He did not think anyone ought to prejudge the future. It was clearly 

evident to him, however, that the time was coming when the System 

would have to move one way or the other. It would not be possible 

simply to stay put. The Treasure's financial problem, which he saw 

as the major problem ahead, would either be solved by a pause in 

business activity and a decline in the demand for business loans or 

else it would have to be solved, assuming the requirements were 

financed at current rates, by an aggressively easier policy on the 

part of the Federal Reserve. The situation was getting again to a 

point similar to that which existed at the Lime of the Treasury

Federal Reserve accord in 1951. There was not a complete analogy, 

of course, but the problem was not going to go away, assuming current 

trends continued. He hoped that everyone would be considering the 

matter carefully in the remaining time that was available. Personally, 

he would be glad if there was a little pause in economic and financial 

activity, for this would ease the problem, but forces seemed to be 

moving inexorably in a direction that made it unlikely that the 

System could avoid a decision one way or the other.  

As to policy for the next three weeks, the Chairman noted 

that there appeared to be general agreement on a directive such as 

proposed by the staff.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee,



11/2/65

to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity has 
expanded further in a continuing climate of optimistic business 
sentiment and firmer financial conditions, and that our inter
national payments have remained in deficit. In this situation, 
it remains the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy 
to strengthen the international position of the dollar, and to 
avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures, while accommodat
ing moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking into account the 
Treasury financing schedule, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining about the same conditions in the 
money market that have prevailed since the last meeting of 
the Committee.  

Cnairman Martin noted that a memorandum from Mr. Holmes dated 

November 1, 1965, had been distributed regarding the data proposed for 

submission in response to the request from Chairman Patman of the 

House Banking and Currency Committee, by letter dated September 21, 

1965, for various records of the System Open Market Account. (This 

request had been considered previously at the Committee meeting on 

September 28, 1965.) 

No objection was raised to the furnishing of the materials 

described in Mr. Holmes' memorandum. It was understood that Chairman 

Martin would write to Chairman Patman listing the materials to be 

submitted and advising of the approximate date contemplated for 

delivery thereof.  

Secretary's Note: Quoted below is the 
text of the letter sent by Chairman 
Martin under date of November 8, 1965:

-53-



11/2/65

This is in further reference to your letter of September 
21, 1965, in which you asked for certain information concern
ing the System Open Market Account.  

At its November 2 meeting, the Federal Open Market Com
mittee directed its staff to prepare and assemble the following 
data, records, and other information relating to the questions 
raised in your letter: 
Dollar Value of Portfolio 

1. System Account holdings as of the end of 
each month, December 31, 1963 through June 30, 1965 
broken down between Treasury bills, notes and bonds 
and showing par value, accrued interest, premium, 
discount and net book value.  

2. Sample photostat copies of the actual System 
Account books for the above dates showing total par 
value, accrued interest, premium and discount with 
distributions among the twelve Federal Reserve Banks 
and by issues.  

Trading since January 1, 1964 
1. Summary transactions from 1964 and 1965 

through June 30, 1965.  
2. Copies of System Account books for the 

same period showing individual daily transactions 
by issue, amount (par value), and price but after 

deletion code number for the dealer with whom the 
transaction was carried out.  

Income of System Open Market Account 
1. Annual income and profit and loss for the 

year 1964 and 1965 through June 30, broken down 
between income from interest-bearing securities 
and Treasury bills.  

2. Sample photostat copies of actual System 
Account books for the end of each month December 31, 
1963 through June 30, 1965 showing daily net income 
accumulations distributed among the twelve Federal 

Reserve Banks.  
Other Material 

Memorandum describing procedures for handling 
income of Open Market Account and for participation 
of Reserve Banks in that income.  
Preparation of the material should be completed in roughly 

two weeks; it will be delivered to you as soon as it is ready.  

Chairman Martin also noted that a list of dates for prospective 

meetings of the Cuommittee during the year 1966 had been distributed.

-54-



11/2/65 -55

He asked whether there were any comments, or suggestions for changes 

in the schedule, and the comments heard were favorable.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, November 23, 1965, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


