









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 8, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.1/ 

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Patterson 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Wayne, Francis, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Messrs. Baughman, Holland, Koch, Taylor, and 

Willis, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Solomon, Adviser to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

1/ This meeting, originally planned for February 1, 1966, had been 
postponed one week because of adverse weather conditions affecting 
travel.



2/8/66 -2

Messrs. Link, Eastburn, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, 
Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. MacLaury, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on January 11, 1966, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies 

for the period January 11 through 26, 1966, and a supplemental 

report for January 27 through February 4, 1966. Copies of these 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this 

week. During January, the Stabilization Fund made gold sales 

amounting to $37 million, which were more than offset by a 

purchase of $50 million in gold from the Bank of Canada, leaving 

a month-end balance of $79 million. During February, an order



2/8/66 -3

of at least $34 million from the Bank of France was expected.  

On the other hand, a second $50 million of gold had been acquired 

from Canada last week so that, on present prospects, there should 

not be any decline in the stock this month.  

Looking farther ahead, however, Mr. MacLaury continued, 

one could not ignore the implications for the United States gold 

stock of the situation in the London gold market. During 1965 a 

record volume of private demand for gold absorbed virtually the 

entire new supply coming from South African and other mines and 

from Russian sources, with the result that the Gold Pool ended 

the year with virtually no net accumulation of gold. As demand 

continued to run ahead of supply, the $40 million reserve in the 

Gold Pool at the beginning of 1966 had been exhausted and it again 

became necessary to reactivate the gold sale consortium. Since 

then the Pool had lost another $19 million net. There still was 

reason to believe that Russia would need to sell another $200 

million or so of gold between now and April, which might provide 

some further breathing space. Over the longer pull, though, 

unless international political and financial tensions moderated 

considerably during the spring and summer months, there could be 

fairly heavy pressure upon the Gold Pool arrangements.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. MacLaury said, sterling had 

continued to show strength. From September through January, the



2/8/66

swing in the Bank of England's exchange position had amounted to

more than $2 billion. Of that amount, $420 million had been

reflected in reserve increases, $700 million in net repayments of

central bank debt, and roughly $1 billion in liquidation of

forward contracts. During January, the Bank of England made

repayments of central bank debt totaling $325 million--$275 to

the Federal Reserve and $50 million to the Bank for International

Settlements--and it had about $300 million of forward contracts

reaching maturity during the month. However, the gross dollar

inflow during the month was very substantial, amounting to

roughly $535 million. That still left, at month-end, a net

drain of roughly $90 million on British reserves.

Mr. MacLaury reported that there was general agreement

among most of the British and American officials involved that

the British would run a serious risk of damaging the recovery

of confidence in sterling if they were to show a sizable reserve

decline for January. To avert that risk, several courses of

action were open. First, the Bank of England might have made a

new drawing on the swap line; but that course was opposed both

by the Bank of England and by the System, on the grounds that

it would represent a leapfrogging procedure of employing a new

drawing to pay off an earlier drawing. Second, the British

Government might have drawn on its portfolio of United States



2/8/66 -5

securities, but that alternative was flatly rejected by Chancellor 

Callaghan. Third, the British Government might have drawn on its 

$250 million line of credit with the Export-Import Bank, but that 

course was opposed for U.S. balance of payments reasons by the 

U.S. Treasury. There remained the fourth alternative of employing 

the joint Treasury-Federal Reserve authorization granted last 

September of $400 million for exchange operations to support the 

recovery of sterling. As it turned out, the $90 million needed 

to prevent a British reserve decline was provided from this 

source on a one-day swap over the month-end, divided equally 

between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve.  

In February, Mr. MacLaury continued, the Bank of England 

again started off the month with outpayments of $290 million, of 

which $200 million reflected repayment of the remaining debt 

under the $750 million swap line with the System and $90 million 

repayment of the one-day swap with the Treasury and Federal Reserve.  

In addition, a sizable volume of forward contracts would come due 

in February. In the past February generally had been a seasonally 

favorable month and the Bank of England might well take in 

sufficient funds before the month-end to avoid any net reserve 

loss. In the first few days they already had taken in not quite 

$100 million. If, however, a short-fall should materialize, 

arrangements had been made with the Bank of England and the Bank



2/8/66 -6

of Italy for a triangular operation, having the dual objectives 

of strengthening the British reserve position and enabling the 

Federal Reserve to liquidate the bulk of its swap drawings on 

the Bank of Italy. As part of the credit package put together 

last September, the Bank of Italy committed itself to provide 

support for sterling, if needed, up to the amount of $70 million.  

If circumstances required, the Bank of England would draw $70 

million of lire from the Bank of Italy at the end of February 

and sell the lire to the Federal Reserve against dollars, 

thereby strengthening the British reserve position by $70 million 

and enabling the Federal Reserve to pay off that amount of its 

lira debt to the Bank of Italy.  

During the four weeks since the last meeting, Mr. MacLaury 

observed, the dollar had continued to show strength against nearly 

all of the continental currencies. Although the unwinding of year

end positions undoubtedly had contributed to that strength, the 

improvement went beyond such technical factors. In part, he 

thought, the dollar was benefiting from the continued reversal 

of short sterling positions. In addition, he could not help but 

believe that the effects were being seen of the improvement in 

the U.S. balance of payments situation. The voluntary foreign 

credit restraint program with respect to corporations seemed to 

be biting harder, and the movement of rates in both the exchange



2/8/66 -7

markets and the Euro-dollar market indicated that there was, if 

not a growing scarcity of dollars, at least a cessation of 

excessive dollar availabilities. Even in the case of Italy, the 

huge dollar inflows of previous months had ended; in fact, there 

had been a slight net decline in dollar holdings in the first 

three weeks of January. And, in the case of France, the rate 

had been off the ceiling now for more than a month. Likewise, 

with the Belgian franc under some pressure, the System was able 

to buy from the Belgian National Bank sufficient francs to pay 

off the remaining $35 million equivalent debt under its standby 

facility with that bank. In addition, the Account Management 

was in the New York market more or less continuously during the 

period, buying marks for Treasury account to build up the balances 

that were used on February 1 to repay a $50 million equivalent 

mark-denominated bond maturing on that date.  

As the Committee would recall, Mr. MacLaury said, at a 

recent meeting Mr. Hayes had mentioned that discussions were 

taking place among central bankers at the Bank for International 

Settlements in an effort to find a way of dealing with the 

threat to sterling of possible drains of sterling balances. A 

package of credits was now shaping up, based on the roughly 

$1 billion of credits made available to the Bank of England 

last September. The United States had participated to the



2/8/66 -8

extent of $400 million--$200 million each for System and Treasury-

under an authorization to purchase sterling on a covered or 

guaranteed basis. The other participants in the arrangement set 

a time limit of six months on the facilities that they provided.  

Present indications were that they would agree to extend their 

credit arrangements for a one-year period from March 15, the 

current expiration date, channeling any assistance that might 

in fact be required through the BIS on the basis of sterling 

swaps. U.S. participation would continue as at present, on a 

bilateral basis with the Bank of England.  

In response to questions, Mr. MacLaury said that about 

$2 billion of gold had come onto the London market in 1965--$1.2 

billion from new production, $375 million from Russian sales, 

and about $500 million from other sources. The off-take also was 

about $2 billion, absorbing virtually the entire supply. Of the 

latter amount, mainland China had accounted for a relatively small 

part of the total--somewhat over $100 million. Final figures were 

not yet available on the change during 1965 in the volume of gold 

held in official reserves by non-Communist countries, but he 

thought it would show a small increase. South Africa had 

contributed between $200 and $300 million of gold to the market 

in the first half of 1965, but in September that country began to 

rebuild its own holdings, and thus far had withheld about $125



2/8/66 -9

million of new production from the market. With respect to 

Canada, there was some possibility of additional sales of gold 

by that country to the U.S.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
January 11 through February 7, 1966, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury then reported that a System drawing on the 

swap arrangement with the Bank of Italy, in the amount of $100 

million equivalent, would mature on February 28, and he requested 

the Committee's approval to renew the drawing a second time, if 

that should prove necessary. As he had indicated earlier, there 

was a possibility that transactions between the British and the 

Italians might permit reduction, if not full repayment, of the 

drawing in the near future.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that he hoped the System would 

repay the drawing as soon as possible, and Mr. MacLaury replied 

that that was the intention of the Account Management.  

Possible renewal of the $100 
million drawing on the Bank of 
Italy was noted without objection.  

Chairman Martin invited Mr. Daane to comment on devel

opments at the recent meeting of the Deputies of the Group of 

Ten.



2/8/66 -10

Mr. Daane said that the Deputies had met in Paris on 

January 31, February 1, and part of February 2. As he had 

indicated to the Committee earlier, the discussions at the 

previous meetings--in November and December--had involved rather 

frank and exploratory exchanges of views. At this meeting a 

long step had been taken toward the negotiating phase. The 

meeting consisted mainly of a searching question-and-answer 

review of four papers that had been put forward, including one 

containing a U.S. proposal.  

He would outline the U.S. proposal first, Mr. Daane 

observed, although it was not in fact the first advanced at the 

meeting. Under Secretary of Treasury Deming had made clear that 

the proposal was a serious one, arrived at carefully by the U.S.  

Government. It had been reviewed thoroughly at a series of meet

ings--nine or ten in number--of the so-called Dillon Advisory 

Committee to the Treasury; and it had been given painstaking 

consideration by representatives of the Government agencies 

concerned, including the Federal Reserve. Also, it had been 

discussed with interested members of Congress and reviewed by 

the President.  

In essence, Mr. Daane said, the proposal called for a 

dual approach, with the first part involving the creation of 

special drawing rights for all member countries of the



2/8/66 -11

International Monetary Fund, both Group of Ten countries and 

others. Those rights would be distinct from all existing 

drawing rights in the Fund. In operation they would resemble 

the drawing rights under the present gold tranches; unlike the 

latter, however, there would be no input of gold in connection 

with them.  

The other part of the dual approach would involve the 

creation of a new reserve unit, Mr. Daane continued. The new 

unit would constitute a claim on a pool of currencies paid in 

by a group of advanced countries. The U.S. had not taken a 

hard and fast position on the question of the exact composition 

of that group, but had suggested that a small number of countries 

in addition to the members of the Group of Ten might be brought 

in. The new units would be allocated on the basis of IMF quotas, 

and would carry a gold-value guarantee. Among a number of 

technical provisions, there would be one establishing limits on 

holdings by creditor countries, of perhaps 2 or 3 times the 

amount of units allocated to the country. Another provision 

was intended to enable the U.S.--or any country that made its 

currency convertible into gold--to avoid excessive accumulation 

of the new units by selling them to other countries against its 

own currency. In addition, the U.S. proposal called for a "set

aside" of new units or currencies by the limited group for the 

benefit of the rest of the world.



2/8/66 -12

Some figures had been advanced in connection with the 

U.S. proposal for the sake of illustration, Mr. Daane said. Thus, 

it was noted that total world reserves, consisting principally of 

gold and reserve currencies, were about $70 billion at present.  

If one reasoned that reserves should be increased at a 3 per 

cent annual rate, slightly over $2 billion of new reserves would 

be needed each year. Allowing for additions to the monetary 

gold stock at the recent average rate of $500-$600 million a 

year, it would be necessary to create about $1-1/2 billion in 

new reserves each year. It was suggested that that amount be 

divided equally between new drawing rights and new reserve units, 

each of which would then amount to $750 million per year.  

Similarly, if one started with a 4 per cent rate of reserve 

growth, about $1 billion each would be created annually in the 

form of drawing rights and new units.  

The first paper actually discussed at the meeting, 

Mr. Daane continued, was put forth by the Canadians, who made 

clear that it was not an official proposal but simply a collection 

of views--largely those of the Finance Ministry. The Canadian 

proposal concentrated on the construction of a new unit, some

what similar to the one contemplated in the U.S. proposal but 

with a few interesting differences. Of these, the most important 

was the provision for the new unit to carry a rather high rate of



2/8/66 -13

interest, set one or two percentage points below the U.S.  

Treasury bill rate. The U.S. proposal had not involved an 

interest return, although the U.S. delegation had indicated that 

its position on that question was neutral. The Canadians 

stressed the desirability of an interest return in order to 

make the new unit more acceptable. As to the make-up of the 

group of participating countries, the Canadians, like the U.S.  

representatives, were searching for some criteria for qualifi

cation, and were thinking in terms of about 15 or 16 countries.  

The third paper, Mr. Daane said, was an official 

proposal put forward by the British. Again, there were a 

number of points of similarity with the U.S., as well as the 

Canadian, proposals, and some points of difference. One 

distinctive feature was a requirement that any holdings of 

the new unit in excess of the holding limit would be converted 

directly into gold. Another interesting variant reflected the 

British concern with the problem of conversion of sterling 

balances, to which Mr. MacLaury had alluded, and of dollar 

balances. They proposed that the new units be available not 

only to increase reserve assets but also to provide an alternative 

asset for countries wanting to convert reserve currency holdings.  

The fourth proposal, Mr. Daane noted, was advanced by 

Mr. Emminger, the Chairman of the Group of Ten Deputies, who



2/8/66 -14

said that it represented his own views. It was concurred in by 

a number of delegations, however, and could be considered to 

represent a synthesis of the views of the continental Europeans 

excluding the French--and, it was learned later, the Belgians.  

The Emminger proposal called for a new reserve unit whose initial 

creation would require a unanimous vote, with subsequent decisions 

made by majority vote. The unit would be used by and allocated 

to only a limited group of countries, and it would be used in 

transfers in a one-to-one ratio with gold. The needs of countries 

outside the group would be met by providing for set-asides of 

the new unit.  

Mr. Daane remarked that the French made no new proposals 

at the meeting. They noted that they had had a proposal on the 

table for a year and a half, and that there was no change in 

their position.  

In sum, Mr. Daane said, the meeting pointed up both the 

areas of agreement and the areas of division. As to the former, 

all of the proposals provided for reserve units to be created 

under the responsibility of a limited group of countries. All 

were reasonably close with respect to the membership of the 

group that would receive the units, and all implied a search for 

some qualifying criteria that pointed to inclusion of roughly 

15 or 16 countries. There was a fair consensus that the amounts



2/8/66 -15

of the new reserve asset created should be established in terms 

of a growth trend, rather than decided ad hoc each year; and 

that the purpose was to provide for global needs rather than 

just those of a particular group of countries.  

As to the differences, Mr. Daane continued, the major 

one was in the attitude taken to the dual approach recommended 

by the U.S. The U.S. proposal was labeled by some as "quadri

lateral" because it provided for drawing rights both for the 

group and for other countries, for distribution of the new units 

to the group, and for a set-aside of the units for other 

countries. There was much sentiment for a simpler procedure, 

perhaps involving a set-aside of the new units to finance 

drawings by the countries outside the group, and only units 

for the group.  

Other major differences, Mr. Daane said, related to the 

holding limit that the U.S. had suggested as a means of safe

guarding against abuses, and to the gold link which the 

Emminger proposal would involve. Speaking for the U.S., he 

(Mr. Daane) had raised a number of questions regarding the gold 

link. His basic question was whether that link was intended 

simply to provide further discipline on the actions of deficit 

countries. The second was whether such a gold link would not 

in effect induce much larger holdings of gold--both by the



2/8/66 -16

countries within the group, particularly those with low gold 

ratios at present, and by countries outside the group. Dr.  

Emminger answered those questions quite vigorously and effec

tively. He argued, in effect, that if the new unit had a gold 

link and also carried an interest return, one could expect that 

the unit would become more desirable than gold, and that its 

creation therefore would be constructive rather than disruptive.  

Mr. Daane added that Mr. Polak spoke on behalf of the 

Managing Director of the IMF, mainly on two points. First, he 

noted that the Director was anxious that there be recognition 

of the reserve needs of countries beyond a limited group, a 

view to which the U.S. had been fully sympathetic all along.  

Secondly, it was the Director's view that the decision-making 

process should be broadened to involve more countries. Near 

the close of the meeting one of the German representatives had 

made a provocative and thoughtful statement. He noted that 

the group was faced with the momentous decision to create 

money, and raised the question of whether it would not be 

better to do so in the traditional way--which Mr. Daane inter

preted to mean within the framework of the IMF. That position, 

Mr. Daane thought, was premised on the fear that the other route 

would lead to excessive world liquidity.



2/8/66 -17

Mr. Daane concluded by noting that there would be another 

meeting on March 7 and 8, in which, he presumed, the group would 

move a little closer to negotiations. That would be followed by 

a longer meeting in Washington during the third week of April.  

He was happy to note that the U.S. delegation now included 

Mr. Robert Solomon of the Board's staff, in addition to the 

customary participants--Under Secretary of the Treasury Deming, 

Messrs. Willis and McGrew of the Treasury, and himself.  

In answer to Mr. Ellis' question as to how it was 

proposed to execute the provision for an interest return on the 

new unit, Mr. Daane said the group had not got down to the 

point of working out all of the mechanics on that question.  

In general, the debtor would pay the interest on any credit 

received--that is, on assets used. That, of course, could be 

done on either a gross or net basis.  

Mr. Galusha commented that recent news stories had 

suggested that the Deputies had made far greater progress in 

their discussions than had been anticipated, and that the 

solution to the problem now appeared possible. He asked whether 

that was Mr. Daane's impression.  

Mr. Daane replied that he thought such an appraisal 

was correct if the progress was measured in terms of the 

original charge given to the Deputies, to search out areas of



2/8/66 -18

agreement. There had been forward movement at each of three 

recent meetings and, as he had indicated, there was clear 

progress toward agreement in several important areas. There 

also, however, were some important disagreements. In the words 

of one participant, used in a personal conversation at the end 

of the meeting, there had been both progress and retrogression.  

Mr. Hayes said he agreed with Mr. Daane's appraisal.  

It should be borne in mind, he thought, that some of the 

differences between the positions of the U.S. and some other 

countries were exceedingly important to the U.S. In his 

personal view, it was far better to make progress slowly toward 

the right decision rather than to accelerate the proceedings 

for the sake of reaching some agreement.  

Mr. Daane indicated that he shared Mr. Hayes' view.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the 

System Open Market Account covering open market operations in 

U.S. Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the 

period January 11 through 26, 1966, and a supplemental report 

for January 27 through February 7, 1966. Copies of both 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



2/8/66

The Treasury refunding of outstanding February 
maturities, in which owners of April, May, and August 
maturities were given a chance to prerefund their holdings, 
was the dominant feature of the period since the last 
meeting of the Committee. The Treasury's decision to make 
this more than a routine operation and to offer a 5 per 
cent note was a bold move, designed to ease the problems 
of debt management later in the year. And despite some 
uneasy moments while the books were open, the decision 
turned out to be a wise one. While attrition in the 
February and April issues was somewhat greater than 
expected, public subscription of $6.5 billion to the 
5 per cent notes was substantially greater than the 
market anticipated at the time the books closed and has 
reduced the May and August refunding operations to routine 
proportions.  

The Treasury announcement was initially very well 
received in the market, but the opening of the books on 
Monday, January 31, coincided with the resumption of 
bombing in North Vietnam and with accelerated discussion 
of the likelihood that monetary policy was apt to play 
the leading role in any effort to restrain inflationary 
pressures in the months ahead. In this atmosphere prices 
of some long-term Government bonds declined by as much as 
a full point during the three-day period while the books 
were open, and prices of rights and when-issued securities 
also declined, with the when-issued 5s closing the period 
at par bid compared with a premium of 7/64 immediately 
following the Treasury announcement, Dealer support of 
the refunding was minimal--with net positions in both 
new issues only $300 million--and with short positions 
in outstanding intermediate issues rising significantly 
during the financing. Dealer pessimism was not shared by 
holders of the issues eligible for exchange, however, as 
the results indicated. The notes appear to be in firm 
hands with little or no speculative activity and, as 
noted, there are no large dealer inventories overhanging 
the market. Since the books closed prices of the new 

issues moved up somewhat until yesterday when the 5s 

closed at par bid.  
During the period since the Committee last met, the 

money market--at least as reflected in the Federal funds 

rate and member bank borrowing at the Reserve banks--has 
generally been relatively comfortable, as the extreme 

pressure on money center banks finally eased. A small net

-19-



2/8/66

borrowed reserve figure has been maintained as System 
open market operations were generally directed towards 
maintaining an even keel surrounding the Treasury 
financing. A sizable proportion of the reserves provided 
involved repurchase agreements against rights. In 
contrast to the preceding period, there has been a general 
tendency since the last meeting of the Committee--at least 
until the past week--for reserve availability to exceed 
projections, as float stayed higher than anticipated and 
required reserves declined more than seasonally. Despite 
the absence of extreme pressures on the banking system, 
short-term interest rates moved irregularly higher over 
the period, with the three-month bill rate hitting an 
all-time high of 4,67 per cent in the auction on January 
17, and with rates on three-month acceptances raised by 
dealers to 5 per cent bid on February 1. In yesterday's 
auction the 3- and 6-month bills were sold at average 

rates of about 4.65 and 4.77 per cent, respectively.  
Rates on long-term securities, which had been relatively 
stable since their initial adjustment to the discount 

rate change, rose by about 10-15 basis points.  
While the market does not seem to have been at all 

impressed, the investor response to the Treasury refunding 
may hold some interesting implications about the attrac

tiveness to investors of the historically high yield 
levels of intermediate- and long-term Government bonds.  

At the same time, at least some of the larger banks, many 

of which have been heavily dependent on borrowed funds, 
are taking a hard look at their lending policies. To 
the extent that this process results in greater reluctance 

to meet loan demands, some of the pressure may be removed 
from the Federal funds and CD markets. But it is not so 
clear what pressures would be shifted to other markets 

as corporations and others seek to meet their growing 

credit needs elsewhere.  
In the meantime, the markets continue to be extremely 

sensitive to developments in Viet Nam, to price movements, 
and to demand pressures, both financial and real. Amidst 

it all, there appears to be a growing feeling that monetary 

policy will be forced to play the leading role in any 
anti-inflationary campaign. Some further tightening of 

monetary policy may well have already been discounted by 
the market and an unexpected settlement in Viet Nam could 
have a major impact on expectations. But the dominant mood 

continues to be one of anticipation of growing pressure on 

financial markets as the year progresses. At the moment the 

pressure appears to be focusing in the longer end of the market.

-20-



2/8/66 -21

Mr. Swan referred to Mr. Holmes' observations that dealer 

participation in the refunding had been minimal and that the new 

securities appeared to be in firm hands. He asked what implications 

those facts had for the period over which an even keel policy would 

be required.  

Mr. Holmes replied that he thought an even keel clearly 

should be maintained until the payment date for the refunding, 

February 15. While it was somewhat difficult to understand 

yesterday's decline in price of the new securities, dealers had 

been seeing a continuing moderate demand for those securities. On 

the whole, he saw no particular problems ahead in connection with 

the refunding, and he did not expect the process of distribution 

to be lengthy.  

Mr. Daane asked what consequences for interest rates Mr.  

Holmes would envisage if net borrowed reserve figures were deepened 

from their recent levels. Was the rate impact likely to be minor 

since, as Mr. Holmes had reported, the market may already have 

discounted some further tightening of monetary policy? 

Mr. Holmes remarked that, other things equal, a higher 

level of net borrowed reserves probably was already discounted by 

the market. While there was a great deal encompassed by the "other 

things equal" qualification, he doubted that somewhat deeper net 

borrowed reserves would act to push rates higher, particularly if 

some of the other upward pressures on rates diminished.



Mr. Hickman asked whether the identity of the sellers 

accounting for yesterday's decline in the price of the new 

securities was known. Mr. Holmes replied that there were some 

indications of sales by investors, but the decline appeared to 

be mainly due to professional activity, reflecting the reluctance 

of dealers to take a long position in the securities.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
open market transactions in Government 
securities and bankers' acceptances during 
the period January 11 through February 7, 
1966 were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Secretary's note: On February 1, 1966, the 
following message had been transmitted by 
Mr. Young to members of the Committee, by 
telegram to those outside of Washington: 

The following message has been received from System 
Account Manager: 

"Referring to current Treasury offering, System Account 
holds $2,232,950,000 of notes maturing February 15, 1966, 
about 47% of total outstanding. Account management proposes 
that Account exchange its entire holdings through subscrip
tion for $1,232,950,000 (about 55%) of the 4-7/8% notes 
maturing August 15, 1967 and $1 billion (about 45%) into 
the 5% notes maturing November 15, 1970. Principal reasons 
for the proposal are avoidance of excessively heavy System 
holdings of any single Treasury issue, ample holdings 
maturing in one and two years, and the relatively short 
maturity of the 5% notes offered by the Treasury.  

"1. Assuming the public subscribes to $1,200 million 
4-7/8% notes, if the System's entire holdings were exchanged 
into the 4-7/8% notes, it would represent 65% of the entire 
issue; under the proposed plan it will be 50% of the entire 
issue.

2/8/66 -22-



2/8/66

"2. Although it is difficult to assess at this moment 
how many fives there will be subscribed by the public 
(including prerefunding of May and August maturities) it 
appears unlikely that System holdings of the 5% notes would 
be excessive relative to public holdings.  

"3. After the exchange, 55% of the total System Account 
would mature in one year and 84% in two years." 

Please wire whether you would approve the Manager's 
proposal.  

Advices subsequently were received from 
all available members of the Committee 
indicating that they approved the Manager's 
proposal.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement on economic 

conditions: 

I would like to focus my comments on price pressures 
this morning, for it seems likely to me that the next 
round of critical choices for stabilization policy, 
monetary and otherwise, will turn largely on the current 
and prospective performance of prices.  

The over-all performance of our economy this past 
year has brought us very close to several of our 
domestic economic goals. Our level of output is high, 
and demand is broadly based and growing rapidly. Rates 
of resource utilization are correspondingly high, with 
manufacturing output running at better than 91 per cent 
of rated capacity and unemployment in January finally 
down to the 4 per cent milestone. But, partly for these 
very reasons, our price performance this past year has 
been less good than earlier. To be explicit, the index 
of wholesale prices of industrial commodities has been

-23-



2/8/66

rising at around a 1-1/2 per cent annual rate throughout 
this past year and a quarter, after virtually no net 
change (+.3 per cent) earlier in this expansion.  

From this point forward--absent an unlikely outbreak 
of peace in Viet Nam--the outlook seems to me to be for 
a further gradual step-up in the rate of price advance.  
This, in a nutshell, implies significantly more price 
rise this year than last, and more than has been projected 
by the Council of Economic Advisers and various other 
Administration officials.  

Let me tick off briefly the reasons for this con
clusion. The chief cause of this difference from the 
Council outlook is not hard to find: we project more 
demand than they do. Our latest green book 1/ projections 
through the first quarter of 1966 unfold along a track 
that runs roughly $5 billion higher than the Council's 
projection. Besides some variation in the timing of the 
build-up of Federal outlays, the biggest differences lie 
in our stronger figures for plant and equipment expenditures 
and inventory additions. Even these may strike us as too 
low, once the full implications of the sharp upward tilt 
of November-December inventory statistics are taken into 
account.  

It may be that businesses are already acting in 
recognition of some of the market implications of these 
stronger demands. The surprisingly strong fourth-quarter 
inventory accumulation probably includes some buying to 
guard against longer delivery times, and also some stocking 
in anticipation of price advances. By January, the monthly 
purchasing agents' survey showed that more than three-fifths 
of the reporting firms were paying higher prices than a 
month earlier, a sharp rise from the two-fifths figure 
reported in December and the highest proportion in seven 
years.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-24-



2/8/66

Nonetheless, while price increases seem to be having 
a more pervasive effect, they are not yet omnipresent and 
the bulk of them still are not very large. This explains 
why the average price index for industrial commodities 
has not shown much acceleration to date. While a strong 
upward thrust has appeared in the latest over-all price 
indexes, it has stemmed chiefly from the further sharp 
rise in agricultural prices. These price increases did 
not attach to farm products that serve as industrial raw 
materials; rather, they have been confined mainly to food
stuffs, chiefly meat. Such price increases are not much 
of a direct addition to business costs outside the food 
processing industry. The consequent increases of retail 
food prices, however, are obvious to the average wage 
earner, and will undoubtedly stiffen demands in this year's 
labor negotiations. It is true that relatively few major 
labor contracts are up for negotiation until after midyear, 
and by then food costs may well be showing some declines.  
Nonetheless, in the interim, a great many less noticeable 
wage bargains inside and outside the unionized area are 
likely to be influenced both by limited manpower supplies 
and by the higher cost of living.  

Business production costs are also likely to be 
enlarged somewhat by nonwage increases in labor cost.  
Elasticity of the labor supply surprised many observers 
last year, but growth in the labor force was mainly among 
inexperienced youths and women. Skilled adult male labor 
is scarce. Recent trends suggest employers are hiring 
more inexperienced workers and perhaps are beginning some 
hoarding of labor. This will help make a dent in the 
toughest of the remaining unemployment problems--the 
inexperienced youngsters, the disadvantaged, the minority 
groups--but there will probably be a price to pay over 
the short run in the form of slower productivity gains 
and higher training costs. The combination of these 
influences, plus the higher Social Security taxes on employers, 
can easily push unit labor costs in manufacturing above 
the plateau maintained for most of this expansion, and 
add a small measure of cost-push to the demand-pull likely 
to be at work on prices as the year progresses.  

What assurance do we have that the resultant price 

action will not develop rapidly into an old-fashioned 
inflationary outbreak? It is true that many individuals 
and businesses command the financial resources to finance 
a sudden price-boosting surge of spending if military or

-25-



2/8/66

other developments were to deliver the necessary shock to 
expectations. But this prospect appears less likely to me 
than a fairly gradual demand-pull, cost-push, price advance.  
The major moderating influences are persisting forces often 
cited to this Committee: the rapid rate of expansion of 
plant capacity, the trend toward longer-run pricing policies 
on the part of business, still strong domestic interproduct 
competition, and vigorous competition for certain products 
supplied by foreign producers. (This latter is a mixed 
blessing, of course, as Mr. Hersey's report on recent import 
trends will show.) Reinforcing these factors will be the 
weight of the Administration "guideposts" and the President's 
own potent persuasion in headline cases of threatened price 
advances.  

But, in my judgment, all these influences will not 
suffice to prevent the projected growth of public and 
private demands from provoking some increase in the rate 
of price rise, unless buttressed before long by a somewhat 
greater degree of fiscal and monetary restraint than has 
been observable up to now. Comments on how much further 
financial restraint may already be in train, and considera
tions as to the desirable composition and timing of any 
changes in the fiscal-monetary mix, I shall leave to my 
colleague, Mr. Koch, to illumine.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

With the most appropriate posture for monetary policy 
over the next couple of weeks likely to be of an even keel 
nature, at least until the payment date of the current 
Treasury refunding, and with recent developments adequately 
covered by the staff written materials and by Mr. Holmes' 
remarks, I should like to spend my few minutes this morning 
talking mainly about some of the more basic, longer-run, 
domestic financial developments that are facing us.  

There was considerable discussion at our last meeting 
as to whether quantities of credit or liquid assets, or 
interest rates, should be our main target over the coming 
months. I don't think it is a question of "either-or." 
We have to keep both types of factors uppermost in our 
minds, continually watching their effects on each other, 
their effects on spending and investing, and the changing 
interactions among the real and financial variables.

-26-



2/8/66

Unfortunately, with our present state of knowledge, we 
do not know enough about the strength and the timing of 
financial restraint to be sure about either the volume 
of credit flows or the level of interest rates that would 
be consistent with a sustainable rate of growth of GNP 
given our current state of resource use.  

Historical evidence does suggest, however, that 
under conditions of high resource use and expanding 
demands the pace of total credit growth can be large, 
and some increases in interest rates can occur, and 
still be consistent with sustainable economic growth 
without inflation. The job of monetary policy is to 
determine the increases in both financial variables 
that would be consistent with such a happy state of 
affairs.  

There is evidence that the monetary restraint 
we have been seeking is having some effects. Both 
statistics and opinions obtained from the larger banks 
suggest that they are firming up their lending and 
investing practices. The weekly reporting banks have 
reduced their holdings of municipal and agency 
securities on balance in recent weeks and have made 
quite prompt redistribution of the new Treasury issues 

they acquired originally for tax and loan credit.  

Credit expansion at the nonweekly reporting banks, 
however, seems to have continued strong throughout 

January.  
Also, in the last two months longer-term interest 

rates, even mortgage rates, have risen rather sharply 

for such a short period of time. Some feel that this 

is the main avenue through which monetary policy affects 

the real economy. The impact of this recent rise in 

longer-term interest rates on housing starts and other 

types of investment may not be visible for some months.  

But even if monetary restraint is beginning to 

bite, there are reasons for expecting a fairly rapid 

total credit expansion to continue in the coming months.  

One reason lies in the business area. After economic 

expansions have gone on for several years, as this one 

has, business investment tends to grow sharply and 

available internal funds to level off. As a result, 

external financing demands jump. Last year, for 

example, business external financing increased 50 per 

cent over 1964. With the growth in internal funds

-27-



2/8/66

likely to be slow this year, a further large increase 
in external financing will be required to finance a 
desired volume of investment.  

The Federal Government will also add to, rather 
than subtract from, total credit demands in the coming 
months despite the apparently rosy look of the 1967 
administrative and cash budgets. To assess the indirect 
as well as direct impacts of the Federal budget on 
financial markets, one has to translate the figures on 
spending and receipts in terms of their likely effects 
on the volume of the Federal debt held by the public 
and then to add such important influences as the projected 
speed-up of corporate taxes and the increased sale of 
financial assets. When one does this, the over-all demands 
on the financial markets stemming from Federal fiscal 
developments are likely to be considerably larger this 
year than in 1965, although it is very difficult to 
pinpoint the exact timing of the asset transactions.  
This conclusion is based on the volume of Federal 
spending projected in the Budget Document which, unless 
developments in Viet Nam improve greatly soon, will no 
doubt prove understated. Nondefense spending also may 
be underestimated.  

Thus, if the projections of GNP that are currently 
prevalent prove to be true, in formulating monetary policy 
in the months ahead we will have to expect, and I feel 
should consider appropriate, further fairly rapid growth 
in the rate of over-all credit expansion as well as some 
additional increase in interest rates. Credit markets 
are in a sensitive state these days and recent events, 
such as the resumption of bombing in Viet Nam and the 
resultant increased talk of the likelihood of inflation 
and the need for a tighter monetary policy, have tended 
to make the interest rate outlook even more bearish. One 
near-term effect of this has been to keep the 3-month 
Treasury bill rate in the 4.60-4.65 per cent range and to put 
further upward pressure on bond yields.  

I am less sure about likely future monetary expansion 
than total credit expansion, since it is not at all clear 
how much elasticity we still have in the existing monetary 
stock; that is, how much the likely increase in the demand 
for balances for transactions purposes will be offset by 
the decrease in the demand for money as a result of a 
further likely rise in interest rates on substitutes for 
money. The rate of expansion in bank credit, as contrasted

-28-



2/8/66 -29

to total credit, will likely decline even if money 
supply and demand deposit growth continue substantial 
for, with rising market rates of interest, banks will 
find time and savings funds more difficult and costly 
to obtain. The slackened growth in bank time and 
savings deposits recently, despite the changes in 
Regulation Q in early December, may already be 
reflecting this fact.  

We are likely to have to support this course of 
domestic financial developments by further monetary 
restraint, but I would hope that the major share of 
any needed further restraint on the economy would come 
from fiscal policy.  

Interest rates are already historically high. If 
they go much higher, it may be difficult to get some of 
the sticky ones down when economic conditions call for 
lower rates. High interest rates also have significant 
differential effects on the various sectors of the 
economy, tending to limit growth-inducting investment 
more than consumption. In the period ahead, restraint 
on consumption may prove to be the more appropriate 
policy goal. Of course, if adequate anti-inflationary 
fiscal measures are not taken promptly enough, it will 
put an added burden on the more flexible monetary 
policy instrument to help keep further economic 
expansion on a sustainable basis.  

Mr. Hickman asked if there was any evidence that the Admin

istration was planning to increase the degree of fiscal restraint 

beyond that outlined in the report of the Council of Economic 

Advisers.  

Mr. Koch replied that, while he had no specific information 

on the subject, he assumed that the economists at the Council and 

Treasury were thinking about the possible need for further fiscal 

restraint.  

Mr. Hersey presented the following statement on the balance

of payments:



2/8/66

One of the most striking pieces of economic intel
ligence to emerge in the past fortnight was the news 
that U.S. imports in the last three months of 1965 were 
even larger than in the preceding three months, with 
only a slight decline in steel imports. Commerce 
Department analysts are adjusting the Census figures 
down in the fourth quarter and up in the preceding 
quarter, to correct for statistical lags. Even so, 
they find a rise at a 10 per cent annual rate. In 
relation to GNP, fourth-quarter imports were at an 
almost unprecedented 3.30 per cent of total GNP 
expenditures. If these high and rising imports are 
a harbinger of what we have to expect in 1966, and if 
we cannot improve much on the fourth-quarter trade 
surplus, which was only a little over $5 billion at 
an annual rate, the outlook for achieving any 
significant reduction in our international payments 
deficit will be bleak indeed.  

Imports in the fourth quarter were 17 per cent 
higher than those of the final quarter of 1964. The 
broad features of the upsurge that was occurring last 
year can be seen from corrected breakdowns available 
for the third quarter. First, imports of manufactures-
that is, of consumer goods and capital equipment-
have been rising at an accelerated pace. The trend 
has been steep for many years. In the mid-1950's 
these goods made up one-tenth of total imports. By 
1964 they were nearly one-fourth of the total, having 
risen at a rate of 18 per cent a year, compounded.  
But now this rise has accelerated to about 25 per cent 
per annum. Second, imports of semimanufactured and 
crude materials--which constitute about two-fifths of 
the total--had a rising trend from the mid-1950's to 
1962 of only 3 per cent a year, with large fluctuations 
of a cyclical character around this trend. From 1962 
to the present the rise has been steadily accelerating.  
Data for October and November, corrected as well as 
we can, indicate an annual rise in imports of materials 
at least as great as the 18 per cent shown for the 
third quarter. Finally, imports of petroleum (under 
the quota system since 1959) have been rising very 
slowly in value terms, and the same has been true of 
our imports of foods.  

Against this background, we must ask: is the rise 
of total imports going to continue in the 10-to-20 per 
cent range this year? Or, can we take reassurance from

-30-



2/8/66

the standard forecasts, which have been projecting a 
smaller rise--in the 5-to-10 per cent range? For 
example, the National Foreign Trade Council projection 
implies a rise to the fourth quarter of 1966 of only 
5 per cent, which is less than the 7 per cent average 
experienced in the past decade.  

In the past, rapid increase in imports has tended 
to go with heavy inventory investment and with rapid 
increase in the materials and business equipment 
components of the industrial production index. The 
indications that inventory investment in the fourth 
quarter was large are wholly consistent with the recent 
import picture. Under current conditions I regard the 
NFTC projection as implausibly low. The problem of 
slowing the rise in imports now is closely linked with 
the problem of holding down the rate of inventory 
investment and damping capital outlays.  

As I see it, the two big economic challenges that 
face the country are twin problems: how to end our 
balance of payments deficits soon, and how to make a smooth 
transition to stable growth at high employment.  
Excessive imports threaten our success on the balance 
of payments front; excessive inventory investments, 
along with excessively accelerated fixed capital 
investments, threaten the smooth passage we hope for 
in the economic life of the country.  

The growing uneasiness about prices can aggravate 
both problems. Fears of price increases may already be 
a motive for stocking and ordering ahead, and excessive 
bunching of ordering may already be giving a push to the 
upward movement of domestic prices and encouraging 
greater importing.  

Can we accept these conditions as necessary and 
inevitable, and hope to ride through them without 
fear either of a subsequent letdown in the domestic 

economy or of critical developments in the balance of 
payments? 

I won't try to deal with the domestic side of the 

question. For the balance of payments, after we get 
beyond the seasonally favorable first quarter the next 
several months may be extraordinarily critical ones.  

It is not only the import bill that is at stake.  
Excessive domestic demand can suck back potential 

exports as well as suck in imports. Export prospects

-31-



2/8/66

look reasonably favorable now, but there is no guaranty 

that sales will increase as much as we would like. If 
the trade balance fails to improve in the next few months, 
probably the balance of payments as a whole will worsen, 
for the adverse balance of capital movements and Government 

payments is likely to be somewhat larger in coming months 

than it was in the fourth quarter of 1965. And if the 

idea gains ground among investors and businessmen that 

the only hope the Government has for handling the balance 

of payments is instituting a set of controls more permanent 

and less voluntary than those we have now, capital outflows 
may well begin to accelerate again. Eventually our problems 

with the dollar could begin to resemble Britain's with 

sterling.  
The Administration has held out great hopes--most 

recently in the President's Economic Report--that "we 

intend to complete the job (of moving toward payments 
balance) this year." The question is, how is this to 
be done? 

I would like to quote, in conclusion, what seems to 
me a relevant part of a paragraph in the Economic Report, 
in which the President states that he will look to the 
Federal Reserve System for help in . . . "preventing ex
cessive credit flows that could carry the pace of expansion 

beyond prudent speed limits." 

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Mr. Hayes, who 

began the go-around, made the following statement: 

Now that we are one month into the new year, we 

have not only statistical evidence of a stronger economy 

in December than we believed it to be at our last meeting, 
but also clear signs that the rapid pace of the expansion 
is continuing. This year we see no sign of the "winter 
doldrums" that used to be a normal seasonal phenomenon 
early in the calendar year. Moreover, the outlook for 

1966 is very strong. In the private sector, besides the 

stimulus of vigorous consumer demand and record business 

outlays on plant and equipment, accelerated inventory 

accumulation may be becoming a significant additional 

factor.

-32-



2/8/66

Of course the Viet Nam war is a major factor affecting 
all prospective economic and financial developments. The 
rising scale of military operations has clearly contributed 
to the strong business outlook, has generated skepticism 
as to the realism of the Federal budget, and has been a 
major cause of continuing upward pressure on interest 
rates of all maturities. We must have in mind this 
dominant uncertainty, with its possibility for bringing 

unexpected changes in the economic picture in either 
direction.  

Notwithstanding the Administration's strenous efforts 

to produce a budget that would not add to inflationary 

pressures, the general atmosphere remains one of apprehen

sion that excessive demands are building up. Our analysis 

suggests that although the budget as presented should be 
much less stimulative than the extraordinarily stimulative 
1966 budget, it will still make a considerable expansionary 

contribution. All indications are that rising expenditures 
all along the line will increasingly press against available 

resources of labor and plant capacity. These pressures 

are likely to be especially noticeable in the area of 

manpower; and since the ranks of the unemployed consist, 
to a much greater degree than a year ago, of untrained 

workers, their absorption into employment could exert a 

strong initial drag on productivity. The changes of con

tinuing stability in unit labor costs appear dim. While 

the increase in industrial wholesale prices remained 

relatively moderate in 1965, with no signs of acceleration 

in the over-all index, the price advances were quite 

pervasive and indeed increasingly so as the year went by.  

The outlook for prices in 1966 is clearly disturbing; and 

the performance of the stock market this year, especially 

with respect to low-priced issues, has been just one 

more sign of growing inflationary psychology.  

Fragmentary balance of payments statistics, suggesting 

a deficit for the month of January, are not useful as a 

measure of the outlook for the year as a whole, because 

of the bunching last month of large Canadian issues 

originally scheduled for placement in November and December, 

besides unusually large tax and royalty payments to 

Venezuela and the Middle East. However, recent estimates 

of our prospective international transactions for 1966, 

made by a Governmental committee in Washington, are not 

encouraging. The benefits of an anticipated $900 million 

improvement in our trade surplus, together with a decline

-33-



2/8/66

in direct investment, increased investment income, and 
the absence of large sales of British official portfolio 
securities, may well be fully offset by increases in 
military and aid expenditures, in bank credit to 
foreigners, and in travel expenditures. And even the 
hoped-for improvement in our trade surplus seems a bit 
optimistic in view of the prospect for continued rapid 
expansion in the domestic economy and accompanying cost 
and price pressures.  

In the credit area, preliminary January figures 
suggest that the pace of the advance of the credit and 
liquidity indicators has moderated since December, 
although the gains were still rapid. Bank loan demand 
remains extremely active even at the higher interest 
rates charged since early December. This latter 
impression is verified by New York bankers who foresee 
no let-up in loan demand. Such factors as the upward 
drift of rates in the corporate bond market and the 
prospective speed-up in corporate tax payments are 
providing additional stimulus to loan demands, besides 
the general influence of the strong business outlook.  
Whereas reduced bank liquidity last year was not a 
major deterrent to the granting of all reasonable loan 
requests, there is now growing evidence of efforts by 
the New York banks to curb loan expansion. For one 
thing, I am glad to note an apparent increasing reluc
tance to finance transactions they consider more 
appropriate for the bond or equity markets, especially 
mergers and acquisitions.  

Despite some continued uneasiness, I think there 
are some signs that the tensions characterizing the 
short-term financial markets in December and part of 
January are gradually receding. The success of the 
Treasury's refunding operation should be a constructive 
influence. At the same time, however, the long bond 
markets have come under increased pressure, with no 
real assurance of stabilization as yet. Earlier yield 
adjustments in the long area had been relatively moderate, 
but the growing corporate calendar, the prospective large 
asset sales by Government agencies, and the already 
heavily committed position of insurance companies and 
other institutional investors are major factors 
currently affecting market sentiment.  

Turning to policy, I am impressed by the clear 
and present danger of inflation and by the fact that 
present fiscal policy plans do not provide any very

-34-



2/8/66

significant restraint. It is impossible to estimate as 
yet whether the combination of a very high level of 
credit demand and a somewhat more stringent supply will 
result in a moderation of the financial expansion without 
further restrictive steps. Restraint in the rate of 
credit expansion seems highly desirable for purely 
domestic reasons, apart from the important contribution 
such a move might make to our balance of payments.  

The nervous state of the money and capital 
markets during the last two months of adjustment to the 
higher discount rate and higher Regulation Q ceilings 
has made it difficult to keep reserves under sufficient 
pressure to encourage a slowing of credit expansion 
without excessive rate effects. The recent large 
Treasury refunding also required an especially solicitous 
attitude toward the state of the money and capital markets.  
Now that it is virtually completed, I would hope that net 
borrowed reserves could soon be restored to a range 
centering around something like $150 million, such as 
prevailed for sometime before last December's discount 
rate increase; and I would also hope that this would 
be consistent with other money market conditions similar 
to those prevailing in recent weeks. While I lean toward 
moving even a little further in the direction of reduced 
reserve availability, perhaps toward a target of $200 million 
or more net borrowed reserves, I think this decision might 
well be delayed until the next meeting, when we should 
have a better idea of the effects on credit expansion of 
our moves to date.  

With respect to Mr. Robertson's interesting 
memorandum,1/ I sympathize with his objective of more 
prompt counter-cyclical influence by open market opera
tions, as well as with his goal of wider swings in net 
borrowed reserves that would have the effect of diminishing 

1/ Entitled "A Free Reserve Proposal," and distributed 
to the Committee on January 27, 1966. A copy has 
been placed in the Committee's files.

-35-



2/8/66

the present public overemphasis on a given reserve 
figure. However, I wonder whether we can rely on 

required reserves as a valid short-run measure of the 
forces of credit expansion. It seems to me that we 
have a hard enough time interpreting credit and 
liquidity developments on even a monthly basis, let 

alone relying on an automatic reserve interpretation 

on a day-to-day basis. Insofar as a net borrowed 

reserve target is involved, I would much prefer, as 

a general rule, to wait three weeks or a month until 

the next meeting and then make a conscious judgment 

that the target should be higher, lower, or unchanged.  

The draft directive as proposed by the staff 1/ is 

entirely satisfactory.  
One possibility which the Board might wish to 

consider is an increase in margin requirements, in the 

light of the sharp rise in customer credit over the 

last five months, and particularly in December.  

Mr. Francis reported that economic activity in the Eighth 

District had continued to advance during the fall and early winter, 

but the growth rate probably had not equaled the rapid national 

increase. Employment in the District had risen since August, though 

at less than the national rate. Unemployment had declined in most 

of the area's major labor markets. In only two of the eight 

metropolitan areas of the District was the latest seasonally 

adjusted unemployment rate as much as 3 per cent. One of the areas 

was Fort Smith, Arkansas, where the Fort Chaffee military installa

tion was closed.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-36-



2/8/66 -37

McDonnell Aircraft, the region's largest employer, had 

received Defense Department contracts to step up production of the 

Phantom fighter plane, Mr. Francis said. In addition, the company 

was beginning to build versions of the Phantom for the British.  

The company planned to increase its employment between now and 

next fall by 4,000, to about 40,000. Other major companies in 

the District which had recently received contracts for military 

goods included Wagner Electric, General Steel Industries, Universal 

Match Corporation, and Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation. Each 

of those companies planned to increase its employment in the near 

future. Also, RCA commenced construction in December on a TV 

receiver manufacturing plant in the Memphis area; the plant was 

expected ultimately to employ about 7,500.  

Since August, Mr. Francis continued, manufacturing output 

in the District had risen moderately, following a rapid expansion 

in late 1964 and early 1965. Spending, as indicated by the volume 

of bank debits, had risen at a 12 per cent annual rate in the same 

period. Personal income, reflecting the higher level of employment 

and greater activity, had been about 9 per cent higher in recent 

months than it was a year earlier. Gross farm receipts were up 

3 per cent from the fourth quarter 1964 to the fourth quarter 1965.  

Returns from livestock jumped considerably, but were partially offset 

by reduced crop receipts. For the year 1965, income per farm was up 

about 5 per cent on both a gross and a net basis.



2/8/66 -38

Total credit at large District'banks had risen moderately 

since August, Mr. Francis said. Increases in total loans, 

particularly on real estate and to consumers, more than offset 

net sales of securities. Business loans had risen less than 

seasonally since August, following an unusually sharp rise last 

spring. Both demand and time deposits had gone up. Nevertheless, 

banks had been pinched for funds, and borrowings--both from the 

Federal Reserve Bank and from others--had been at higher average 

levels in the past three months than at any other time in over 

five years.  

In summary, Mr. Francis observed, economic activity 

appeared to be vigorous in the District. He based that conclusion 

on both the statistics and the optimism of those with whom he 

had talked. From a review of the national data, it appeared that 

the national scene was as strong or stronger than that of the 

District. Aggregate demand might be excessive, as evidenced by 

price rises, labor shortages, and the increased concern about 

guideposts.  

Mr. Francis said that he preferred not to make detailed 

comments on policy at this, his first, Committee meeting.  

However, with most measures of the banking system--bank reserves, 

loans, bank credit, time deposits, demand deposits, and money-

expanding rapidly during the past two months, with the current



2/8/66 -39

stimulative fiscal situation, and with the strong upward momentum 

in the economy, it would appear that insofar as the Committee's 

responsibility to the Treasury permitted some firming in monetary 

policy was indicated.  

Mr. Patterson reported that economic developments in the 

Sixth District continued to provide a base for strong credit 

demands, and the latest banking figures confirmed that conclusion.  

Loans at banks at leading cities in the District declined less in 

January this year than in 1965. District bankers were looking 

forward to continued loan expansion during 1966 although there 

were differences of opinion about its strength.  

A new round in the competition for time deposits might 

possibly be developing, Mr. Patterson said. Until recently, 

most bankers had adopted a "wait-and-see" attitude with respect 

to their rates on time deposits, and any increases in rates that 

were made were modest. Two weeks ago one of the large Atlanta 

banks launched an extensive advertising campaign, offering to 

pay 4-3/4 per cent on savings certificates for as short a time 

as 90 days and for as small amounts as $25. A newly opened 

nonmember bank in New Orleans was offering 5 per cent on savings 

certificates held for one year in amounts of $25 and over. So 

far, no reaction had been noted from the other banks or savings 

institutions. Negotiable certificates of deposit declined during



January at practically all the banks in leading Sixth District 

cities, the major exception being a bank that had aggressively 

competed on the basis of rates.  

For some time, Mr. Patterson observed, the Committee had 

been hoping that the dust would settle so that it could identify 

the forces that were responsible for the rate and loan behavior 

following the discount rate changes. That cloud of dust seemed 

to be very persistent. Even now, the Committee could not sort 

out clearly the technical, expectational, and real factors, and 

that seemed also to be the case for persons outside the System.  

Nevertheless, more and more of them were commenting on the 

apparently inconsistent behavior of rates and reserves. As was 

usual, they had been advising the System that something ought to 

be done. But, contrary to most occasions, they had not told the 

System how to go about controlling the expansion of reserves and 

the money supply without pushing up rates.  

When a dust cloud persisted for as long as this one had, 

Mr. Patterson continued, one was tempted to just rush in to do 

something, and hope for the best. On the other hand, if the 

Committee waited for the dust to settle completely, it might 

find that it had permitted undesirable developments that could 

not be changed after visibility had improved. There was, 

however, the possibility of adopting a policy that gently probed

2/8/66 -40-



2/8/66 -41

toward the desired goal with the understanding that that course 

of action might have to be altered at any time.  

Mr. Patterson commented that during recent weeks the 

Committee's operations had been primarily directed toward keeping 

the short-term Treasury bill rate within bounds, at the same time 

hoping that implementing that policy would not create too large a 

volume of reserves. It seemed appropriate after the Treasury 

refunding was completed to reverse the emphasis and to carry out 

a probing operation aimed at getting a tighter control of reserves.  

He did not think that the Committee should delay that type of 

action until after the short-term bill rate fell below the discount 

rate.  

Possibly some tightening of member bank reserve positions 

would result in a further increase in the bill rate, Mr. Patterson 

said. However, he was not sure that that would be the case. To 

the extent that the present bill rate structure resulted from a 

maldistribution of reserves and special credit demands, pressures 

on the short end of the market might be reduced in the future. But 

even the Treasury bill rate's remaining above the discount rate 

would not inevitably call for an immediate further increase in the 

discount rate as had sometimes been suggested. Member banks at 

present showed no disposition to take advantage of the differential 

between the bill and the discount rates. Should that develop, of 

course, the System's policy would have to be reconsidered.



2/8/66 -42

The Committee could not begin the probing operation until 

after the Treasury refunding program had been completed in mid

February, Mr. Patterson said. After that, he would like to see 

System operations so conducted as to reduce the availability of 

reserves, by moving toward a net borrowed reserve figure of around 

$200 million, as suggested by Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that, with the President's budget 

message having been made public, it appeared clearer than ever to 

him that the economy was poised to move strongly ahead in coming 

months and that price pressures were likely to mount and become 

more pervasive. The strength of demand showed up in the trend of 

fixed investment, the fast pace of inventory accumulation, 

burgeoning new orders and unfilled orders for durable goods, and 

an operating rate in the manufacturing sector now within a hair's 

breadth of the preferred rate.  

Earlier, Mr. Bopp said, when the margin of unutilized 

resources was larger, it had seemed reasonable to him to wait 

for actual price increases before taking additional restrictive 

action. The margin of unutilized resources was much narrower 

now and, although industrial prices had been fairly quiet recently, 

the stage was set for major increases in prices. In that 

environment, such increases could lead to speculative inventory 

building and other anticipatory actions, creating upward pressures 

which fed on themselves.



2/8/66 -43

Also, in that kind of environment uncertainties over the 

Federal budget became more crucial. As Mr. Bopp saw it, there 

were four principal areas of uncertainty, and all of them appeared 

to veer in an expansionary direction. First, with respect to 

spending: Viet Nam needs were unpredictable and spending estimates 

were very possibly on the conservative side. Moreover, it was 

uncertain whether and to what extent Congress would be successful 

in cutting domestic spending. Second, on timing: If, as some 

forecasted, the largest expansion in Government spending occurred 

in the second half of fiscal 1966 and early in fiscal 1967, such 

a "bunching up" of expenditures could prove quite stimulative 

even if total spending did not exceed the amount budgeted by the 

President. Third, on revenues: While a burgeoning economy might 

well generate the increased receipts envisaged by the President, 

and while his proposed tax changes probably would be passed, the 

question still remained of whether and to what extent the tax 

measures would restrain private spending during the current 

calendar year. Finally, as to additional fiscal restraint: 

Even if the President should move very quickly to recommend added 

taxes or reduced spending in the event of further inflationary 

pressures, those recommendations would have to be appraised and 

acted upon by Congress.



2/8/66

In short, with strong pressures from private demand and 

the many uncertainties in the fiscal outlook, it seemed to 

Mr. Bopp that action should be taken to damp current rates of 

flow of money and credit. However, with the Treasury refunding 

in progress, there was a question of whether to wait until the 

next meeting of the Committee before imposing additional restraint.  

He would be inclined to move initially to tighten reserve 

availability as soon after February 15 as the Manager judged was 

appropriate in view of the refunding.  

The move, however, should be a moderate and gradual one, 

Mr. Bopp said. It might be necessary, among other things, to 

relieve some pressures on commercial banks, should they have 

strong credit demands at the same time they were experiencing 

trouble replacing CDs. He would rely mainly on the discount 

window to relieve any excessive pressure from those and other 

sources. The staff's draft directive appeared appropriate to 

him.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that the impact of fiscal policy on 

the economy this year seemed to be even less predictable than 

usual. The figures for Federal spending in the national income 

and "high-employment" budgets, which measured the impact of 

budget policy on the economy, probably would be on the low side, 

particularly in the area of defense--although the situation was

-44-



2/8/66 -45

subject to change almost on a daily basis. Despite the general 

uncertainty about the budget, it now appeared that fiscal policy 

would be stimulative, at a time when aggregate demand was pressing 

on the nation's capacity to produce. Under those circumstances, 

higher taxes than were now contemplated seemed indicated. Until 

such plans emerged, he thought the Committee should rely on 

reduced credit availability and on tighter money.  

Such a course of action was also indicated by current 

developments in the economy, Mr. Hickman said. As the staff had 

pointed out in the green book, GNP in the first quarter would 

probably increase by at least as much as in the fourth quarter 

of last year. Industrial production through December exceeded 

the most optimistic expectations. All major price indexes 

continued to move up, with the resurgence of farm and food 

prices at wholesale presaging further increases at retail.  

Mr. Hickman thought recent price developments were not 

surprising in view of the kinds of pressures now impinging upon 

resource utilization. The Cleveland Reserve Bank's informal 

survey in late January of manufacturing firms in the Fourth 

District indicated widespread manpower shortages, especially for 

firms in the machinery and fabricated metals industries, where 

the work week was currently ranging from 50 to 60 hours. In some 

cases, pressures were also developing on plant capacity because



2/8/66 -46

new facilities were not coming on stream rapidly enough to offset 

rising order backlogs. Moreover, several important industries in 

the District emphasized limitations imposed by streched-out delivery 

dates for machinery. Many firms were already operating above 

preferred utilization rates and would have difficulty handling any 

further increase in orders. The backlog of defense orders was 

already large, and another surge of orders would simply intensify 

problems of capacity and priorities.  

On the financial front, Mr. Hickman continued, increases 

in nonborrowed reserves, money supply, and time deposits apparently 

had slowed to a less frenetic pace in recent weeks. Nevertheless, 

over-all rates of increase in those variables since the discount 

rate action had been excessive and inconsistent with his view of 

appropriate monetary policy.  

Because of the massive Treasury refunding, Mr. Hickman said, 

there was little that the Committee could do now of a constructive 

nature, particularly in view of the unsettled state of the bond 

market and the probable churning in the after-market. Nevertheless, 

some moderate corrective action might be possible later this month, 

if the bond market settled down. In the past four weeks, the net 

reserve position of banks had averaged slightly above zero, and 

bank borrowings had averaged about $400 million, which created 

slightly easier conditions than Mr. Hickman thought the Committee



2/8/66 -47

had intended, even during a period of even keel. He hoped that it 

would soon be possible for the Manager to move net reserve positions 

back to levels prevailing before the last discount action. Once the 

Treasury refunding was out of the way, he would prefer a still deeper 

level of net borrowed reserves and correspondingly higher bank 

borrowings.  

For reasons already indicated, Mr. Hickman did not agree with 

the second paragraph of the staff's draft directive. It seemed to 

him that it was time for the Committee now to begin to reduce credit 

availability, which would mean higher interest rates rather than 

stable rates, given the current strength of loan demand. That approach 

would involve less tampering with the economy than would any system 

of credit rationing based on vague distinctions as to what are and 

are not productive uses of credit.  

Mr. Maisel thought that if the Committee examined the Economic 

Report it could derive certain assumptions as to where monetary policy 

was expected to aid stabilization in the current situation. Monetary 

policy was expected to aid in containing the expansion of fixed 

investment and to cut back on inventory investment. In addition, 

it appeared as if a decrease in the net export balance would aid 

the fight against inflation.  

With respect to the latter point, Mr. Maisel thought the 

Committee should give more consideration to the question of whether



2/8/66 -48

it now had a contradiction in the directive. Could it expect mon

etary policy to help in restraining inflationary pressures and at 

the same time aid in achieving balance in the country's international 

payments? If the Committee was to fight inflation, shouldn't the 

net export balance decrease? Could it expect the current account 

to carry as much foreign investment as it had in the past? 

Mr. Maisel agreed with the previous statements around the 

table that tighter fiscal policy at this time might be proper. He 

would doubt, however, that tighter fiscal policy would be tried 

until monetary policy had had its chance to decrease demand. As 

a result he believed that the rate of expansion of total credit 

had to be cut back at least to where it was in the Committee's 

previous policy period.  

The Desk should put more emphasis on the rate of expansion 

of nonborrowed reserves, Mr. Maisel said. That rate of expansion 

should be reduced to prior levels, even if that caused somewhat 

higher interest rates. The proposal in Mr. Robertson's memorandum 

might be a way of achieving the cut in the expansion of nonborrowed 

reserves and, therefore, it should go into effect as soon as possible.  

He thought the Committee also should be concerned with the question 

of how much of market action and disturbances resulted from rumors 

without proper knowledge of what the System was attempting to do.  

Specificially, he asked whether the market would operate better if



2/8/66 -49

it knew that the Federal Reserve was willing to operate at a 

much higher level of borrowed reserves without resorting to 

another increase in the discount rate.  

Mr. Daane said he confessed to being a bit gloomy about 

the outlook after listening to, and agreeing with, the people 

who had spoken thus far. He noted particularly Mr. Holland's 

expectation of a continued price upcreep; the statement by 

Mr. Hersey, whose pessimism regarding the balance of payments 

was, he thought, well founded; and the excellent analytical 

case Mr. Koch had made for further fiscal restraint, about which 

Mr. Daane was not sanguine at this point. While he shared 

Mr. Koch's distaste for higher interest rates he thought that, 

were it not for the necessity of maintaining an even keel during 

the current large Treasury financing, the Committee should be 

trying to restore a somewhat deeper level of net borrowed 

reserves. He would favor such a course as soon as it was 

feasible and to the extent that it could be accomplished without 

racheting interest rates upward. Because he felt somewhat 

skittish on the latter score, he would go along with a target 

of $150 million for net borrowed reserves; otherwise he would 

have been inclined to accept a somewhat deeper target. The 

staff's draft directive appeared appropriate to him.



2/8/66 -50

Mr. Daane was sympathetic with the goals of Mr. Robertson's 

memorandum. However, he recalled the occasion, a number of years 

ago, when he had tried to disabuse the Committee of the view that 

free reserves were an appropriate guide for policy, and had 

received a letter from Woodlief Thomas saying that free reserves 

were the only serviceable policy benchmark available to the 

Committee. His own views had come full circle. He shared 

Mr. Robertson's opinion that the free reserve figures should not 

be closely pinpointed, and he would like to see the market rely 

less on those figures as indicators of policy--as he believed it 

was already doing. He was skeptical, however, that the Committee 

could abandon free reserve figures for target purposes; and he 

was even more skeptical that it could use required reserves as 

a policy guide in the manner Mr. Robertson had suggested. While 

he shared all of Mr. Robertson's reservations about free reserves, 

he thought they still were the most useful benchmark to indicate 

the nature of the thinking around the table. Recently, the net 

borrowed reserve figures had been showing relatively wide 

fluctuations so, in effect, the Committee was accomplishing one 

of Mr. Robertson's objectives. In Mr. Daane's judgment those 

wider swings were appropriate; but he hoped that the Committee 

would not try to put greater emphasis on aggregate magnitudes 

and quantities in its instructions to the Desk.



2/8/66 -51

Mr. Mitchell remarked that many of those speaking today, 

including the staff, seemed to be saying that there was something 

wrong with the budget submitted to Congress by the Administration.  

He did not think it really needed defense--and yet, perhaps, some

thing should be said in its favor. In his judgment the budget 

represented a plan that encompassed the possibilities of both 

peace and war; it straddled that question, and necessarily so.  

What was the Committee's role when confronted with that 

type of budget? Mr. Mitchell thought the answer lay in the 

Committee's flexibility to fill in during the interim. The 

Committee prided itself on its flexibility but, at the same time, 

it could not pinpoint the effects of its actions because it did 

not have the necessary selective controls. If it were able, 

the Committee might well be trying to do something about the 

inventory situation, which in his judgment was an element not 

of strength in the economy but of great weakness.  

The Committee did have controls over the banking system, 

Mr. Mitchell said, through which it could put some pressure on 

bank reserves, although not without some interest rate effects.  

Another step could be taken immediately--to advise banks coming 

to the discount window to repay their borrowings more quickly 

and to adjust their liquidity positions. The System attempted 

to discourage continuous borrowing under the terms of Regulation A,



2/8/66 -52

but there was no hard and fast rule as'to what "continuous 

borrowing" was, and banks were able to maintain an illiquid 

position by shifting between the window and the Federal funds 

market. System discount officers could be of some help in 

contributing to the Committee's over-all objective of 

restraining borrowing.  

As to policy, Mr. Mitchell said he agreed that at this 

point the Committee should not interfere with the Treasury 

financing. However, he favored moving toward greater firmness 

as soon as the Manager judged that the financing was no longer 

an important consideration; and increasing the degree of firmness 

over time if present circumstances persisted. As long as there 

was a belief that the country faced developments such as were 

associated with the Korean war, such a policy would be desirable 

to help reduce inflamed expectations.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that all of the opinions 

expressed thus far today seemed to be consistent with the state

ment in the first paragraph of the staff's draft directive that 

the economy was expanding vigorously. Pressures seemed to be 

building in almost every facet of the economy, and developments 

since the Budget Message suggested that Federal expenditures 

would be higher than estimated in that document, implying still 

greater pressures ahead. It was important that efforts be made



2/8/66 -53

by any available means to keep the pressures from mounting and, 

accordingly, there was merit in the idea of fiscal restraint to 

curb demand. But such restraint did not seem to be in immediate 

prospect. In his opinion the Committee should be exerting more 

restraint; it should be supporting the December discount rate 

increase by acting to reduce reserve availability.  

Recently, Mr. Shepardson said, he had been studying the 

possibilities of developing a better target for operations than 

free or net borrowed reserve targets. As everyone knew, there had 

been periods when the Committee had maintained negative reserve 

targets but had not achieved its objectives for bank credit because 

of rising credit demands. He had discussed the possibility of 

using some other measure, such as total reserves, with members 

of the staff, but thus far had not found a satisfactory approach.  

For lack of a better suggestion at this time, he recommended 

working back toward the level of net borrowed reserves that had 

prevailed before the discount rate action, and perhaps to higher 

level. He recognized the Treasury financing situation but, if 

he correctly interpreted the statements made today on that 

subject, the financing had been generally successful and the 

problem of digestion of the new issues was a relatively small 

one. Moreover, the need for maintaining an even keel would 

become progressively less over the coming period.



With those circumstances in mind, Mr. Shepardson said, 

he would change the second paragraph of the draft directive to 

read: "In light of the successful Treasury financing, System 

open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 

shall be conducted with a view to moving toward somewhat firmer 

conditions in the money market." With such an instruction, he 

would expect the level of net borrowed reserves to be moved 

toward the $200 million level--not immediately, but before the 

next meeting of the Committee.  

Mr. Mitchell suggested that the Manager indicate how long 

he thought even keel conditions should be maintained.  

Mr. Holmes replied that in his opinion it certainly would 

be desirable to maintain an even keel through the payment date, 

February 15. As to the subsequent period, while he could not be 

certain, it appeared that even keel considerations were likely 

to be less important than usual at that stage of a refunding.  

As he had noted, the underwriters' positions in the new issues 

were rather minimal and it was conceivable that they would be 

even more minimal a week from now. He did see one problem with 

Mr. Shepardson's proposal for the directive, connected with the 

description of the Treasury financing as "successful." Certainly 

it had been successful in achieving the objective of extending 

the average maturity of the debt. From the point of view of

2/8/66 -54-



2/8/66 -55

market developments, however, it had been somewhat less success

ful; it was quite unusual to see the price of a new security 

move down to par at this point.  

Mr. Shepardson agreed that there might be some problem 

with the word "successful," but it was the best word he could 

find. He thought it definitely was desirable to start moving 

toward deeper net borrowed reserves; since the distribution of 

the new securities already was fairly well accomplished, it 

would be unfortunate, in his judgment, to wait three weeks before 

doing so. The objective at first might be to restore the earlier 

target level of $150 million net borrowed reserves. To his 

recollection the Committee had not changed that target--the 

figures had slipped away in the course of recent developments-

and its restoration could be considered to be consistent with 

maintaining an even keel. As he had indicated, however, he 

favored going a little further than that before the next 

meeting.  

Mr. Daane suggested that Mr. Shepardson's objective might 

be accomplished by having the directive call for moving toward 

firmer conditions "as soon as the current Treasury financing 

permits." 

Mr. Young then proposed the following language: "In 

the light of the imminent conclusion of the current Treasury



2/8/66 -56

financing, System open market operations until the next meeting 

of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 

in the first part of the period about the same conditions in 

the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, and in the 

latter part of the period moving toward firmer conditions." 

Mr. Daane remarked he could live with that language but 

it seemed a little cumbersome. He would prefer a formulation 

along the lines of his own suggestion.  

In response to a question by Chairman Martin, Mr. Holmes 

said the intent of the members of the Committee who had spoken 

thus far was clear; they favored moving to firmer conditions 

after the Treasury financing.  

The economic go-around then resumed with the following 

statement by Mr. Robertson: 

The round-up of evidence suggests that a strong 
business advance is still under way. With demands 
already beginning to press hard upon our narrow 
remaining margin of available resources, this 
situation possesses all the ingredients for an 
outbreak of an inflationary public psychology. The 
latest readings on the price indexes are up somewhat, 
even though chiefly because of higher agricultural 
prices. Other signs of a possible developing ebullient 
attitude are exemplified by the apparent inclination 
of businesses to commence some hoarding of both 
materials and labor, and--in some cases--to borrow 
now before interest rates rise further and lendable 
funds become harder to locate. There also is the 
possibility that Viet Nam developments will do more 
to aggravate than to calm these inflationary expecta
tions in the weeks and months ahead.



2/8/66

This is the kind of situation in which we must be 
alert to the signs of an inflationary outbreak and be 
prepared to adopt a firm counter-inflationary stand by 
a wise combination of fiscal and monetary policy. We 
have the new budget figures now, even though it is 
generally recognized that the visissitudes of the war 
effort render the figures more than ordinarily uncertain.  
While the analysts are still arguing over the fine 
points of the budget's impact, I am inclined to regard 
it as just a shade more stimulative than in the second 
half of 1965. The additional money-raising actions of 
the Government may be almost but not quite enough to 
offset the expansive effect of the step-up in Federal 
spending. But no matter how you shade it--either a 
little more stimulative or about the same--the Federal 
budget will do little, if anything, to help restrain 
any upthrust of private demands. This means that 
monetary policy must bear the brunt of dampening 
excessive demands if they actually develop.  

We are now in a period of "even keel" that 
probably has to stretch over a good part of the time 
between now and the next meeting of the Committee, 
although the relatively smaller dealer awards of the 
new 5's suggest that we might not have to hold very 
much beyond payment date. Nevertheless, I would agree 
that any significant further firming in our policy 
must wait until at least the March 1 meeting.  

In the interim, however, there are two operational 
considerations we could have in mind that might make 
our next policy change easier to accomplish. One is 
to define our current "even keel" with the same 
qualifications the Manager attached to the term three 
weeks ago, namely, that market responses to basic 
military, economic, and budgeting developments should 
only be moderated and not completely offset. The 
second adaptation I would suggest is to permit a 

somewhat greater range of movement in net borrowed 
reserves, along the lines of the memorandum I circulated 
to the Committee ten days ago. I will not take the 
time to reiterate here all the arguments put forth in 
that document, but will simply suggest that net 
borrowed reserves be centered on $100 million, but 
permitted to range between $0 and $200 million as my 
memorandum suggests. That would mean dropping toward 
$200 million if required reserves are larger than

-57-



expected, and rising toward zero if credit demands are 
less than expected. This would not do violence to the 
"even keel" principle but would give us a better basis 
for maneuver come the first of March.  

With this interpretation, I would be willing to 
vote in favor of the draft current directive distributed 
by the staff.  

Mr. Robertson added that he also would concur in a revision 

of the directive such as had been suggested, calling for firming 

after the payment date. He was grateful for the sympathetic 

comments made with respect to his memorandum, and he would simply 

note that he hoped further consideration would eliminate skepticism.  

Since the members were aware of the need to get away from fixed 

targets he would suggest that the staffs of the Board and the 

Reserve Banks be requested to give consideration to the problem; 

if his suggestion was not the best, the staff might be able to 

offer a better suggestion.  

Mr. Hickman commented that the Committee might want to 

plan on discussing Mr. Robertson's proposal in depth, perhaps at 

a time several months from now.  

Chairman Martin agreed that the staff should consider the 

subject and that at some time the Committee might hold a discussion 

not only of Mr. Robertson's paper but of any others that were 

prepared. It would be desirable, he thought, for other members 

who were so inclined to present papers to the Committee.

2/8/66 -58-



2/8/66 -59

Mr. Wayne then reported on Fifth District business 

conditions, noting that they continued to follow a strong upward 

course. December increases in nonfarm employment and factory 

man-hours were even stronger in the District than in the nation 

as a whole. Manufacturers reported that they felt the pinch of 

tight labor markets in the higher costs incurred to find and train 

the workers needed to meet existing commitments. Furniture 

producers complained of the limited supply and rising cost of 

labor, and some were unable to promise deliveries of popular 

lines in less than four months. The textile industry was beset 

by other problems in addition to labor shortages. Leaders of 

the industry said they could meet Defense Department needs only 

by reducing production and delaying deliveries to civilian 

customers in some product lines. They felt, however, that the 

resulting upward pressure on prices could be controlled by their 

determination to hold the line. Textilemen were also concerned 

lest domestic shortages lead to increased imports, a development 

that would concern the Committee as well because of its implica

tions for the balance of payments.  

On the national scene, Mr. Wayne continued, the long

sustained business expansion showed increasingly disturbing signs 

of becoming a classical boom. Gains in business activity in 

December were outstandingly broad and strong and there were no signs



2/8/66 -60

of slackening in January. Pervasive upward pressure on prices 

continued, with wholesale prices rising by 1 per cent from October 

to December and by 3.4 per cent for the year. Labor markets were 

progressively tighter, and optimal rates of capacity utilization 

had been passed in a number of industries. Order backlogs 

continued to grow steadily, with an especially large rise in 

December. Unfilled orders for durable goods had risen every 

month for two years, but they rose about as much in the last 

four months of 1965 as in the first eight months of the year.  

Business generally seemed under growing pressure to step up 

investment in both plant and inventories. Business expectations 

were increasingly buoyant and credit demands continued unusually 

heavy despite sharply higher interest rates. The budget 

presented two weeks ago had apparently made no contribution 

toward reducing inflationary sentiments or settling the money 

and capital markets.  

Against that background of the economy's exuberant 

advance, Mr. Wayne said, the growth of reserves, bank credit, 

and the money supply in recent weeks had not been consistent 

with the rationale of the policy change made in December. From 

December 29 to January 26 weekly reporting banks showed smaller 

declines than in comparable periods of the previous two years in 

investments, total bank credit, demand deposits, and total



2/8/66 -61

reserves. The money supply apparently grew more in January than 

was normal for the month. He was aware that it had been necessary 

for the Committee to make a strong effort to provide stability 

and order in credit markets and that the recent rapid growth 

rates in money and credit had been a by-product of that effort.  

But if the Committee was not to negate the December action, it 

must now move to slow the growth of reserves, credit, and the 

money stock. The low level of bank borrowing in the past three 

weeks suggested that the Committee might have been supplying 

reserves somewhat more freely than might be consistent with the 

December rate action.  

Credit demands had increased greatly in the past two 

months, Mr. Wayne observed, and the sharp rate increases over the 

period clearly had not exerted any appreciable restraint on 

credit and money growth. In the past ten days those demands had 

extended to the long end of the capital market and, along with 

military developments and the Treasury refunding, had raised 

yields on long-term Governments by as much as ten points. The 

heavier demand appeared to be associated in part with expectational 

factors that could pose a progressively more serious problem unless 

it was made clear that prompt and effective action would be 

taken to contain the boom which seemed to be developing.



2/8/66 -62

An unequivocal move toward a lower level of reserve 

availability seemed to Mr. Wayne to be necessary and also 

consistent with recent Administration evaluations of the situation, 

especially those of Secretary Fowler last week. Such a move 

manifestly involved risks, as a sudden turnabout in the market's 

assessment of the policy posture could produce serious market 

disorders. The increased reliance of bankers on the money 

market also could contribute to an over-reaction of money market 

rates to diminished reserve availability. Nonetheless, he was 

convinced that those risks would have to be assumed at some early 

stage if monetary policy was to make its proper contribution 

toward restraint. He would favor a move toward a lower level of 

reserve availability, and adoption of a directive which would 

contemplate that before the next meeting of the Committee.  

Mr. Clay remarked that once again the Committee was faced 

with a Treasury financing that tended to dominate policy considera

tions for the interval between meetings. It was essential, 

nevertheless, to evaluate the economic and financial situation 

apart from Treasury financing. So far as economic activity was 

concerned, the statistical measurements continued their upward 

revisions both as to what the economy had been doing and what it 

was doing now, and indeed as to what it probably would do.  

Accordingly, the relationship between resource availability and



2/8/66 -63

prices became of more crucial importance month by month. That 

was apparent also in the Tenth District where economic growth 

had been much slower than in the nation. Nevertheless, there was 

a growing scarcity of skilled workers in the region, with up

grading and salary adjustments becoming more noticeable. As a 

consequence, many firms were conducting training programs for 

production workers, and also were endeavoring to attract workers 

from outlying communities and rural areas.  

Looking beyond the immediate interval between meetings, 

Mr. Clay continued, consideration would need to be given to the 

possible application of further monetary restraint. That view 

was underscored by the fact that the Federal budget appeared to 

carry expansionary implications for the economy, even if Federal 

outlays were confined to the budget projections. What should be 

involved in such a policy change would be difficult to perceive, 

however. A judgment would need to be made as to the rate at 

which the economy's accelerating credit demands could be met 

without price inflationary developments. In making provision 

for the growth of the credit base, the changing mix of demand and 

time deposits would have to be taken into account. The problem 

would be further complicated by the marked movement of interest 

rates that had taken place since the monetary policy actions of 

early December and the apparent sensitivity of interest rates to



2/8/66 -64

further increase under current conditions, so that only limited 

restrictions on reserve availability might prove to be compatible 

with the current discount rate.  

As he had already indicated, Mr. Clay said, even keel 

considerations would need to prevail in the period ahead because 

of the Treasury financing. The draft economic policy directive 

appeared satisfactory to him.  

Mr. Scanlon observed that developments in January in the 

Seventh District provided further confirmation that the business 

upswing was continuing. Most District labor markets continued to 

tighten, backlogs of unfilled orders continued to rise, delivery 

schedules were lengthening, orders were being placed earlier, and 

reports of higher prices paid for components and raw materials 

were heard more frequently. Retail sales remained strong. Debits 

to demand deposits at District member banks were up 17 per cent 

from a year earlier in December, compared to a 12 per cent gain 

from 1964 for the year 1965 as a whole.  

Mr. Scanlon now saw some evidence that the domestic capital 

spending boom might have an adverse effect upon the balance of pay

ments in 1966 while contributing to domestic inflationary pressures.  

Machine tool orders placed by domestic users in the fourth quarter 

rose sharply from the year-earlier level while foreign orders, 

discouraged by lengthening lead times, were down substantially.



2/8/66 -65

After allowance for seasonal forces, credit demands still 

appeared very strong, Mr. Scanlon continued. Loan liquidation in 

January was relatively larger in the District than in the nation 

as a whole, but to a large extent that reflected pay-downs-

especially by machinery and other hard goods manufacturers--on 

the very large borrowings over the December tax and dividend 

period. He had seen no indication of any diminution in the 

underlying strength of credit demands. Despite the seasonal 

reduction in loan volume, the major Chicago banks had moved to a 

deeper deficit position over the past month as their holdings 

of Governments rose and deposits declined.  

Like others, Mr. Scanlon said, he was pleased to receive 

Mr. Robertson's memorandum of January 27, since he thought it 

desirable that the Committee give further consideration to the 

form and content of its directive. He would not take time today 

to indicate the points on which he agreed or disagreed, but would 

merely state that Mr. Robertson had given the Committee something 

to work from, and that the Committee should pursue and not dismiss 

the matter.  

As to the current situation, Mr. Scanlon remarked, System 

policy appeared to be lending support to the rising pace of business 

activity. He believed that the System should undertake to moderate 

further the rapid pace of monetary expansion as soon after the



2/8/66 -66

current Treasury financing as was feasible in the judgment of the 

Manager. He would concur in any directive that so specified.  

Mr. Galusha reported that the Ninth District continued to 

do exceedingly well economically. As noted in the green book, it 

was benefiting especially from higher farm prices. District cash 

farm income reached an all-time high in the fourth quarter of 

1965; the quarterly total was up a full 10 per cent from a year 

ago. And of course the outlook was bright--for farmers, if not 

consumers. Indeed, the recent and prospective behavior of farm 

prices might well seriously affect the future course of money 

wages, as Mr. Holland had observed. There appeared to be nothing 

in the District's agricultural situation to suggest that prices 

to consumers would break at all in the next twelve months.  

Mr. Galusha noted that the Reserve Bank's examination 

reports for 1965 recently had been analyzed. Of 123 banks, 19 

were eliminated because they consistently had low loan volumes 

and seldom had any criticized loans. The remainder fell into 

two groups--the consistent problem banks, numbering ten in all, 

and the remaining 94, comprising the great majority. The latter 

group had increased their loan ratios slightly--from 48 per cent 

in both 1963 and 1964 to 50 per cent in 1965. Their classified 

loans had dropped from 3.2 per cent in 1963 to 2.5 per cent in 

1964 and then to 2.2 per cent in 1965. The conclusion might be



2/8/66 -67

drawn that the strong loan demand in the period had enabled the 

banks with reasonably good management to upgrade the quality of 

their loan portfolios. Conversely, the problem banks had slipped 

slightly. Classified ratios for them rose to 7.7 per cent in 

1965, from 6.8 per cent in 1963 and 4.8 per cent in 1964.  

Mr. Galusha said that he would omit the other comments he 

had prepared on District developments because they were largely 

reiterative of statements already made. As to open market policy, 

an even keel seemed to be indicated, at least for the next week 

and possibly beyond. He would favor holding money market conditions 

unchanged for the whole period until the Committee's next meeting; 

in his judgment it would be unwise to decide today on a change in 

policy that could not be put into effect until very near the time 

of the next meeting.  

Mr. Galusha added that he was unhappy about phrases like 

"holding money market conditions unchanged," or "maintaining about 

the same conditions in the money market," because those phrases 

connoted a qualitative and quantitative appraisal that had been 

and would continue to be illusory. He hoped the day would soon 

come when the Committee could take positive action to curb sharply 

the growth of credit and inflation. As to the latter, the signs 

were showing up in the business community of the Ninth District 

with distressing and alarming frequency.



2/8/66

Mr. Galusha concluded with an expression of gratitude to 

Mr. Holland for his letter of January 18, 1966, explaining the 

proposal he made at the preceding meeting.1/ In his judgment both 

Mr. Holland's proposal and that made by Mr. Robertson warranted the 

Committee's fullest consideration; they went to the heart of the 

Committee's operating procedure.  

Mr. Swan reported that business conditions in the Twelfth 

District continued to show considerable strength. Despite reports 

of tight labor markets, the aerospece industries reported a 

surprisingly large employment gain in December. They added almost 

9,000 employees in that month, bringing their total increase since 

the low of March 1965 to 48,000. Their employment level in 

December was 594,000, still about 40,000 below the peak of 

December 1962.  

As elsewhere, Mr. Swan said, in the Twelfth District banks 

seemed to be facing a strong loan demand. They had been substantial 

buyers of Federal funds throughout January and early February. At 

weekly reporting banks savings deposits declined in January and 

negotiable CDs and other time deposits rose considerably less than 

a year ago. Still, at the moment at least, there was much less 

1/ Copies of this letter, addressed to Mr. Galusha, were sent to 

all members of the Committee and a copy has been placed in the 

Committee's files.

-68-



2/8/66 -69

concern than some weeks ago about the possibilities of excessive 

rates or destructive competition in seeking deposits of individuals 

through the use of savings certificates in various forms. That 

situation seemed to have settled down somewhat.  

Mr. Swan agreed with what had been said about the strength 

of the business and financial situation generally and about the 

desirability of moving toward a more restrictive credit policy.  

He favored slowing somewhat the rate at which reserves were being 

provided, and setting a somewhat deeper net borrowed reserves 

figure as the short-run target of operations after the payment 

date for the Treasury refunding. His only qualification was that 

the implications of the refunding for policy might have been 

understated somewhat in the discussion thus far. Despite the small 

participation of dealers, there was a question in his mind as to 

how firmly some of the new securities were held. Thus, while he 

would favor moving in the direction of a somewhat tighter policy 

after the payment date, he hoped the Manager was right in thinking 

that the market might already have discounted such a step. The 

move would have to be cautious and probing, given the sensitivity 

of the market and the price behavior of the new securities thus 

far. He agreed with those who questioned whether the Committee 

could, in fact, make a significant move before its next meeting.



2/8/66

For the directive Mr. Swan would accept either the staff's 

draft or one referring to the possibility of firming. If the 

Committee favored the latter, he would much rather put it in some 

such terms as "when conditions surrounding the Treasury financing 

permit" than "after the payment date," or "in the latter part of 

the period," because the Committee would have to rely on the 

Manager's judgment of the state of the market.  

Mr. Irons reported that Eleventh District economic condi

tions were strong in all of the major areas--production, employment, 

unemployment, retail trade as reflected by department store 

figures, and so forth. Weather conditions had been good in the 

District recently and, generally speaking, the agricultural 

picture was quite favorable with respect to both production and 

prices. Much of what Mr. Galusha had said about the farm situation 

in the Ninth District applied to the Eleventh District also.  

On the financial side, Mr. Irons said, bank loans in all 

major categories had declined in the District in the first four 

weeks of the year. Investments rose because of gains in holdings 

of Governments; holdings of non-Governments were down. Demand 

deposits showed seasonal declines, and time deposits continued 

to grow. The liquidity position of banks was reflected in part 

in their demand for Federal funds, which on a net basis had been 

running at about $400 million for the past two weeks. Borrowing

-70-



2/8/66 -71

from the Reserve Bank was negligible; apparently the large banks 

were using non-Federal Reserve facilities and the smaller banks 

in need of funds were borrowing from city correspondents. The 

situation with respect to Regulation Q had quieted down reasonably 

well. A number of bankers were negotiating rate increases when 

necessary, but they were not advertising higher rates and in 

general were trying to hold rates at reasonable levels.  

The general expectation in the District, Mr. Irons observed, 

was for continued over-all expansion, with capital expenditures 

rising further. There was an underlying concern about inflation; 

people found it hard to believe that the Administration could 

accomplish everything it planned domestically and in connection 

with Viet Nam.  

As to policy, Mr. Irons thought the point had been reached 

at which the Committee should work toward a deepening of net 

borrowed reserves. It would be desirable, in his judgment, to 

move as soon as possible from the average level of under $50 

million of the last three weeks up to the $100-$150 million range 

prevailing before the discount rate change.  

Mr. Irons believed that the second paragraph of the staff's 

draft directive was inconsistent with a policy decision calling 

for greater firmness during the coming period; it would be 

appropriate only if the decision was to maintain about the same



2/8/66 -72

conditions as in recent weeks. He had attempted an alternative 

formulation, as follows: "After settlement of the impact of the 

current Treasury financing, System open market operations until 

the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted so as to 

tighten further the conditions in the money market that have 

prevailed in recent weeks." He held no particular brief for 

that specific wording, but he would not want to refer to specific 

dates or parts of the period; such a procedure would set an 

undesirable precedent.  

Mr. Ellis commented that in a period when the economy of 

New England was reflecting a general surge of rising activity, 

there tended to be a sameness about the glowing reports from 

each segment. That fact lead him to mention just two points-

the deposit record of savings banks and the pressures on member 

banks in the First District.  

Deposit balances at regularly reporting mutual savings 

banks continued to grow, Mr. Ellis said, but at a slower pace.  

The December expansion was 0.8 per cent. Compared with a year 

ago, new deposits during December were 9 per cent higher, but 

withdrawals were up 15 per cent. The twelve-month net growth 

in deposit balances narrowed to 7 per cent from growth rates 

2 points higher a year ago.



2/8/66 -73

However, Mr. Ellis continued, savings deposits at the 

weekly reporting member banks showed a 17 per cent year-to-year 

gain, compared with 10 per cent for the U.S., and they continued 

to grow in the three weeks ending January 26. All other time 

deposits registered a 27 per cent twelve-month gain, one-tenth 

greater than the U.S. pattern. Those deposit inflows, coupled 

with a year-to-year increase in demand deposits of 6.5 per cent, 

helped reduce loan-deposit ratios from the regional average of 

74 per cent in November and December to 72.3 per cent in January.  

The leading money market banks in Boston continued to 

lean heavily on borrowed funds in meeting their reserve positions, 

Mr. Ellis said. Through CDs, Federal funds, short-term notes, or 

borrowings from the Federal Reserve, they had borrowed an average 

of 176 per cent of their required reserves during the past 20 

weeks, compared with 186 per cent for the eight New York City 

money market banks. Those Boston banks were still holding to a 

posture of meeting all their customers' requests--at least those 

of established customers.  

Mr. Ellis noted that Mr. Hersey had concluded his remarks 

with a quotation from the President's Economic Report on what the 

President requested of the System. He (Mr. Ellis) had planned to 

begin his remarks on monetary policy with a fuller version of the 

same quotation. On hearing Mr. Hersey, he was struck by the fact



2/8/66 -74

that the statement consisted of two parts, the first of which, 

"meeting the credit needs of a vigorous and growing economy," 

reflected a point made by Mr. Koch today. The second part, 

relating to the prevention of "excessive credit flows that could 

carry the pace of expansion beyond prudent speed limits," had been 

cited by Mr. Hersey and reflected a point the latter had emphasized.  

Retrospectively, Mr. Ellis continued, while the System's 

rate action in December had usefully allowed more realistic rates 

in relation to credit demands, the Committee's action in temporarily 

de-emphasizing reserve targets had facilitated a sharp expansion of 

reserves and credit in magnitudes that certainly strained the 

concept of "prudent speed limits." 

Looking ahead, Mr. Ellis said, some of the path was marked 

by the economic message and the budget. From the monetary viewpoint, 

one of the most important decisions was to forego tax rate increases 

in favor of accelerating tax payments. To the extent that such 

acceleration would have any restraining effect on total spending, 

it had to influence the taxpayers, both individuals and corporations, 

to forego spending they would otherwise have undertaken. While 

individuals might well reduce their takings by amounts roughly 

equivalent to the accelerated payments, corporations might well 

seek to hold to pre-established plans by borrowing funds to replace 

tax-drained cash positions. That alternative means of financing



2/8/66 -75

Federal outlays clearly threw additional burdens onto monetary 

policy. It involved an increment of borrowing in an economy 

that apparently was already being stimulated by a budget more 

stimulative this calendar year than last. In sum, fiscal 

restraint seemed more of a goal than a present likelihood.  

Clearly, Mr. Ellis observed, the need to distribute the 

new securities issued in the recent Treasury refunding suggested 

no immediate shift in monetary policy. But once the new issues 

had been distributed the market would be watching closely to 

identify the emerging posture of policy. As he listened to 

Mr. Holmes' report today, he got the impression that the market 

was waiting for the other shoe to fall. It appeared appropriate 

to delay no longer than absolutely necessary in recovering to 

at least the posture the Committee held before December, as a 

basis for future moves.  

Mr. Ellis thought that the most critical long-range 

policy choice facing the Committee was in deciding how much 

emphasis to place on alternative short-term targets of policy-

money market conditions, interest rates, or reserve growth.  

Experience suggested that the Committee never completely 

abandoned any one of the three; but it often elevated one to 

greater relative importance, and in the past few months it had 

placed relatively greater emphasis on rates. In the present



2/8/66 -76

context, he believed interest rates should not be accepted as a 

principal object of policy. Changed and changing price expectations-

from an expectation of a 2 per cent annual rate of increase to one 

of perhaps 2.5 or 3 per cent--coupled with foreseeable expansion in 

credit demands, suggested that the 1/2 point rise in short-term 

rates since November might not represent a completed adjustment 

to the new situation and outlook. However important interest rate 

objectives might properly become at some points in time, at present 

they did not serve as adequate substitutes for direct attention to 

the pace at which reserves were being created in relation to the 

economy's need for credit expansion. In his judgment, the Committee 

should move to restore "moderated reserve growth" as a prime 

target to guide the Manager's operations.  

In that context, Mr. Ellis found helpful the suggestions 

in both Mr. Robertson's recent memorandum and Mr. Holland's letter 

to Mr. Galusha. Both proposals started with the objective of 

improving the use of the net borrowed reserves concept as a target 

of policy. However much the Committee might challenge its present 

technical capacity to determine the "expected demand for required 

reserves and deposits" on a weekly basis, it remained true that in 

times of rising demands the Account Manager was required to seek-

within other constraints of rate trends and money market conditions--



2/8/66 -77

to meet in full all demands in excess of such expectations for 

reserve expansion, in order to achieve on average a target range 

of net borrowed reserves.  

As one alternative, Mr. Ellis commented, Mr. Robertson 

suggested that initially, at least, the Manager not meet any such 

demands for required reserves when they rise at a "faster than 

anticipated pace." Instead, he would allow net borrowed reserves 

to rise to the upper limit of a target range--$200 million at present, 

for example. Mr. Holland's approach would be to supply decreasing 

proportions of the desired reserves when their growth exceeded 

expected rates. Both approaches would (1) rely more on borrowed 

reserves; (2) allow more fluctuation in net borrowed reserves; 

(3) presumably result in somewhat greater fluctuations in bill 

rates; and (4) provide quicker responses to underlying shifts of 

trend. His personal preference would be for the Holland alternative, 

because it would apply to the whole range of reserve variations-

not just the amount within a preselected range--and it might 

facilitate more gradual adjustment of the Committee's target.  

It would avoid simply shifting attention from a target figure to 

a target range.  

Since the Committee obviously was not going to adopt 

either of the suggested alternatives today, Mr. Ellis said, he 

would urge that the Manager be directed to probe toward a deeper



2/8/66

level of net borrowed reserves when the market settled down from 

the current refunding. His own choice of target would be net 

borrowed reserves of $150 million, with the expectation that 

variations around that target would fall within plus or minus 

$50 million, as had been true on average during 1965. The major 

objective of moderating the pace of reserve growth was clearly 

described in the first paragraph of the directive. In the second 

paragraph he would avoid any effort to specify subperiods, and 

he favored language along the lines of that suggested by 

Mr. Shepardson.  

Mr. Balderston remarked that he was pleased by the 

unanimity of views on policy this morning, even though the 

circumstances from which it stemmed were not comforting. The 

economy was in a wartime boom and risking uncontrolled escalation 

unless restraint, both monetary and fiscal, was applied without 

delay. Many of the Committee members had noted that because 

plant and inventories were being built in the expectation of 

enlarged demand based upon the pyramiding of war orders and 

private buying, prices were tending to push steadily upward.  

In short, the economy was pressing hard against its resources-

human and other--with the over-all unemployment rate about the 

same as in the expansion of 1956 and early 1957, and with the 

precentage of adult men unemployed at 2.3 per cent and of married

-78-



2/8/66 -79

men at 1.8 per cent. Farm land values continued to advance; the 

national average rose 6.6 per cent in the year ending November 1 

last. There was no substitute for real restraint that bit, 

especially at a time when a portion of bank credit was being 

used for speculative purposes and for the promotion of such 

activities as mergers, take-overs, and similar ventures.  

Reflecting current ebullience, Mr. Balderston said, 

January trading on the New York Stock Exchange stayed at the high 

level of last fall, with common stock prices rising further. The 

volume of daily transactions during the first three weeks of 

January was above the historic peak of 8.7 million shares reached 

in December. Since July 1965, net debit balances had risen $660 

million; or 13-1/2 per cent, which about offset the decline in 

that form of stock market credit between the November 1963 change 

in margin requirements and July 1965. Not only had margin 

buying expanded but one could not help but suspect that credit 

for the buying of stocks was being obtained through bank loans 

and the resetting of mortgages. There was something reminiscent 

of American Founders in the exuberant reception accorded the 

Manhattan Fund. Its focus upon special situations reflected the 

mood of the moment.  

Mr. Balderston went on to say that two types of increased 

efficiency in the use of bank credit and of the underlying



2/8/66 -80

reserves might tend to offset such braking of bank credit expansion 

as the System sought to apply between last spring and the December 

change in the discount rate. Since then, availability had not 

been curbed visibly, at least by the central bank. The two 

efficiencies were the increased turnover of demand deposits and 

the greater reliance on Federal funds. The turnover rates in 

1965 were 12 per cent higher than in 1964 outside of New York 

City and 13.7 per cent higher within it. The second type of 

efficiency that influenced reserve utilization was resort to the 

Federal funds market. In addition, the use of reserves had been 

altered since earlier periods of bank credit restraint, such 

as those of 1957 and 1959, by changes in the deposit mix.  

Although total reserves rose last year at an annual rate of 5.2 

per cent, time deposits--against which the reserves required 

were only 4 per cent--rose at an annual rate of 16.3 per cent.  

The mix of time and demand deposits had altered markedly since 

earlier periods when restraint was called for. That might 

explain why bank credit, as reflected by total member bank 

deposits, rose last year by 9.1 per cent and the money supply 

by 4.8 per cent while the System was intending to apply restraint.  

It was clear to Mr. Balderston that the time had come to 

deepen the net borrowed reserve figure substantially as soon as 

feasible after the current financing. He would hope that well



2/8/66 -81

before the next Committee meeting the net borrowed reserve figure 

would rise above $150 million, with subsequent targets substantially 

larger. When resources were being used fully, as they were now, 

it was appropriate to force banks to get more of their reserves 

through borrowing at the Reserve Banks. He shared the view 

expressed so generally at this meeting that there was no time 

to lose; in fact, the bus might already have been missed.  

Chairman Martin commented that in his judgment the System 

had performed quite well over the past few months. The Committee 

should not lose sight of the fact that economic pressures had been 

mounting steadily. Various impediments to the free flow of funds 

had had to be removed, and when the System took the rate actions 

of December it was clear that a difficult money market operation 

would be involved. All it all, the System had come through that 

operation quite well. Now some people were beginning to say not 

that the actions were wrong but that they should have gone 

further.  

At present, the Chairman continued, the Committee ought 

to be reasonably cautious about keeping the flow of funds as 

orderly as possible. The experience with the current Treasury 

refunding was typical of the uncertainties of the current period.  

For a time--about the middle of last week--it appeared as if the 

refunding might be a failure; but it turned out to be substantially,



2/8/66 -82

although not overwhelmingly, successful, despite the fact that the 

subscription books happened to be opened on the day the President 

announced the resumption of bombing of North Viet Nam. Unfortunate 

coincidences of that kind were likely to reoccur for some time to 

come, and the more orderly the Committee could make any adjustments 

the better it would be. As to the directive, he would have read 

the staff's draft as giving the Manager sufficient latitude to 

accomplish that objective, but perhaps the language should be 

made more specific.  

There followed a discussion of possible alternative 

wordings of the second paragraph of the directive, in the course 

of which Mr. Wayne suggested instructing the Account Management 

to move toward somewhat lessened reserve availability, rather than 

toward firmer money market conditions. Although he personally did 

not feel strongly about the matter, the former type of instruction 

would seem to reflect the sense of today's discussion better.  

Mr. Wayne also suggested that the move should be called for in the 

coming period "with appropriate regard for the current Treasury 

financing." A number of members concurred in Mr. Wayne's 

proposals, and there was a suggestion that the reduction in 

reserve availability to be sought should be described as "gradual." 

Chairman Martin remarked that the present was a period 

in which operations based largely on the "color, tone, and feel"



2/8/66 -83

of the market would seem appropriate, although as a rule he did 

not particularly care for those terms. Under existing circum

stances it might be difficult to achieve a gradual adjustment, 

but it would be desirable to make it as gradual as possible. He 

then asked Mr. Holmes if the Committee's intentions were clear.  

Mr. Holmes replied affirmatively. As he understood it, 

when considerations relating to the Treasury financing permitted, 

the Committee would like to have net borrowed reserves move back 

gradually to about where they were before the December discount 

rate action, recognizing that the market atmosphere now was 

somewhat different. While the objective might be difficult to 

reach, the desired course was clear. He added that he would 

interpret the references to the conclusion of the Treasury 

financing to take into account the aftermarket.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether the Manager would propose not 

to initiate a change until after any churning in the market had 

ended. Mr. Holmes replied that his course would depend on 

whether or not the churning was related to the refunding, as best 

as he could interpret it. If the churning appeared to be related 

to other developments he would not postpone firming action.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 

and seconded and by unanimous vote, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute 

transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive:



2/8/66 -84

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy is 
expanding vigorously, with prices continuing to creep 
up and credit demands remaining strong. Our inter
national payments continue in deficit. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to 
resist the emergence of inflationary pressures and to 
help restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments, by moderating the growth in the 
reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee, with 
appropriate regard for the current Treasury financing, 
shall be conducted with a view toward a gradual 
reduction in reserve availability.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that over the past several months 

some members had felt that the Committee should be moving toward 

reducing the rapid rate of credit expansion. Others had felt 

that no attempt to slow the expansion should be made until certain 

developments had occurred. Those developments had come to pass; 

and it seemed to him that the hesitancy to move earlier meant 

that now, when everyone recognized the existence of real pressures, 

the Committee might have to move less gradually than otherwise 

might have been possible. His own hope would be that since those 

pressures now were definitely apparent, the Committee would not 

act in too gradual a manner in meeting them. He recognized that 

the current Treasury financing had to be considered, but it would 

not constitute a constraint for long.



2/8/66 -85

Mr. Mitchell agreed, except that he noted that conditions 

in the money market had been disorganized during the recent period 

and that the market even yet had not settled down.  

Chairman Martin commented that it was desirable to get 

as smooth a flow of funds in the money markets as possible so 

that when an adjustment was made it would not prove disruptive.  

He hoped that in carrying out today's policy decision for a 

gradual move the Desk would maintain as much stability as it 

could. By the time of the next meeting the Committee would have 

more information on the basis of which it could decide whether 

a further policy change was indicated.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, March 1, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 7, 1966 

Draft Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on February 8, 1966 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding vigorously, 
with prices continuing to creep up and credit demands remaining 
strong. Our international payments continue in deficit. In this 
situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to 
resist the emergence of inflationary pressures and to help restore 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by 
moderating the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 
money supply.  

In light of the current Treasury financing, System 
open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the same 
conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks.


