









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 13, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 1/ 
Shepardson

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, and Swan, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



9/13/66

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lewis, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Ratchford, Brandt, 
Baughman, Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. MacLaury, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the action taken by 
members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

on September 9, 1966, amending paragraph 2 
of the authorization for System foreign 
currency operations to read as follows, was 
ratified: 

The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 

arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System Open Market 

Account with the following foreign banks, which are among 

those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 

Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 

approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements on 

maturity:



9/13/66

Amount of Maximum 
Arrangement Period of 
(millions of Arrangement 

Foreign Bank dollars equivalent) (months) 

Austrian National Bank 100 12 
National Bank of Belgium 150 12 
Bank of Canada 500 12 
Bank of England 1,350 12 
Bank of France 100 3 
German Federal Bank 400 6 
Bank of Italy 600 12 
Bank of Japan 450 12 
Netherlands Bank 150 3 
Bank of Sweden 100 12 
Swiss National Bank 200 6 
Bank for International Settlements 

(System drawings in Swiss francs) 200 6 
Bank for International Settlements 

(System drawings in authorized 
European currencies other than 
Swiss francs) 200 6 

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies 

for the period August 23 through September 7, 1966, and a supplemental 

report for September 8 through 12, 1966. Copies of these reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said that, on Mr. Coombs' behalf, he would first like to summarize 

briefly the negotiations that preceded the public announcement today 

of the $1.7 billion increase in the System's reciprocal credit facil

ities, from $2.8 billion to $4.5 billion. (A copy of the press



9/13/66 -4

announcement, dated September 13, 1966, has been placed in the files 

of the Committee.) At its last meeting the Committee had authorized 

Mr. Coombs to negotiate an enlargement of the network subject to the 

understanding that negotiations were not to proceed until the Board 

of Governors had received specific notification from the Secretary 

of the Treasury that the proposed program was fully consistent with 

United States international financial policy and that the timing 

was appropriate. While the Treasury had initially expressed sympathy 

with the Special Manager's proposal simply to negotiate large increases 

in the swap lines, subsequently the proposal was altered by grafting 

on additional elements involving direct credits to the U.K. by 

other central banks. The Special Manager strongly opposed this 

alteration since he was convinced that it would greatly increase 

the resistance of the Europeans to the package. Whereas the System's 

partners in the swap network were prepared to go along with large 

increases in the reciprocal credit lines with the Federal Reserve, 

they were exceedingly reluctant to increase their direct aid to the 

U.K. at this time. Moreover, the need to negotiate an additional 

$400 million of direct credits involved from the start cutting back 

the size of the increases that could be negotiated in the System's 

swap network, thus reducing the potential total from the $5.2 billion 

originally contemplated. In effect, the United States sacrificed 

permanent protection for the dollar for the sake of a temporary three

month increase in facilities available directly to the U.K.



9/13/66 -5

As anticipated, Mr. MacLaury continued, the negotiations 

were difficult in the extreme. Although in the end the package did 

prove negotiable, the Special Manager believed that the frictions 

caused by the efforts to raise the $400 million in direct credits 

to the U.K. cost the U.S. and international financial cooperation 

more than had been gained by that temporary contribution. One "cost" 

to the U.S. became apparent immediately. Whereas in the past all 

increases in the swap lines had been considered by both parties to 

be more or less permanent additions to the network, on this occasion 

a number of the continental countries had specified that the increases 

were to be considered only temporary. That was notably the case 

with the Netherlands and Belgium, both of which specified that the 

$50 million increases in their lines were not to be considered 

automatically renewable in December. In part, that attitude simply 

reflected the desire of those smaller countries to subject the 

United States to closer multilateral surveillance in Working Party 3 

or the Group of Ten where their voices carried greater weight than 

in bilateral negotiations. Italy and Germany also indicated that 

the respective increases in their lines ($150 million each) were to 

have a term of six months. In contrast with the Netherlands and 

Belgium, however, Italy and Germany seemed prepared to rely on the 

less formal multilateral surveillance procedures that now took place 

at the Basle meetings. At the moment, therefore, Mr. Coombs believed



9/13/66 -6

that the increases in the swap lines with the Bank of Italy and 

the German Federal Bank could be renewed at maturity without undue 

difficulty. If the Dutch and the Belgians insisted on subjecting 

the $50 million increases in their lines to formal multilateral 

surveillance procedures, Mr. Coombs believed the System should simply 

not ask for their renewal. That issue, of course, did not have to 

be resolved at the moment.  

Turning to recent developments in gold and the exchange 

markets, Mr. MacLaury reported that the Treasury gold stock would 

remain unchanged this week. As things stood now, the Stabilization 

Fund did not have enough gold on hand to meet anticipated sales 

during the remainder of September if France converted its August 

dollar gains--which amounted to $45 million prior to their $49 million 

gold subscription payment to the International Monetary Fund--into 

gold. There was a chance that the U.K. might sell the U.S. additional 

gold, so it was uncertain at the moment whether there would be a 

drop in the stock this month. With respect to the London gold market, 

conditions had not improved noticeably since the last meeting. Demand 

remained steady with the price not far below $35.20, and Communist 

China had reappeared as a buyer, although in very small amounts thus 

far. One helpful development had been the tapering off during the 

past month or so of South African reserve gains, with the result 

that a larger proportion of new production had been available to the



9/13/66 -7

market. Nevertheless, the gold pool had continued to lose small 

amounts fairly steadily. As arrangements stood prior to the recent 

negotiations, there would have been less than $60 million still 

available to the pool from the participating central banks. At the 

meeting in Basle two weeks ago, however, it was agreed to increase 

the total amount of the commitments by $50 million to $320 million, 

with a possible further $50 million increase available if needed, 

after further consultation. In general, it was fairly clear that 

high interest rates had been an important factor in keeping private 

demand for gold lower this year than last. Any falling off of 

interest rates, therefore, could be expected to lead to an increase 

in demand for gold.  

Mr. MacLaury commented that tight credit conditions and 

high interest rates, particularly in the Euro-dollar market, had 

also had a significant impact on the exchange markets. The dollar 

had shown surprising strength against most major currencies despite 

the continuing U.S. payments deficit, precisely because private 

foreigners had had a substantial interest incentive to hold on, for 

the time being at least, to the dollars they earned. That strength 

was reflected not only in exchange rates but in foreign central 

bank intervention. For example, for the first time in a number of 

years the Bank of France had actually sold dollars to support the 

franc in Paris during the past few weeks. Similar support operations



9/13/66 -8

by the Belgian National Bank caused it to buy $20 million from the 

Federal Reserve against francs, thus enabling the System to repay 

that amount of the $30 million drawings previously outstanding under 

the Belgian arrangement. On the other hand, Italian reserve gains 

this summer, while smaller than anticipated, had nevertheless been 

substantial; and on September 2 the System again drew $100 million 

under the arrangement with the Bank of Italy to absorb part of their 

recent accruals.  

Although the attractiveness of foreign interest rates had 

also been a factor in sterling's continued weakness, Mr. MacLaury 

observed, the causes in that case, of course, went much deeper.  

Despite the drastic measures announced by Prime Minister Wilson in 

late July, there had been no return of confidence, and the Bank of 

England had to provide further support during August. The actual 

drain on British reserves in August amounted to about $300 million.  

The announced reserve decline was $53 million, with foreign credits 

making up the difference, plus the refinancing of earlier month-end 

credits. The U.S. Treasury provided $400 million of the refinancing 

on the basis of an overnight credit at the end of August, and the 

Federal Reserve made available $100 million--$50 million under the 

swap arrangement, bringing the U.K. total drawings to $300 million, 

and $50 million on an overnight basis. It was hoped that today's 

announcement showing that the U.K. still had available more than



9/13/66 -9

$1 billion under its expanded facility with the System, plus 

additional credits from other central banks, would help turn 

market sentiment and stem the continuing erosion of recent weeks.  

In any case, the announcement of the very large general increase in 

Federal Reserve reciprocal credit lines should do much to insure 

market confidence in the ability of monetary authorities in general 

and the U.S. in particular to deal with speculative threats to 

their currencies.  

In concluding, Mr. MacLaury said that he would like to 

call one other matter to the Committee's attention--a $75 million 

drawing on August 30 by the Bank for International Settlements on 

its facility with the System providing for swaps against European 

currencies other than Swiss francs. As the Committee was aware, 

for some years the System had had a $25 million gold loan facility 

with the BIS to permit financing of short-term dollar drains. From 

its inception the System's swap line with the BIS was less clearly 

a two-way street than its other swap lines and, for that reason, he 

thought it was useful to have the BIS employ the facility.  

Mr. Daane said he would like to pay special tribute to the 

Special Manager for the way in which he had conducted the recent 

negotiations; Mr. MacLaury's account did not give the full flavor 

of the difficulties Mr. Coombs had faced nor of the skill he had 

exercised in negotiating the package. In spite of his (Mr. Coombs')



9/13/66 -10

reservations as to the appropriateness of some elements of the 

package, he had carried out his instructions to the letter.  

Mr. Daane observed that to some extent he shared Mr. Coombs' 

feeling that a Pyrrhic victory might have been won in persuading the 

Europeans to extend $400 million additional direct credits to the 

U.K. One cost was that the enlargement of the System's own network 

was smaller than it might otherwise have been; and a second, longer

run, cost was that the System had been brought one step closer to 

more formal multilateral surveillance for the entire swap network.  

At the same time, Mr. MacLaury's report might not have done full 

justice to the rationale of seeking the direct credits to the U.K.  

It was not simply a matter of getting $400 million more assistance 

to the British; the main objective was to make the new assistance 

package multilateral, rather than have the U.S. take a unilateral 

action.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed with Mr. Daane that the System probably 

was moving in the direction of greater multilateral surveillance, 

although he hoped that could be avoided. In any case, he wondered 

whether WP-3 was the best group for that purpose. WP-3 was originally 

established as a purely technical forum. If basic questions of 

international policy were to be discussed the Committee might want 

to give some thought to the appropriate forum.  

Mr. Daane commented that the August, 1964 report of the 

Governors and Ministers of the Group of Ten, in the preparation of



9/13/66 -11

which the U.S. had participated, quite clearly assigned a multi

lateral surveillance role to WP-3, although it did so in the 

expectation that the surveillance would be more informal than that 

which now appeared to be developing. Thus, in a sense that bridge 

had been crossed some time ago, although not necessarily correctly.  

At the same time, that report also assigned a surveillance role to 

the Basle group, as was noted in the Ministers' and Governors' more 

recent report, of June 1966.  

Mr. Hayes noted that there had, in fact, been a substantial 

amount of multilateral surveillance at Basle. Moreover, it was the 

distinct wish of a majority of Governors attending the Basle 

meetings to confine surveillance to their group.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
August 23 through September 12, 1966, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury then noted that a $50 million drawing by the 

Bank of England on its swap line with the System would mature on 

September 30, 1966. He recommended its renewal for a further period 

of three months if the Bank of England so requested. That would be 

a first renewal.  

Renewal of the Bank of England's 
drawing was noted without objection.  

Mr. MacLaury reported that two $50 million System drawings 

of Swiss francs, on the Swiss National Bank and the Bank for



9/13/66 -12

International Settlements, respectively, would mature on October 13, 

1966. He recommended their renewal for a further period of three 

months if no opportunity arose for their repayment in the interim.  

Both would be first renewals.  

Renewal of the two Swiss franc 
drawings was noted without objection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government 

securities and bankers' acceptances for the period August 23 through 

September 7, 1966, and a supplemental report for September 8 through 

12, 1966. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of 

the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

Since the Committee last met the capital markets have 
passed through a state of near disorganization with prices 
of Government, corporate, and municipal bonds declining 
precipitously until August 30. On that day, following a 
statement by a Treasury official that was generally 
interpreted as foreshadowing a change of Administration 
thinking on fiscal policy, a sharp and sustained rally 
took place that brought yields on intermediate- and long
term bonds back below where they had been three weeks 
ago. The hectic daily swings in prices and yields have 
been spelled out in some detail in the regular written 
reports to the Committee and I will not dwell on them 
here.  

The President's announcement of a new anti-inflationary 
program, involving both fiscal and debt management policy, 
at the close of business last Thursday, came at a time when 
the market rally was running out of steam. In general,



9/13/66

after some initial skepticism, there was a favorable 
psychological reaction in long-term markets. This reaction 
was based mainly on relief that the Government had rec
ognized the seriousness of inflationary pressures and the 
pressures of agency financing on financial markets. While 
the President's program was generally considered a step 
in the right direction, there were many questions in the 
market as to its adequacy and its eventual impact on 
spending decisions, both Governmental and private. Most 
market participants felt that the program was not forceful 
enough to warrant any early change in Federal Reserve 
policy, although many also felt that the System had again 
been put squarely on the political hot seat. The Board's 
statement of September 7 was generally interpreted as a 
reaffirmation of the System's policy of restraint, 
although there are a number of observers who will be 
watching closely for any evidence of easing in System 
policy.  

At the moment, the long-term markets are in better 
shape than they were three weeks ago. The risks of panic 
have greatly diminished, although major uncertainties 
remain and the market will continue to respond to devel
opments in Vietnam and elsewhere in the international 
sphere. The municipal market benefited also from the 
Board statement on discount window administration, which 
was generally interpreted as tending to discourage bank 
sales of municipals. The corporate market may again come 
under pressure later, particularly if bank credit to 
business borrowers is significantly curtailed, but a 
better atmosphere prevails for the time being.  

In contrast to the situation in long-term markets, 
short-term rates remain under pressure. Banks and cor
porations both have liquidity problems which are likely 
to be keenly felt over the tax and dividend dates.  
Banks have a particular problem with the heavy volume 
of CD maturities and we are getting close to another 
interest payment period at savings institutions at a 
time when market rates are higher than at the end of 
June. There has been little evidence yet of any large 
scale recourse to the discount window on the part of 
the money center banks which have moved into deep basic 
deficit--a deficit caused in part by heavy Treasury 
calls on tax and loan balances. On the other hand, 
the Federal funds rate moved to an effective rate of 

6 per cent last Wednesday with a heavy volume of 
trading at 6-1/8 per cent and, on Friday, to an

-13-



9/13/66

effective rate of 6-1/8 per cent with a fair volume at 
6-1/4 as well. As a result of pressure on the banks, 
dealer loan rates have moved into the 6-3/8 - 6-5/8 
per cent range with loans simply not available at 
some banks.  

In the Treasury bill market a heavy atmosphere 
prevails and rates have penetrated into new high 
ground. Dealer bill inventories are higher than they 
have been in some time as the result of bank selling, 
particularly of the new tax bills sold by the Treasury 
in late August. Bidding in yesterday's auction was 
very skittish and the average issuing rates set on 
the new three- and six-month bills were about 5.45 
and 5.93 per cent, respectively, up 43 and 52 basis 
points from the rates set three weeks ago.  

The Treasury's press conference on Saturday on 
the probable course of agency financing over the test 
of the calendar year implies, of course, a much higher 
level of direct Treasury borrowing than had been 
expected earlier this year, and this has been a major 
longer-run factor contributing to yesterday's higher 
Treasury bill rates. It is, of course, impossible 
to pinpoint at this moment what will be added to the 
Treasury's borrowing needs. Regular Treasury spending 
has been running on the high side of late, and a 
quantitative estimate of the new spending restraint, 
and particularly the timing of it, is hard to come by.  
The suspension of FNMA and Export-Import Bank sales 
of participation certificates may add as much as $2 
billion to direct Treasury borrowing and the limita
tion on net market borrowing by all Government agencies 
to the replacement of maturing issues will add another 
substantial amount.  

The new financing approach should provide, over
all, a more orderly marketing of debt, but it will 
still require great ingenuity on the debt management 
side. At this juncture, we can only hope that agency 
financing programs can be pared back, but plans to 
assist the mortgage market and the reduced cash flows 
of savings and loans institutions may make this hard 
to accomplish. For the System, the new financing 
approach will probably involve more important even 
keel considerations over the rest of the year, although 
not much can be said about this until a financing 
schedule can be worked out.

-14-



9/13/66

At the moment, of course, the Treasury is running 
with a very low cash balance. Deposits at the Federal 
Reserve Banks are estimated at only about $200 million 
tomorrow and uncalled balances at commercial banks are 
at a minimum. Our best estimates are that the Treasury 
can just barely avoid borrowing directly from the 
System through an adroit juggling of its commercial 
bank deposits, but even a normal miss in the day-to-day 
estimates could lead to an overdraft in the next few 
days. Given the increase in Treasury cash needs it 
is likely that the Treasury will be running with lower 
than usual cash balances over the remainder of the 
year and this could lead to recurring problems in 
this area.  

As far as open market operations are concerned, 
the System has provided reserves over the past three 
weeks to offset the reduction in float brought about 
by the settlement of the airlines strike and the 
pre-Labor Day drain of reserves. The state of near 
disorganization of the Government securities market 
also required attention and a large volume of Treasury 
bill purchases was necessary early in the day on 
Monday, August 29, in view of the nervous conditions 
then prevailing in the market. With the improvement 
in atmosphere on the afternoon of August 30, an effort 
was made to recapture redundant reserves through the 
execution of matched sale-purchase transactions which 
again proved to be a very useful tool. As a result, 
the net borrowed reserve figure published for the week 
ending August 31, $422 million, was well within the 
recent range, although it was subsequently revised sub

stantially lower. Since then money market conditions 
have continued to be tight with Federal funds, dealer 
loan rates, and Treasury bill rates moving higher, as 
indicated earlier.  

The current statement week, ending tomorrow, has 
been plagued with a highly skewed intra-weekly pattern-
with very high net borrowed reserve figures prevailing 
before the weekend, turning into substantial free reserve 
figures thereafter. Much of the post-weekend ease was 
expected to develop from the sharp decline in Treasury 

balances at the Reserve Banks, and the market, of 

course, had no way of knowing that this would occur.  

As a result we went over the weekend anticipating a 
relatively low average net borrowed reserve figure

-15-



9/13/66

after doing a token amount of RP's on Friday in light 
of the pressures on the money market, but with the 
expectation that we could mop up any redundant reserves 
today and tomorrow through matched sale-purchase agree
ments. The high level of borrowings at the Reserve Banks 
over the weekend ($1-1/4 billion) should help lead to 
easier money market conditions that would facilitate 
these operations if they prove to be necessary. I should 
add that Friday's RP's were made at the discount rate.  
We thought it prudent not to undertake any innovation 
that could lend itself to misinterpretation at the present 
time.  

Throughout the period since the Committee last met, 
required reserves have been falling short of estimates, 
and estimates of growth of the credit proxy have been 
marked lower. As the blue book 1/ sets forth, August saw 
a decline of about 2-1/2 per cent in the credit proxy 
and the Board staff September estimates now indicate 
little or no growth, compared with a 6 per cent estimate 
at the time of the last meeting. Current estimates at 
the New York Bank are now in the 2-4 per cent range 
after making allowance for growth in foreign branch 
balances.  

I should note that some unusual problems had to be 
faced in yesterday's hectic Treasury bill auction. Normally 
our problem is to compete with other bidders to make sure 
the System can roll over its maturing holdings. Yesterday, 
in contrast, the problem was to redeem at least part of the 
$359 million Treasury bills maturing September 15 without 
leaving the auction uncovered at anything like a half-way 
reasonable rate. As my supplementary report indicates, bids 
were submitted for both the 3- and 6-month bills at a wide 
scale of prices. The report notes that on the basis of 
preliminary indications the System had apparently redeemed 
$100 million. Final results indicated that the redemption 
amounted to $119.6 million, which will be of at least some 
help in absorbing reserves in the statement week ending 
September 21.  

Looking ahead for the next few weeks, estimates indicate 
that we will have a substantial reserve absorption job to 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-16-



9/13/66 -17

do in the week ending September 21 at a time of peak tax 
date pressures and with the Treasury's cash position in a 
precarious state. Following that week, until the Committee 
next meets, we will be supplying heavy seasonal reserve 
needs. Some of the potential problems of the period ahead 
are spelled out in the blue book. I do not believe it 
possible to spell out in advance how things will turn out, 
but open market operations may very well have to be 
conducted with as much flexibility as the Committee's 
over-all policy position can allow.  

Mr. Scanlon asked whether the Manager planned to continue 

making repurchase agreements at the discount rate.  

Mr. Holmes replied he would prefer not to, since the discount 

rate was so far below market rates; it would be better to make any 

RP's at about the three-month bill rate. If Friday had been anything 

like a normal day he would have made RP's at 5-1/8 per cent, which 

was about the average rate in the preceding weekly auction. However, 

in view of the circumstances prevailing then, he had considered it 

better not to take an action that might be misinterpreted.  

In response to Mr. Mitchell's question concerning the out

look for bill rates, Mr. Holmes said that much would depend on the 

nature of Treasury financing activity. The market saw little demand 

for bills at present. On the other hand, rates had now reached a 

level at which some bills could be carried profitably, and that fact 

might lend a little more stability to the market. He thought the 

odds were that the bill rates would be stable or would move lower, 

but in view of the many imponderables that could not be expected 

with assurance.



9/13/66 -18

Mr. Daane asked what consequences Mr. Holmes thought would 

follow if member bank borrowings rose to a much higher level.  

Mr. Holmes said that it was hard to visualize a large increase 

in borrowing that did not lead to an immediate easing throughout 

the whole banking system. Such a development would create problems 

for open market operations. The situation might tend to be self

correcting, with banks repaying their borrowings as money market 

conditions eased, but it was not clear that that would be the case.  

In any event, he did not think there would be a large increase in 

borrowings unless banks changed their attitudes toward the discount 

window. Such a change was possible, but it had not yet occurred.  

Mr. Hickman asked if the Desk had talked with the large 

New York banks about their ability to roll over maturing CD's 

into October.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the question had been discussed 

quite recently with the seven largest New York City banks. All of 

them expected a run-off of CD's over this month, but only two were 

actively concerned. The others felt that the advance preparations 

they had made were adequate, although new uncertainties had now 

been introduced by the latest rise in bill rates. The picture thus 

was a mixed one.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Wayne, Mr. Holmes said that 

CD runoffs at New York banks as a group currently were at a rate



9/13/66

of about $130-$200 million per week. September 15 maturities were 

about $550 million at New York banks and about $1 billion plus in 

the country as a whole.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that some banks recently had reported 

that their CD losses had stepped up a bit.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in 
Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period August 23 
through September 12, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

Having been away from the office for four weeks, my 
only excuse for presuming to report to you on the domestic 
economic scene this morning is that there may be less 
likelihood than usual that I will be misled by transitory 
day-to-day developments. By necessity, I must look at the 
forest rather than the trees this morning.  

There is one specific new development, though, that 
I will have to comment on explicitly, and that is the 
fiscal program announced by the Administration last week, 
even though it will take more analysis and, indeed, events 
themselves to specify all of the effects of such a program 
on the economy.  

Needless to say, increased fiscal restraint is better 
late than never and is an important step in the right 
direction. But important as this current step is, 
assuming implementation of both its tax and expenditure 
aspects, its effects are likely to be moderate in amount 
and spread out in time.

-19-



9/13/66

There seem to me three main aspects of the announce
ment. First, cuts in Federal spending are likely to be 
little more than, if even equal to, the increases made by 
Congress in the President's requested Budget expenditures.  
Second, the temporary suspension of the investment tax 
credit privilege may produce marginal cutbacks in business 
capital spending, possibly rather promptly for such short
lead time items as trucks, office equipment, and the like.  
But its more important impact will likely be in reducing 
new orders in the booming machinery and equipment 
industries and possibly some concomitant effects on wage 

pressures and prices in those industries. The effects of 

the suspension of accelerated depreciation will no doubt be 
more delayed than those of the investment tax credit.  

Third and finally, the sleeper in the announcement, 
and what might turn out to be its most important revelation, 
is its oblique references to continuing and increased 

defense spending. When I left town several weeks ago, the 

most critical element in one's evaluation of economic 

prospects was his view as to likely defense spending.  

The sentences in the President's fiscal announcement 

regarding Vietnam and defense spending have been the first 

official pronouncements on the subject for some time.  

They suggest that our earlier estimates on such 

spending have probably been under- rather than over

estimated. As you will remember, the official Budget 

document projected a leveling off of defense spending 

about mid-year and in our chart show last winter we 

projected increases in the third and fourth quarters of 

$2-1/2 and $2 billion, respectively, expressed at annual 

rates. Now we are raising our projections of each of 

these quarterly increases to about $3-1/2 billion.  

Other fragmentary bases for these increased 

projections are the rapid increase in actual defense 

spending in August, continued increases in defense orders, 
and further rises in draft calls. All of this means that 

even if the President's new fiscal program is adopted in 

its entirety as outlined last week, the over-all Federal 

contribution to economic activity will likely continue to 

shift to a more stimulative position over the rest of this 

year, and probably into next year unless further tax 

measures are adopted.  

If it were not for the war, it is now clear that the 

economy is showing characteristics common to the late 

phases of a business expansion. Production of business

-20-



9/13/66

equipment is now 85 per cent above its 1957-59 average 
while output of consumer goods is up only 45 per cent.  
Over the past year, business equipment output has 
risen 18 per cent compared to 5 per cent for consumer 
goods. This spring an acceleration of business inventory 
accumulation was added to the boom in plant and 
equipment spending.  

Tight money is producing an even larger and more 
abrupt drop in residential construction than was 
considered likely only a few weeks ago. Other consumer 
spending, though, has picked up again recently as 
disposable personal incomes have risen, reflecting 
continuing sharp gains in employment, larger transfer 
payments, higher wages, and lower tax payments.  

Prices continue to rise, although still not as 
sharply as might have been expected in the current state 
of economic conditions. The pace of wage advances has 
quickened; witness the recent 5 per cent per year 
increases for both the airline machinists and the 
telephone workers.  

It is probably in part because of the length and 
lopsided character of the current economic cycle that 
none of 20 leading economists recently replying to a 
questionnaire from the New York Times called for more 
monetary restraint at this time. Indeed, although all 
of them agreed that Federal Reserve policy to date had 
been appropriate, a minority of them felt that some 
easing would now be desirable.  

The current age and character of the cycle is also a 
partial answer to the weak stock market, although I 
suspect that this is due more to the host of uncertainties 
that currently face the saver and investor. Participants 
in the stock market have also been strongly affected by 
rising interest rates and the developing credit squeeze.  

A further word on the recent course of prices. There 
has been some talk suggesting that the steam may have gone 
out of the rise and that, in any case, what rise has been 
taking place has been due to supply situations in 
particular areas rather than to excessive aggregate 
demand.  

I don't agree. Food prices continue much stronger 
than had been anticipated. The rise in the industrial 
component of the wholesale price index has tapered off 
this summer, but it is still too early to judge whether 
this is the beginning of a new trend. Prices of some 
sensitive materials have actually declined, but they were 
the ones that had shown the spectacular increases earlier

-21-



9/13/66

and they are not particularly important in total indus
trial costs. Although the labor cost situation in 
manufacturing continues to be better than it was in the 
late fifties, the favorable factors of moderate long
term wage contracts and stable consumer prices have 
about run their course.  

In conclusion, if one could exclude the war, I 
would be joining the coterie of economists I mentioned 
earlier in suggesting that with the boom now so old and 
lopsided we should ride out its lingering and lagging 
distortions and inflationary effects. But with the war 
prospects still as disturbing as they are, inflation and 
even worse distortions in the structure of spending are 
likely to be our problem for many months, or even quarters, 
to come.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

The two main indicators of the U.S. balance of 
payments position have been pointing in opposite direc
tions since mid-year. This has not caused any serious 
confusion; but it has raised some interesting analytical 
questions, and has required that this Committee's 
directive refer to an "underlying" deficit rather than 
simply to a deficit.  

On the liquidity basis of calculation there was a 
continued large payments deficit in July-August, whereas 
the balance measured by official reserve transactions 
swung into substantial surplus. The difference resulted 
primarily from the fact that a few large U.S. banks 
borrowed more than $1 billion from the Euro-dollar market 
through their foreign branches in the space of only two 
months. Such inflows of foreign liquid funds improve 
the official settlements balance but do not affect the 
liquidity balance; they are regarded as financing the 
liquidity deficit, rather than as reducing it.  

Given these two superficially conflicting indicators, 
a judgment that the over-all payments position is one of 
underlying deficit rests on the expectation that the 
liquidity deficit will persist while the recent heavy 

inflow of foreign liquid funds will slacken.

-22-



9/13/66

Two main considerations lie behind the view that 
liquid inflows will taper off. First, there is reason 
to think that the scramble by U.S. banks for Euro-dollar 
funds is to a large extent defensive and temporary.  
This is one way in which the banks have been adjusting 
to increases in reserve requirements and preparing for 
the possibility of large CD runoffs in September; they 
are unlikely to want to rely for long on a continuing 
massive inflow of very short-term foreign money, for 
which they must pay upwards of 6-1/4 per cent. Second, 
even if U.S. banks do continue to bid aggressively for 
foreign liquid funds, it seems unlikely that the supply of 
such funds to them can long continue even at the August 
rate, which was only half that of July. Recent flows have 
been affecting European exchange rates, official reserves, 
and money markets in ways that will tend to reduce the 
flows. Also, distrust of sterling, especially in July, 
greatly stimulated or facilitated flows out of sterling 
into dollars. A favorable turn in market sentiment 
towards sterling, of the sort that this Committee and the 
British authorities are now hoping for and working toward, 
would tend to reduce or reverse that flow, as happened in 

the autumn of 1965.  
For all the other international transactions that 

together produce the liquidity deficit, the expectation 
remains, as before, for little net change in the months 

ahead. The liquidity deficit was at an annual rate of 

roughly $2-1/2 billion to $3 billion in July-August, or 

about the same as it would have been in the second quarter 

of the year if there had not been some large, once-for-all 

shifting of foreign assets from "liquid" to technically 
"nonliquid" categories. There may have been some further 

deterioration on current account since mid-year; the July 

trade figures were very disappointing, with imports up 

sharply further. But there has probably been an offsetting 

reduction in net outflows of U.S. capital; we know that 

reflows of U.S. bank credit in July were large.  

In the months ahead, I would expect the trade 

deterioration to slow down. Exports of raw cotton should 

have turned up sharply since August 1 when the U.S. price 

was reduced. More broadly, demand in foreign markets 

that are important to us is generally becoming even more 

buoyant than before. And some slowing of the import 

advance may result from the economic upswing that is now 

gathering momentum in Japan, and in Italy and France,

-23-



9/13/66

which might make those countries less eager to sell here 
even if aggregate U.S. demand remains excessive.  

But while there may be only modest further dete
rioration on current account, there are also only modest 
possibilities of further improvement on capital account, 
even with credit conditions here continuing very tight.  

So the liquidity deficit may stay in the $2-1/2 
billion to $3 billion range for the rest of the year, 
reduced perhaps by some debt prepayment receipts, but 
increased perhaps by another waiver of year-end debt 
service due from the U.K. This would bring the liquidity 
deficit for the full year to something over $2 billion in 
the published figures, or more than $2-1/2 billion aside 
from the shifts of foreign official and international 
assets from liquid to nonliquid forms.  

Probably a large proportion of this year's liquidity 
deficit will have been financed by inflows of private 
foreign liquid funds. In other words, the official 
settlements deficit for the year will probably be small, 
perhaps as small as $1 billion; it was about zero, 
seasonally adjusted, in the 8 months through August. We 
will probably have drawn down our gold stock during the 
year by somewhat more than the $1/2 billion so far used.  
We will have used up about $1/2 billion of our IMF 
position, leaving only about $300 million to go before we 
get into the credit tranches where the Fund would begin 
to give us specific policy advice. On the other hand, 
U.S. liquid liabilities to foreign official holders will 
probably not have increased during the year, and may even 
have been reduced somewhat.  

For 1967, international visibility is even more 
limited than domestic visibility. It will, of course, be 
very easy to achieve a further deterioration in our 
payments position. On the other hand, I think it is still 
barely possible that we might achieve some improvement by 
recovering some of the ground lost this year on current 
account. With foreign demand buoyant and inflation abroad 
widespread, improvement may in some ways be easier from a 
purely economic point of view in 1967 than it was in the 
early 1960's.  

Everything will depend on our ability to bring 

aggregate domestic demand into better balance with domestic 

supply potential. Given the opportunities open to us if we 
do this, and the dangers to our payments position if we do 

not, I see no case for easing up on monetary restraints until

-24-



9/13/66

there is clear evidence that we are in fact well on the 
road toward making that kind of domestic adjustment.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The staff reports already presented this morning 
bring into focus most of the major constraints and 
imperatives in formulating monetary policy. Mr. Holmes 
has described the still-nervous state of financial 
markets, which have been buffeted severely in recent 
weeks and now have to assess the import of major new 
fiscal and debt management programs in the midst of a 
period of peak seasonal banking pressures. The recent 
behavior of financial markets suggests a policy pre
scription perhaps best described as "tender loving 
care." 

But Mr. Koch's analysis of the prospects for 
nonfinancial markets does not hold out much hope in 
the short-run for relief from price pressures, even 
with swift passage and implementation of the President's 
fiscal program. The cumulative impact of monetary 
restraint is undoubtedly spreading from housing into 
other expenditure areas, and by, say, early next year, 
the combination of monetary and fiscal restraints 
conceivably could produce an economic "over-kill"-
if it weren't for the increasing prospect of 
substantially higher Vietnam spending. Whatever fears 
one may have as to the lagged effect of monetary 
restraint on the private sectors of the economy, it 
would seem dangerous to formulate policy now on the 
assumption that additional fiscal restraint will be 
imposed in sufficient time and magnitude to offset 
further acceleration in defense spending.  

Turning to the import of international flows for 
policy, one might conclude that whatever improvement 
(or perhaps I should say whatever slowing in deteri

oration) has occurred in our over-all international 
balance has been in large measure a function of the 

restraint on bank credit we have been exerting. This 

restraint has reinforced our efforts at limiting direct 
bank outflows of capital; it has increased the attractive

ness of U.S. financial assets to foreign investors; it

-25-



9/13/66

has encouraged U.S. businessmen to finance abroad a 
larger share of their overseas investment. Such 
results of monetary restraint on our international 
capital accounts have been essential in a period 
when our current account has continued to deteriorate.  
Given the still dismal international flow outlook as 
outlined by Mr. Reynolds, one doesn't see much basis 
from the international side for easing on the monetary 
reins yet.  

Balancing these market, domestic, and interna
tional perspectives in an over-all appraisal of 
policy needs, I come to the conclusion that it is 
far too soon to be actively moving away from the 
System's posture of restraint, but that our efforts 
to maintain restraint should be tempered. Tempering 
is called for, first to avoid further jolts to 
financial markets as they try to develop new trading 
levels appropriate to changes in flows and in 
expectations that may be engendered by the new fiscal 
program and, second on the off-chance that our 
appraisal of fundamental economic conditions and 
prospects could be wrong, in its assessment of either 
the strength of demands or of the bite that is 

already resulting from policy actions to date.  

In these circumstances, caution is called for.  
The appropriate policy posture can probably best be 

described as "passive restraint," a policy that 

permits financial indicators to ease if the source of 

the easing comes from the market, but which would 

maintain pressure if financial indicators suggest 

renewed strength significantly beyond that now forseen 

for credit demands at banks or in the capital markets.  

In the few minutes remaining, I would like to 
spell out what this posture might mean for the banking 

and financial indicators we usually follow. At the 

outset we have to recognize that several factors, such 

as our new discount administration program and the 

Treasury's foreswearing of new agency issues and 

participation certificates, render some of the usual 

policy indicia difficult to interpret. For example, a 

decline to a shallower net borrowed reserve figure 

would not necessarily mean an easing in monetary policy.  

Indeed, it could well reflect an unwanted tightening, 

a failure of policy intent, if banks insist on making 

the kinds of portfolio adjustments we wish they

-26-



9/13/66

wouldn't, rather than seeking accommodation at the 
window at the price of disturbing customer relation
ships. Alternatively, a shallower net borrowed 
reserve figure could signify reduced pressure of 
credit demands on the banking system as a whole, or 
that those banks continuing to meet strong customer 
loan demands are finding resources outside the discount 
window, either from other banks in the Federal funds 
market, or from foreign branches, or elsewhere.  
Conversely, a rise in the net borrowed figure that 
brought more banks within the purview of discount 
window administration might be welcomed as the first 
step toward our objective of achieving some redistri
bution of the brunt of monetary restraint, without 
intensifying the over-all degree of restraint.  

The ambiguity of alternative marginal reserve 
figures can be dispelled if interpreted in terms of 
concomitant developments in Federal funds and other 
money markets, and in light of the information becoming 
available on the composition of bank credit growth. But 
because a particular net borrowed reserve figure can 
have such widely different analytic meanings, it is not 

appropriate now as a policy target.  
We'll probably come closer to our basic policy 

objectives in this period by keeping our sights on 

financial prices and aggregate credit figures rather 
than on marginal reserve measures. In considering 

aggregate targets, let me say just a word about our 

September projection for the bank credit proxy and its 
relationship to the draft directives 1/ submitted by 

the staff. The projection for September of virtually 

no growth in the proxy on a seasonally adjusted basis 
assumes that, on average over the month, CD's would 

run off by about $1 billion more than the $1/2 billion 
reduction to be expected on seasonal grounds. It also 

assumes that Government spending will continue to rise 

so fast that even with high September tax collections, 
Government balances will, on average, be reduced about 
$1-1/2 billion more than seasonal. While the CD run-off

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-27-



9/13/66

and the spending of Government balances will likely 
result in a rapid rise in private demand balances, 
total bank deposits--the credit proxy--would show 
very little change for the month. But the shift in 
deposit structure would produce a substantial rise 
in reserve needs.  

Whether the contraction in CD's is held to the 
$1-2 billion range depends very much on what happens 
to rates on alternative investments, particularly to 
Treasury bill rates. The outlook is not encouraging.  

Treasury financing needs are rising swiftly, and the 
Board staff's latest estimates of fourth-quarter needs 
are staggeringly high. As market participants begin to 
realize this, and take into account that new agency and 
participation certificate financing is foresworn and 
direct long-term financing impossible under the 4-1/4 
per cent interest rate ceiling, upward pressures on 

bill rates already evident in recent weeks will increase 

and CD's will become even less attractive. Yesterday's 

bill auction suggests that the market is already alert 
to the Treasury financing dilemma.  

At what point in the rate structure, and at what 

level of flows, a new balance is struck between bill 

rates and CD's is anyone's guess. The two-way tug of 

bank-customer relationship cannot be ignored. The 

staff assumed, for the purpose of the blue book, that 

a rise in the 3-month bill rate into the 5.30-5.40 

per cent range would still be consistent with only a 

moderate run-off in CD's, but this is sheer conjecture.  

Because there is the danger of too rapid an adjustment 

in short-term rates, bringing with it too rapid a 

contraction in CD's, and thereby renewing upward 

pressures on the long-term markets we have been hoping 

to shelter, I would urge that the bill rate be given 

a high priority among the money market conditions to 

be maintained at around current levels, to use the 

terminology of draft directive "A." 

We have to recognize that operating under this 

directive, in the circumstances postulated of bill 

rates tending to move up sharply and CD's tending to 

run off rapidly, would probably result in increased 

reserve provision, taking operations of the window 

and the Desk combined. But we shouldn't get too 

exercised about it, particularly if a larger share

-28-



9/13/66

of the reserves than usual comes through the window.  
Expansion in bank credit over the summer (May through 
August) has been contained to about a 4 per cent 
annual rate, less than half the 1965 rate, and August 
saw an actual credit contraction. Even if an average 
credit growth rate in the 4 to 6 per cent range is 
about the appropriate degree of monetary restraint 
to achieve, there is no need to force the expansion 
in the one month of September to be held to the 
nominal amounts now projected by the staff. Certainly, 
a shift in the public's preference as to the form of 
bank deposit it wants to hold should not be the 
occasion to force another contraction in bank credit.  
The price of orderly adjustments in financial markets 
and bank credit may be some temporary generosity in 
reserve provision.  

Mr. Robertson entered the meeting during the course of 

Mr. Brill's statement.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he agreed with Mr. Brill's 

analysis except for the concluding part. It seemed to him 

(Mr. Mitchell) that a process of disintermediation by banks was 

underway and, accordingly, that the bank credit proxy could be 

allowed to decline without much concern. To undertake to make 

bank credit grow would, in his judgment, be contrary to the policy 

the Committee had been following. He had prepared a statement on 

that point which he would make later in the meeting.  

Mr. Ellis noted that in the two draft directives alternative 

A was labeled "No further firming, with qualifications," and 

alternative B was labeled "Firming to the extent feasible, with

-29-



9/13/66 -30

qualification." He questioned the accuracy of those labels. In 

particular, the qualification in A appeared to be directed toward 

easing, which suggested that three alternatives were contained in 

the two directives.  

Mr. Brill commented that he did not read alternative A to 

call for operations directed toward easing, but rather for accepting 

any tendency toward ease that might develop in the market. Accord

ingly, he did not think it could properly be called an "easing" 

directive. Alternative B called for firming at the initiative of 

the System.  

Mr. Hickman noted that the proviso clause of alternative A 

ran both ways; it called for further firming if bank credit 

expanded substantially more than seasonally expected, as well as 

for easing if credit expansion was no more than seasonal.  

Mr. Shepardson said he would question the formulation of 

the second part of the proviso, reading "if bank credit expands 

no more than seasonally expected, some easing of money market 

conditions shall be sought." He would prefer language reading 

"if bank credit expands less than seasonally expected . .. ." 

Mr. Brill observed that the Board staff expectation was 

for substantially no change in the credit proxy in September--the 

range given in the blue book was plus or minus 1 per cent, at annual 

rates. He personally felt that some increase would be more 

appropriate to the needs of the economy.



9/13/66

Mr. Mitchell observed that an increase in bank credit was not 

necessarily appropriate if the economy was being financed outside the 

banking system. At a time when banks were reducing the degree of 

their intermediation, a rise in bank credit could mean a tremendous 

increase in the money supply. Under such circumstances a money supply 

target would appear more appropriate.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with Mr.  

Hayes, who made the following statement: 

Business developments since the last meeting 

indicate that the economy is still growing at a rapid 

rate and is likely to continue to grow at a rate 

generating inflationary pressures well into 1967.  

Important elements of strength include business plant 

and equipment expenditures, rising durable goods order 

backlogs, and sizable additions to inventories, besides 

vigorous consumer spending plans and strongly rising 

government outlays. The only significant area of 

weakness in the economy continues to be residential 

construction, but the prospective release of resources 

in this sector does not appear large enough to offset 

the excessive pressures generated elsewhere in the 

economy. While a few of the key price measures have 

recently been moving up at a slightly slower pace 

than earlier in the year, the outlook continues to be 

inflationary, as cost factors become increasingly 

important.  
As for the balance of payments, it appears that 

the July-August deficit averaged roughly $2.6 billion 

at an annual rate--close to that of the second quarter, 

after adjustments for special transactions. The major 

adverse factors, as has been true now for some time, 

are the shrinking trade surplus, reflecting a very rapid 

rise in imports, and increased expenditures connected 

with Vietnam. Some of the capital accounts show a 

distinct improvement, due no doubt in large measure to

-31-



9/13/66

tight credit conditions in this country; and the same 
conditions have caused a sharp rise in private foreign 
holdings of dollars, thus bringing important temporary 
relief to the dollar in foreign exchange markets and 
mitigating for the time being the drain on our gold 
stock.  

A distinct slowing in the rate of expansion of bank 
credit is noticeable in the statistics available for 
August and early September. We find considerable 
evidence, both in the credit figures and in the 
atmosphere of the credit markets, that the System's 
restrictive credit policy is at last becoming 
increasingly effective. Through the first eight 
months of this year the credit proxy has grown at an 
annual rate of just over 6 per cent compared with 9 per 
cent a year ago. Business loans apparently experienced 
an actual decline in August, whereas their rate of gain 
in the previous seven months had been 22 per cent. If 
the August drop is confirmed by the final data, it would 
be the first monthly decline in business loans since 
May 1961. Recent developments in the bank credit proxy 
are likewise encouraging. Our own data suggest a 
September increase of about 2 to 4 per cent after 
including foreign branch funds; and this would be on top 
of a 2 per cent decrease in August, or a 0.4 per cent 
increase including foreign balances. Money supply also 
shows a growth rate of only 1.7 per cent for the first 
eight months of the year.  

Since our last meeting the credit and capital 
markets have been marked by convulsive movements and an 
atmosphere of great uncertainty. At the nadir of the 
bond market about two weeks ago there is no doubt that 
the financial community was experiencing growing and 
genuine fear of a financial panic. This fear seemed to 

stem mainly from the conviction that credit demands 
would remain very strong (with corporate and government 
needs for funds unabated), that fiscal policy was making 
no contribution toward a dampening of the economy, that 
the agency financing program was actively stimulating 

higher interest rates, and that the Federal Reserve 

System was determined to push its restrictive policy 
ruthlessly. Under these circumstances, I believe that 

our System statement had a useful calming effect, 
while at the same time properly underlining our concern 
over the rapid growth--at least until very recently--of

-32-



9/13/66

bank credit. But of greater benefit to the markets 
was the news that at long last the Administration was 
favorable to some degree of fiscal restraint and a 
more restrained policy with respect to agency 
financing. I am not convinced that the near-term 
impact of the proposed fiscal measures will be sufficient 
or that the specific tax and depreciation measures are 
either the most efficacious in reducing excessive demand 
or helpful to the economy in the long run. While there 
is of course ground for encouragement in the move in the 
direction of a more restrictive fiscal policy, we must 
probably accept the likelihood of continued doubts and 
uncertainty in the money and capital markets. The stock 
market's sharp decline has in itself greatly exacerbated 
this uncertain atmosphere. We can be thankful, however, 
that overexpansion of stock credit does not seem to be 
a valid concern at this time.  

In considering policy for the next three weeks, I 
think we should give considerable weight not only to this 
general unease in the financial markets but also to the 
unusual short-term pressures over the next few weeks 
expected to stem from run-offs of certificates of deposit 
combined with seasonal tax and dividend requirements and 
the forthcoming interest payment period for savings 
institutions. On the international side we must 
recognize that sterling is still viewed with suspicion, 
though we can legitimately hope for a real turn-around 
in sentiment if the current program for strengthening 
international credit arrangements catches the imagination 
of market participants all over the world. All of these 
current uncertainties, together with the rather strong 
evidence we now have of a slowdown in credit growth, 
lead me to feel that we should not press for a more 
restrictive policy at this time. It would also seem 
poor timing to tighten further in the face of the 
Government's fiscal proposals. I would think that the 
Manager should be instructed to try to maintain about the 
present level of restraint as measured mainly by money 
market conditions, with ample leeway to adapt his 
operations to market and credit developments. I would 
think that the net borrowed reserve level should be of 

subordinate significance.  
As for the discount rate, I believe the System 

missed a good opportunity in mid-July for a moderate 
increase that would have brought the rate closer to

-33-



9/13/66

market realities. In the meantime market rates have 
risen further, but at the present time, the same 
factors that argue strongly against any open market 
policy tightening also argue with equal force against 
a discount rate rise. I certainly would like to sit 
back for a little while and observe how effectively 
the new Administration program is in dampening 
inflationary expectations. I reach this conclusion 
even though the period during which we shall be free 
from even-keel restraints will not last many weeks 
longer. I would still hope that we could move on the 
rate before too long.  

Turning to the directive, I prefer the first 
paragraph of alternative B to that of A because I 
think it is too soon to abandon our posture of 
resisting inflationary pressures and strengthening 
efforts to restore payments equilibrium. I would be 
willing to substitute the words "continuing to re
strain" for the word "restricting" in the last 
sentence. For the second paragraph I would propose a 
new and simplified wording which is probably closer 
to alternative A than to B but which makes clear our 
intention to maintain both firm and orderly conditions, 
with a suitable proviso for unusual liquidity pressures 
or significant deviations of bank credit from current 
expectations.  

Specifically, I would propose the following 
second paragraph: 

To implement this policy, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of 
the Committee shall be conducted with a view 
to maintaining firm but orderly conditions 
in the money market; provided, however, that 
operations shall be modified in the light of 
unusual liquidity pressures or of any 
apparently significant deviations of bank 
credit from current expectations.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that having reported at the Committee's 

last meeting that residential contracting in New England had not 

revealed the slowdown being reported by the banks, he should now 

report that the data covering July revealed a 43 per cent drop below 

July 1965. All listed categories of residential buildings had a

-34-



9/13/66 -35

smaller contract volume than a year ago, although the 83 per cent 

drop in apartment house contracts was outstanding. Seasonally 

adjusted manufacturing activity expanded further in July with most 

of the rise occurring in the durable goods industries. Preliminary 

returns in the Boston Reserve Bank's follow-up survey of capital 

spending by manufacturers in New England confirmed their spring 

reports which indicated a sharp expansion of outlays.  

In the days immediately following the Reserve Banks' 

September 1 letter to member banks concerning business loans and 

borrowing at the discount window, Mr. Ellis said, he had held con

ferences with top managements of each of the reserve city banks in 

his District. Each gave enthusiastic endorsement to the concept of 

loan curtailment, and each detailed the efforts it had been extending 

to such an end. One bank, having run up business loans by the end of 

April by a total of 20 per cent, had a target of absolute contraction 

of 10 per cent by year end. None of those banks had borrowed at the 

Reserve Bank in any volume for the past three weeks and all were 

striving mightily to stay out of the discount window. Each had 

analyzed its certificates of deposit to "guesstimate" possible attri

tion and each had made plans to stay out of the discount window. None 

of the First District banks, large or small, had volunteered that they 

were eligible or sought to be eligible for any special treatment under 

the terms of the special program. Borrowings, primarily through



9/13/66 -36

Federal funds or CD's, of the eight largest banks ranged in August 

from a low of 94 per cent of required reserves to a high of 230 per 

cent. The comparable figure for eight New York City banks, taken 

together, was 192 per cent.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis judged that economic 

events since the Committee's last meeting supported a conclusion that 

the economy remained tilted toward inflation as it expanded rapidly, 

with continuing pressures on available resources. The next most 

visible signs of that condition probably would appear in the labor 

negotiations of the next several months.  

In the fiscal arena, Mr. Ellis continued, it was now known 

definitely that no tax restraint on corporate or individual spending 

might be anticipated for the rest of this year, although order 

backlogs for new equipment might shorten as the rate of new orders 

was restrained. In that connection, he enjoyed reading the Board 

staff's analysis of the probable effects on the economy of the 

Administration's proposals to suspend the investment tax credit and 

accelerated depreciation.1/ In the debt management arena, the 

revised program of Treasury financing should provide more confidence 

to the securities market that the debt would be managed better.  

1/ A memorandum on this subject by Eleanor Stockwell of 
the Board's staff, dated September 11, 1966, was transmitted 
by Mr. Brill to the Board of Governors and the Reserve Bank 
Presidents prior to this meeting, and a copy has been placed 
in the Committee's files.



9/13/66 -37

In the monetary arena, Mr. Ellis observed, he would suggest 

that a one-month decline in the credit proxy and in business loans 

should not lead the Committee to push the panic button and change its 

policy. That development should be viewed in a longer-run perspective, 

including the preceding growth and the further expansion that was 

virtually assured for September and the rest of the fall. Personally, 

he was not moved by the fact that there had been a one-month decline.  

The fiscal program announced by the Administration would not restrain 

inflation for the rest of the year. Accordingly, he would suggest 

that this was not the time for the System to ease its policy posture.  

Mr. Ellis agreed with Mr. Brill that shallower net borrowed 

reserve figures could have the meaning the latter had suggested. But 

they also could mean that the Committee had eased policy and was 

providing reserves a little more freely, and the market was likely to 

so interpret them. In fact, the staff had projected a September shift 

from CD's into demand deposits with such a surge as to expand demand 

deposits faster than in any previous month this year. That obviously 

explained the expected acceleration in required and total reserves to 

growth rates of 7 and 9 per cent, respectively, in contrast to their 

August declines. He recalled that at other recent Committee meetings 

there had been discussion of the question of how much of the increase 

in reserve requirements made by the Board should be supplied through 

open market operations, but he noted that there had been no discussion 

of that question around the table thus far this morning.



9/13/66 -38

Presumably, Mr. Ellis said, borrowings would have to average 

in excess of $800 million--perhaps near $900 million--if net borrowed 

reserves of $500 million were to be achieved. At such a level of 

borrowing even the largest banks probably would be having recourse to 

the discount window, and that would enable further conversations about 

the trend of lending.  

Mr. Ellis noted that Mr. Koch had referred to three parts of 

the President's recent message. But there was a fourth part also; 

namely, the President's request that the Federal Reserve work with the 

commercial banks to help hold down, or lower, interest rates coupled 

with action by the Congress authorizing the Federal agencies to 

regulate savings rates. That made it inappropriate at this time for 

the System to take the long overdue action of bringing the discount 

rate into line with related market rates. It would seem feasible, 

however, to maintain a target of $500 million for net borrowed 

reserves, hoping that data revisions subsequent to termination of 

operations would begin to be on the plus as well as the minus side.  

And, with confidence somewhat restored in the securities market, it 

should be feasible to attend more to reserve objectives rather than 

market objectives. Rather than backing away from reserve objectives, 

the Committee should cling to them as much as possible in September.



9/13/66 -39

Mr. Ellis thought that alternative A of the draft directives 

contained an unfortunate change of wording at the close of paragraph 1.  

It spoke of "accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base" when 

staff projections suggested September growth in total reserves would 

tie for second place in monthly growth rates this year. The second 

paragraph called for easing in monetary policy if credit expansion 

was strictly seasonal or fell short of the seasonal pattern, no matter 

how shaky might be the ability to construct up-to-date seasonal adjust

ment factors. Alternative B kept faith with the System's promise to 

use monetary policy to restrain inflationary credit expansion, and 

would be his preference. However, he disagreed with the label put on 

it; he did not think it was a policy of "firming to the extent 

feasible," because the Committee could firm much more than suggested 

by the language of the draft. He would describe it as "firming if 

credit expansion accelerated." The second paragraph called for 

"supplying the minimum amount of reserves consistent with the 

maintenance of orderly money market conditions." That surely should 

be the Committee's objective; it would not want to supply more 

reserves than those required to maintain an orderly market. He liked 

Mr. Brill's phrases, "tempered restraint," and "with tender loving 

care," and he thought they described alternative B.  

Mr. Irons commented that most areas of the Eleventh District 

economy had advanced over the summer but probably by a bit less than



9/13/66 -40

nationally. Employment changes in most categories had been of about 

seasonal character, although some were above seasonal and some below.  

Changes in industrial production were relatively minor in the latest 

month. The total index had shown no significant change in the last 

few months relative to a year ago, continuing to run at a level 9 per 

cent higher. Retail trade, as measured by department store sales, 

rose about 4 per cent during the past four weeks and also continued 

to run 9 per cent above 1965. Agricultural conditions were highly 

favorable; farm prices were up 8 per cent over the past eight months, 

with most of the increase in cattle prices. Rains had been excellent 

and grazing lands were in the best condition in some time.  

In the financial area, Mr. Irons said, loans at District banks 

were down in July and August, with most of the decrease occurring in 

nonbank financial loans and "other" loans. Commercial and industrial 

loans had advanced slightly. Deposits were down sharply, largely 

because of a decline in Government deposits. Negotiable CD's were 

down about $10 million, and it was expected that two, or possibly 

three, of the largest banks would be interested in special assistance 

at the discount window. Other banks did not appear overly concerned 

at present about CD runoffs. Average borrowing at the Reserve Bank 

was up a bit in the latest period, to $42 million from $32 million in 

the preceding period. Banks continued to use the Federal funds 

market most of the time to make their adjustments, although on any one



9/13/66 -41

day one or more of the large banks might find it necessary to come to 

the window. On the whole, the increase in both total loans and 

commercial and industrial loans at member banks and weekly reporting 

banks in the District had not been as large as nationally.  

The national economic picture had been covered adequately in 

the green book 1/ and in the discussion so far today, Mr. Irons said, 

so he would not dwell on the subject. His general recommendation for 

policy over the next three weeks would be to maintain the current or 

recent degree of restraint without attempting to bring about any 

further intensification, for the several reasons indicated by 

Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Irons believed that the level and movement of interest 

rates and other measures of market conditions might provide a better 

guide for policy now than net borrowed reserves, particularly in light 

of the large revisions in the preliminary figures for the latter 

recently. Interest rates had already reached extremely high levels 

and on one or two recent occasions money market conditions were 

verging on disorganization. In his judgment, further upward pressures 

on interest rates and further restraint on the availability of 

reserves relative to demand were not desirable. There had been some 

signs recently of a dampening tendency in bank credit expansion, and 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



9/13/66 -42

he felt that monetary policy was biting. Banks were under pressure 

to meet their loan commitments and to reduce the aggregate of their 

loans outstanding. The System should provide reserves for seasonal 

loan growth and, possibly, for some nonseasonal growth through open 

market operations and the discount window. And the System should 

stand ready to use the discount window to alleviate any unusual 

pressures arising from CD runoffs or other deposit losses. He would 

not favor a change in the discount rate at this time and he preferred 

alternative A for the directive.  

Mr. Swan reported that while over-all business activity in 

the Twelfth District was still strong the latest fragmentary data 

certainly gave no signs of a further upward surge. August employment 

data for California and Utah--the only two States for which such data 

were as yet available--reflected little change in nonagricultural 

employment and a further increase in unemployment. The California 

unemployment rate had shown successive monthly increases from the low 

of 4.6 per cent reached in May, and in August was 5.2 per cent. Aero

space employment in California increased again in August, but only by 

2,900 as compared with a rise of 8,400 in July. Lumber and plywood 

production continued to exceed orders and prices slipped down again in 

August. Both residential and nonresidential building contract awards 

dropped sharply in July. Total construction contracts declined only 

slightly, but that was because two very large heavy construction 

contracts were awarded in the month.



9/13/66

With respect to banking developments, Mr. Swan said, total 

credit at weekly reporting banks increased in the two weeks through 

August 24, but the rise was due entirely to an increase in security 

holdings. Loans were down; indeed, business loans had declined for 

five consecutive weeks, and preliminary figures for the week ending 

August 31 suggested another decline. There appeared to be a little 

tightening in the reserve positions of the major banks recently, 

with some increase in borrowing at the Reserve Bank in the last week 

of August and the first week in September, but the rise certainly 

had not reached what one would call major proportions.  

As to policy, Mr. Swan said his views were much the same as 

those he had expressed at the preceding meeting. He liked Mr. Brill's 

phrase, "passive restraint," In view of the lack of increase in 

bank credit and reserves in August, the market uncertainties that 

still existed, and the current attempt to assess the Administration's 

fiscal program, it seemed to him that the Committee should again seek 

to maintain about the present money market conditions--recognizing 

that, as had been indicated, the net borrowed reserve figures could 

vary considerably depending upon the factors affecting them. He 

would allow the Manager considerable flexibility in day-to-day 

operations, with some attention to be given to short-term interest 

rates. While movements in aggregates as well as in the marginal 

reserve measures should be considered, he would leave room for a

-43-



9/13/66 -44

considerable margin in the outcome. Despite the change in the 

staff's projection of the bank credit proxy for September, he thought 

that an increase on the order of 5 or 6 per cent, such as had been 

anticipated three weeks ago, was still a fairly reasonable limit 

before some positive action should be taken. That conclusion led him 

to favor alternative A for the directive, at least if it was inter

preted in the sense of its caption, "no further firming, with 

qualification." However, he had a question similar to one already 

expressed regarding the last clause, reading "if bank credit expands 

no more than seasonally expected, some easing of money market 

conditions shall be sought." He would prefer language that was 

symmetrical with that in the preceding clause, such as "if bank 

credit expands substantially less than seasonally expected ... ." 

Mr. Swan concluded by noting that he agreed a change in the 

discount rate would not be appropriate at this time.  

Mr. Galusha reported that the Ninth District economy continued 

to expand and about in the pattern of the national economy, and the 

general outlook remained good. Especially good was the outlook for 

agriculture. In fact, it was so good that anticipated and feared 

pressures on the major banks to finance commodity dealers probably 

would not develop. Farmers, anticipating higher prices, were 

apparently going to hold their crops themselves; and their cash 

position was good. The combination of cash, the shift in the U.S.



9/13/66 -45

Department of Agriculture policy, higher commodity prices, and the 

generally low level of tax sophistication made him quite dubious that 

any downward shift in agricultural spending for capital goods would 

be caused by the Administration's fiscal program just announced. Only 

in the lumber industry was the outlook poor. Unless residential 

construction picked up, that industry would go through a decidedly 

trying period.  

The District's savings and loan associations appeared to have 

gotten through July relatively well, Mr. Galusha said, having lost a 

disproportionately small amount of share capital. Nor had mortgage 

lending and residential construction declined as much in the District 

as in the nation. The large District banks apparently were doing 

better in rolling over their maturing CD's than were the money market 

banks. According to his information, New York banks were losing 

about 50 per cent of their maturing CD's; Ninth District banks were 

losing between 25 and 30 per cent.  

All he could report about the response to the new approach to 

discount administration, Mr. Galusha continued, was that he had not 

heard a peep from the banks. Possibly Ninth District banks--like 

those in other Districts--were anxious to get by as best they could 

on their own. In any event, the Minneapolis Reserve Bank had not 

yet had a chance to implement the System's letter.



9/13/66

Turning to the question of open market policy, Mr. Galusha 

remarked that, as had already been indicated, the big news was the 

President's proposal of last week. He was greatly pleased that a 

shoe had been dropped, although as an old tax man he was not thrilled 

by its size or its style. The reasoning of Miss Stockwell's 

memorandum, with which he agreed wholeheartedly, must have not been 

shared widely. Apart from the public posture impact, the real effect 

of the announcement would be minor. It was apparent, therefore, at 

least to him, that any monetary response to the President's proposal 

was some way off--perhaps a good long way off. At the very least the 

Committee would have to be sure about what was going to happen.  

Yet, Mr. Galusha continued, if easing any now would be unwise, 

so would tightening further. It was reasonably clear that the 

economy was accelerating again. Indeed, the fourth-quarter increase 

in GNP might well be greater than the fourteen-odd billion dollars 

the authors of the green book were presently expecting. Then, too, 

with what Congress had been appropriating for nondefense expenditures, 

the forecasters' computers might soon be reading "tilt." But what

ever the economic outlook might be, the Committee would, in his 

judgment, be very poorly advised politically to go further at this 

time. And he, for one, was still a little apprehensive about the 

results the Committee's new approach to monetary policy--as it 

continued to evolve through this fall--was going to produce.

-46-



9/13/66

Mr. Galusha came out for the status quo and, more particularly, 

for a net borrowed reserves total equal to the average of the past 

several weeks. Nor would he worry much about changes in interest 

rates, slight or sharp, which were--in the Account Manager's judgment-

produced by changes in expectations. Over the next few weeks 

expectations could be quite volatile. In sum, he was for alternative A 

of the directives.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that during August and early September 

labor markets in the Seventh District continued to be extremely tight 

and inflationary pressures remained dominant. Shortages of labor, 

skilled and unskilled, continued in virtually all District centers.  

Help-wanted ads remained at a very high level and unemployment compen

sation claims had declined further. Relaxation of hiring standards-

in terms of experience, education, and criminal records--had not 

solved labor shortages. Prices had continued to rise. Early 

September saw an unusually heavy flurry of price increases and it now 

appeared that food prices would not decline as much in the next few 

months as had been expected earlier.  

Scattered reports indicated some cutbacks in capital outlays 

for 1967, Mr. Scanlon continued. In most cases those represented 

completion of major programs started earlier. On the other hand, 

deliveries of capital goods had been delayed and some construction 

projects had been postponed because of inability to obtain either

-47-



9/13/66 -48

reasonably firm bids or adequate financing. Barring a change in the 

general outlook, most of those projects presumably would be 

reactivated next year. Although orders for some types of capital 

goods declined in July, order backlogs had increased further. There 

appeared to be no basis at present for calling a "turn" in the 

capital goods boom.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that steel operating rates were rising 

gradually but supplies should be adequate without pressing facilities 

to the extent reported last spring. Surveys indicated that more 

steel consumers intended to reduce inventories than raise them in the 

months ahead. Auto inventories were reduced sharply in August but 

remained high relative to past years, and production schedules 

indicated that they would rise further during September.  

Mr. Scanlon said that there was a sharp decline in the pace of 

credit growth at major District banks in August, in line with the 

national experience, but no indication that that was the beginning of 

any extended period of easier demand for funds. The contraseasonal 

decline in loans could be attributed mainly to the further paydown of 

loans to finance companies and the large volume of new capital issues, 

a portion of which might have been used to retire bank loans. Com

mercial and industrial loans in the District continued to rise, but 

by somewhat less than in the same period of other recent years.  

Real estate loans had been rising, but less rapidly than last year.



9/13/66 -49

Consumer loans had declined recently. Total bank credit in the 

District had risen much more since mid-year than in the same period a 

year ago.  

Recent rates on Federal funds of 6 per cent and over might 

indicate an unwillingness by banks to submit to the discipline on 

commercial and industrial loans expected to accompany use of the 

discount window, Mr. Scanlon said. However, he would expect the 

current rate differentials to bring more banks to the window.  

Mr. Scanlon observed that figures for August confirmed the 

more moderate rate of expansion in money and credit projected at the 

last meeting of the Committee. He thought that for the present the 

Committee should attempt to maintain very moderate rates of growth in 

money and credit. If that implied reduced reserve availability, he 

would favor such measures short of inducing disorderly conditions in 

the money and capital markets. As to the discount rate, his views 

paralleled those of Mr. Hayes. In particular, he believed it was 

essential to retain rate flexibility, both up and down. Unless the 

Committee was flexible on the up side it was restrained when easier 

credit and lower rates were needed.  

Mr. Scanlon favored maintaining about the present degree of 

restraint for the period immediately ahead, but would give the 

Manager sufficient latitude to operate should liquidity pressures 

become acute. He had some difficulty in selecting the directive that



9/13/66 -50

would accomplish that objective. On balance, however, he would favor 

alternative B, which he interpreted as Mr. Ellis had.  

Mr. Clay observed that the period since the last meeting had 

been one of marked financial changes. It also had been a period of 

public pronouncements concerning planned fiscal policy and debt 

management changes. Some expectational effects of those public policy 

actions had been immediate in the financial markets and others might 

follow. The basic impact would take longer to work itself through the 

economy and financial structure, once those programs had been worked 

out and implemented. The fiscal program relative to business capital 

outlays required Congressional action for implementation, although the 

retroactive feature might have some relatively prompt effect on new 

orders for business equipment. Whatever the meaning of the announced 

screening of Federal outlays--and that was not clear at this time--it 

had to be recognized that Federal outlays would be accelerating in the 

months ahead. Moreover, direct Treasury financing would be affected by 

those expenditures as well as by the planned curtailment in agency 

financing.  

The basic economic situation did not appear to Mr. Clay to 

have changed. With variation among sectors, the economy still was 

trying to do more than it could do in an orderly way. Despite some 

easing in sensitive materials prices, at least for the present, over

all pressure of demand on resources with upward pressure on prices



9/13/66 -51

continued. In fact, recent developments on the wage-cost front 

raised the possibility of more, rather than less, price inflation.  

Apart from the economic policy issues now being debated, the 

overriding consideration was the growing volume of expenditures 

related to the South Vietnam war.  

Despite the indications of public policy actions, Mr. Clay 

remarked, the System would need to continue to formulate monetary 

policy according to the economic and financial developments that 

unfolded. Any change in policy should depend on whether forth

coming evidence justified such change. For the present, the 

appropriate approach appeared to him to be a continuation of the 

current policy of monetary restraint. In view of the public 

attention focused on recent economic policy statements, it was 

important that the market not be misled into believing that Federal 

Reserve policy had been eased. If recent evidence of curtailment of 

bank credit expansion continued in the weeks ahead, that would become 

a significant factor to be taken into account in future policy 

formulation.  

Mr. Clay observed that the guidelines for a continuation of 

the present policy of monetary restraint were not easy to delineate.  

If member bank borrowing expanded substantially, an increase in net 

borrowed reserves considerably above the current target would be 

consistent with present policy. Also, some increase in money market



9/13/66 -52

rates in connection with possible forthcoming money market pressures 

would not be out of line with the current monetary policy posture.  

The Federal Reserve discount rate continued to be inappropriate to 

the present economic situation and current monetary policy.  

Alternative B of the draft directives appeared to Mr. Clay 

to be satisfactory. Perhaps it should be said, however, that the 

goal was the maintenance of the present degree of monetary restraint.  

Alternative A seemed to carry the connotation of easing rather than 

simply of no further firming.  

Mr. Wayne said that responses to the Reserve Bank's latest 

survey indicated a small increase of uncertainty among both 

businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District. Reports from 

producers of durable goods suggested a continuing but still slight 

downward shift in new orders, backlogs, and hours worked, while 

returns covering nondurable goods remained mixed and showed little 

or no trend. Prices and wages in manufacturing had on balance 

continued to rise. Textile demand remained generally strong, but 

soft spots in certain light cottons and blends continued to cause 

concern and in the trade reports were being increasingly related 

to imports, which had risen rapidly this year. Automobile sales 

remained down slightly, and there were signs of a slower pace in 

construction even though contract award values had been rising since



9/13/66 -53

April and were now above last year's level. Unemployment rates 

continued at or close to historical lows and employment had con

tinued to rise. Prices received by farmers through mid-August were 

well above year-earlier levels, but prices paid reached new record 

highs. Seasonally adjusted business loans, total loans, and total 

bank credit fell more in August at District banks than in the nation 

as a whole.  

Mr. Wayne commented that thus far banker reaction to the 

discount administration policy announced in the System's letter of 

September 1, 1966, had ranged from approval to resignation to the 

inevitable. There had been no adverse comments nor had any of the 

banks asked for special considerations referred to in that letter.  

The national economy continued to show evidence of over

spending despite a reduced pace in some areas, Mr. Wayne observed.  

On balance, inflationary pressures were probably a little stronger 

in August than in earlier months. Prices continued to rise although 

a few divergent trends were beginning to show. The latest data 

available on inventories indicated that they were behaving in a 

manner typical of inflationary periods and in a way almost certain 

to cause trouble later. Capital outlays remained at a very high 

level but there had been a few signs which indicated that the pace 

might be starting to taper off.



9/13/66 -54

With respect to policy, Mr. Wayne said, the Committee had 

had almost no room for maneuver even before the President made his 

fiscal proposals last week. Now, it seemed to him, there was even 

less. Obviously, an increase in the discount rate or significant 

tightening in any other form would be a flagrant rebuff to that move 

toward fiscal cooperation which the Committee had sought for a long 

time. On the other side, there were no valid reasons for any easing 

of restraint. The fiscal proposals were not yet law and there was 

no evidence of "any easing of inflationary pressures." To him that 

suggested that the Committee should follow a very strict "even keel" 

policy while Congress acted on the proposals and, unless there were 

urgent reasons to the contrary, until the initial effects of the 

measures could be evaluated. He would expect the short-run effects 

to be salutary, because they helped to clear the air respecting the 

objectives of fiscal policy and should therefore have a settling 

and strengthening effect on the bond market. Except for those 

announcement effects, the results of the proposed measures were 

likely to develop slowly and uncertainly. The initial impact would 

be on corporate profits and capital investment, both of which 

fluctuated widely and which might now be approaching their peaks 

irrespective of the proposed tax changes.  

In the meantime, Mr. Wayne thought the Committee faced a 

very difficult problem in implementing monetary policy in the next



9/13/66 -55

week or two. The large flows of funds over the tax and dividend 

dates, the prospect of a sizable runoff of CD's, the banking system's 

reactions to the System's policy announced on September 1, continuing 

large demands on the capital market, and the volatile reactions of 

the financial market as the fiscal proposals were debated and acted 

upon--all of those impinging on a market already nervous and unsettled 

would provide a very turbulent environment in which to carry out any 

policy. He could see no alternative but to give the Manager wide 

discretion and ask him to follow as closely as possible the same policy 

the Committee had been pursuing in recent weeks. It was very likely 

that the Manager would often have to give first consideration to 

market conditions but, subject to that, he should attempt to maintain 

about the same level of reserve availability as had prevailed in the 

past month.  

A directive as proposed by Mr. Hayes seemed consistent with 

Mr. Wayne's idea of a desirable posture for the next three weeks and 

perhaps longer.  

Mr. Shepardson said he thought the economic situation had 

already been clearly described today. While there were some 

conflicting indications, most of the evidence still indicated a 

strong, booming pace of economic activity. The President's program 

introduced an element of uncertainty since one could not know how



9/13/66 -56

it would be implemented, and how quickly. All of which, it seemed 

to him, called for maintaining a policy position as nearly like 

the present position as possible. He did not think the Committee 

should be unduly influenced by a one-month downturn in bank lending, 

in the face of the preceding long-protracted uptrend.  

Mr. Shepardson said that, like others, he thought the draft 

directives were mislabeled. Alternative A seemed to him definitely 

to be an easing directive, and he considered inappropriate some of 

the changes suggested in its first paragraph. Alternative B more 

nearly contemplated maintaining the present policy position, and 

it was worded in a way that would give the Manager the necessary 

degree of leeway. The final clause, calling for seeking still 

greater reliance on borrowed reserves if bank credit expanded more 

than seasonally expected, seemed to him to be proper. Basically, 

over the coming period the Committee should try to maintain the 

present degree of restraint without either firming or easing. The 

directive Mr. Hayes had suggested went a long way in the same 

direction, and it might be preferable to the staff's alternative B.  

Mr. Mitchell presented the following statement: 

In the current financial environment the directive 
properly emphasizes the "maintenance of orderly money 
market conditions and the moderation of unusual liquidity 
pressures."



9/13/66

A major reason for this concern over liquidity 
pressures is that so long as interest rates on market 
instruments are higher than Regulation Q ceilings there 
will be a trend toward "disintermediation"--that is, 
toward a run-off of negotiable CD's at banks. In 
addition to our concern over liquidity pressures, we 
must understand the implications for monetary policy 
of such a run-off in CD's.  

We start with the fact that, today, yields on 
market instruments attract investors holding maturing 
negotiable CD's; i.e, investors are responding to 
the current pattern of interest rates by reducing 
their claims on banks and increasing correspondingly 
their holdings of short-term securities.  

What appears to be happening is thus a reversal 
of the process that occurred when Regulation Q was 
raised at the beginning of 1962 and negotiable CD's 
increased rapidly. Perhaps all that is necessary 
for an understanding of the problem at hand is to 
reverse the signs on the analytical and policy con
clusions reached four years ago. At that time, it 
was concluded that a shift of the public's claims 
toward bank time deposits and away from securities 
and nonbank financial institutions tended to absorb 
bank reserves and required offsetting open market 
purchases by the System.1/ 

Under present conditions, holders of negotiable 
CD's who do not wish to renew will probably purchase 

1/ We also observed, four years ago, that the term structure 

of interest rates was affected by the shifts, even if the System 

accommodated them--for banks tended to acquire longer-term 
obligations than the public gave up when it switched to time 
deposits at banks. Such market impacts were regarded as 
desirable at that time, helping to hold up bill rates and to 
hold down yields and increase the availability of funds in 
the municipal, mortgage, and other longer-term markets.

-57-



9/13/66

short-term agency issues, municipals, commercial and 
finance company paper, and bankers' acceptances. To 
the extent banks hold these types of paper, we can 
cut through the intervening analysis and simply imagine 
that banks redeem maturing CD's by handing over such 
short-term assets, thus reducing both their assets and 
liabilities.  

Assuming that 100 of maturing CD's were paid in 
this way, the results would be as follows: 

Bank assets -100 
Time deposits -100 
Money supply No change 
Total reserves No change 
Required reserves - 6 
Excess reserves + 6 
Public's holding of securities +100 

Although bank credit and bank deposits would appear 
to contract, total credit available to the economy would 
not be affected nor should there by any further impact 
on interest rates, in this example. All that has happened 
is a reshuffling of assets between the banks and the 
public with attendant effects on the distribution of 
total credit availability and the shape of the yield 
curve about the reverse of those that accompanied CD 
expansion (see footnote, page 57). In short, there will 
have been a shift away from intermediation by the banks.  

However, the situation with respect to excess 
reserves is unstable; unless they are absorbed by the 
System, they provide the basis for net credit and money 
supply expansion.  

In order to check on this short-cut reasoning, it is 
useful to examine the process under the more realistic 
assumption that those holding maturing CD's take the 
proceeds initially in the form of demand deposits, which 
they in turn use to purchase the short-term obligations 
they wish to hold. I have done this and find that the

-58-



9/13/66

conclusions are unchanged once the transitional churning 
is over.1/ 

The net result of a switch from CD's to market 
instruments is, in the absence of offsetting action by 
the System, to increase the over-all supply of credit and 
money and to reduce average level of interest rates. So 
long as individual banks in the course of reducing their 

1/ Assume that 100 of CD's mature. The first step is that the 
holders receive either a credit to their demand account in the 
issuing bank or a check which they deposit in their own banks.  
In any event, the banking system finds 100 of its deposits 
shifted from time to demand status, with an immediate impact on 
required reserves, in addition to churning of reserves among 
banks as checks on banks that redeem CD's are deposited in 
other banks.  

But since the former holders of CD's intend to acquire higher 
yielding assets rather than additional cash balances, we must 
assume that the new demand deposits will quickly be used to 
purchase short-term securities. Since the supply of such 
securities much be assumed to be uninfluenced in the short run 
by these developments, the securities will presumably be 
purchased from existing holders, and the demand deposits pass 
to the sellers of securities. At the same time, banks as a 
whole find themselves under reserve pressure because time 
deposits have been converted to demand deposits. Assuming 
total reserves to be held constant, the banks will begin to 
dispose of assets in order to adjust their reserves. As banks 
sell securities, they reabsorb demand deposits, thereby reversing 
the increase in both required reserves and demand deposits that 
accompanied the switch from CD's to market instruments.  

The switch of 100 from time to demand deposits increased 
required reserves by, say, 9 (assuming the average reserve 
requirement on demand deposits at the banks involved to be 15).  
In order to reduce required reserves again, banks need to lower 
their demand deposits by only 60, which means they must dispose 
of only 60 of securities. It should be recalled that the former 

holders of CD's will be in the market purchasing 100 of short
term securities. To reach complete parity with the short-cut 
illustration itemized earlier, the System would now have to be 

motivated to absorb 6 million reserves in order to reduce demand 
deposits by 40, back to their original level; and the total of 

40 securities sales by the banks and the System to accomplish 
this adjustment would equilibrate the buying being done by former 
CD holders.

-59-



9/13/66 -60

assets did not cause security markets to become disorderly, 
the System would want to absorb the excess reserves released 
by the reduction in CD's.  

What is the implication of this analysis for the 
aggregate measures upon which policy operates? To be 
specific, assume a decline in negotiable CD's of about 
$2 billion; then apart from the disturbances in security 
markets arising out of adjustments by banks to the loss 
of deposits, the aggregates will be affected as follows if 
the System acts to absorb the $120 million in reserves that 
are released as CD's decline: 

1. Bank credit (proxy) -$ 2 billion 
2. Public holdings of securities + 2 billion 
3. Money supply No change 
4. Total reserves -$120 million 

This decline in bank credit and total reserves would 
not per se represent a tightening of policy. If the market 
consequences of the changed distribution of credit avail
ability go beyond the bounds consistent with current policy, 
we may want to take account of this in our operations. But 
these are distinctions that it is important to recognize, 
and to communicate, in order to be clear first to ourselves 
and then to the many observers and critics of monetary policy.  

Mr. Mitchell added that he preferred alternative B to A for the 

directive. However, he would delete the last clause of the first 

paragraph, reading "by restricting the growth in the reserve base, 

bank credit, and the money supply." He thought the clause was in

appropriate at this time because, as his analysis indicated, there was 

likely to be a basic inconsistency in the three measures cited. In 

the second paragraph, he would insert the words "firm and" before 

"orderly money market conditions." He did not like the proviso clause 

because it was written in terms of bank credit, whereas he felt that 

the focus should be on money supply. Others might prefer an interest 

rate target. In any case, the Desk could operate properly without

the clause, and he would prefer to see it deleted.



9/13/66

Mr. Daane said he favored maintaining the current degree 

of restraint and, to use a phrase Committee members had employed 

in the past, "watchful waiting." He would give the Manager flex

ibility to carry out the spirit of the Committee's intentions.  

As to the draft directives, Mr. Daane said, he agreed that 

there was a flavor of easing in alternative A that was not appropriate 

at present. He would accept the first paragraph of alternative B 

with Mr. Hayes' amendment to the last clause. Alternatively, he 

would have no great objection to deleting the last clause of the 

paragraph as Mr. Mitchell suggested. For the second paragraph he 

preferred Mr. Hayes' suggested language.  

Mr. Maisel said he could agree with much of Mr. Mitchell's 

analysis but he differed in the interpretation of the current state 

of the monetary variables. If one considered the period since 

September 1965, and more particularly that since January 1966, most 

such variables--with the exception of bank loans and possibly total 

loans--appeared to be running considerably below a normal growth rate.  

The degree of monetary restriction had been substantially greater 

than might have been thought, and it would appear desirable to return 

to something closer to normal growth rates.  

Mr. Maisel noted that he had expressed the hope on previous 

occasions that weekly net borrowed reserve figures would vary more 

than they had in the past. That goal appeared to have been attained 

recently, if only as a result of large revisions in the preliminary

-61-



9/13/66 -62

figures. He agreed with Mr. Hayes' conclusion that the net borrowed 

reserve figures should be subordinated now.  

Mr. Maisel thought it was important to accept Mr. Mitchell's 

suggestion for deleting the reference to the reserve base, bank credit, 

and the money supply from the first paragraph of the directive. For 

the second paragraph he would prefer a modified version of Mr. Hayes' 

proposal. It would be best, he thought, to avoid referring to 

expectations, particularly since there was a difference between the 

Board and New York Bank staff projections. He would call for opera

tions to be modified "in light of . . any apparently significant 

deviations of money and bank credit from a normal seasonal growth 

pattern." By "normal" for bank credit he meant a 4-6 per cent growth 

rate in the credit proxy.  

Mr. Brill commented that the difference between the projections 

at the Board and the New York Bank did not reflect any basic disagree

ment on the outlook for bank credit. They were mainly definitional; 

the Bank's projection included the credit expansion expected as a 

result of a continued pull-back of funds from foreign branches, which 

was not allowed for in the Board's projection.  

Mr. Hayes said he was a little puzzled by Mr. Maisel's use 

of the term "normal seasonal growth pattern," which seemed to call for 

no growth on a seasonally adjusted basis. In any case, he would prefer 

not to pinpoint an operating target in that manner.



9/13/66 -63

Mr. Maisel replied that, as he had indicated, he had a 4-6 

per cent growth rate in mind as normal for bank credit.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that with a reduction in bank inter

mediation underway such a growth rate in bank credit was likely to 

have strong inflationary effects. He thought it would be better to 

refer to total credit than to bank credit alone.  

Mr. Holmes noted that figures on total credit were available 

only quarterly, in the Board's flow of funds accounts, and with a time 

lag so that total credit was not a workable operational guide for the 

Manager.  

The go-around then resumed with remarks by Mr. Brimmer, who 

noted that at its meeting just three weeks ago the Committee had no 

expectaions of further assistance from fiscal policy. Now that it 

appeared that some assistance would be forthcoming, the general view 

around the table was that the Administration's program was not good 

enough. Personally, he thought the Committee should keep policy 

unchanged while observing developments with respect to the fiscal 

package--and he would emphasize that it was a package and not simply 

a collection of miscellaneous items. It was not possible to foresee 

the effectiveness or the timing of the elements, but there had been 

some effects already, as indicated by the Manager's comments regarding 

the postponement of agency issues. As he understood the plan, the 

Treasury proposed to sell a substantial volume of agency issues to 

Federal trust funds and to increase sales in the market of short-term



9/13/66 -64

Treasury securities. Such operations might have a significant effect 

on money market conditions and would have to be taken into account in 

open market operations; the Committee might find itself engaged in 

some sort of an even keel operation. In any case, the monetary im

plications of the Administration's package were serious.  

Mr. Brimmer recalled that two months ago he had said publicly 

that suspension of the investment tax credit might be helpful, and he 

continued to think so. At the same time, he thought the Committee 

should not be overly optimistic about the package, but should wait to 

see what happened. As to Mr. Brill's suggestion of a policy of "passive 

restraint," he (Mr. Brimmer) did not think the System should be passive; 

there were some difficult areas--especially in connection with the new 

discount administration program--that would call for active steps.  

However, if Mr. Brill meant simply avoiding active further restraint 

he agreed with him.  

Mr. Brimmer said that he favored alternative A for the directive 

with the several modifications suggested by Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Hickman commented that the economy continued to move forward 

under forced draft, reflecting pressures generated mainly by business 

and defense spending. The rate of increase in consumer spending was 

rising in the third quarter, after declining in the second quarter, 

but would still fall short of the unusually rapid advance of the first 

quarter. Business investment outlays were exceptionally high, both 

absolutely and relative to personal consumption expenditures, but the



9/13/66 -65

rate of advance seemed to be moderating. Defense spending remained 

as the great unknown, with almost a complete absence of reliable 

information.  

Recent price developments suggested to Mr. Hickman some 

moderation of inflationary pressures, although that might be temporary 

and illusory. Spot prices of raw industrials continued to decline, 

and now were about 13 per cent below their mid-March peak. The recent 

behavior of meat and wheat prices suggested that food prices probably 

would not move higher over the rest of the year. An additional straw 

in the wind was provided by Dun and Bradstreet's latest reading of 

businessmen's expectations, which showed a small decline in the per

centage of businessmen expecting year-over-year price increases next 

quarter, the first time that had happened in two years.  

Mr. Hickman observed that financial markets were nervous and 

uncertain, reacting in an extreme way to facts and rumors. For that 

reason alone, he would prefer not to make any change in monetary policy 

for the next three weeks. With most aggregate reserve measures lagging 

anticipated rates of growth, and in some cases actually declining, 

there was little doubt that the System's restrictive policy was taking 

hold. Most importantly, business loans declined during August, on a 

seasonally adjusted basis, which indicated--despite some special 

factors--that the excessive rate of expansion of bank lending was 

moderating. Other reasons for holding a steady course were the 

President's five-point plan to combat inflation announced last Thursday



9/13/66 -66

and the heavy run-off of CD's anticipated in some quarters during 

the next few weeks.  

Although it might be academic now, Mr. Hickman said, he should 

report for the record that at the Cleveland Reserve Bank directors' 

meeting last week--before the President's announcement--there was con

siderable discussion about the effects of rescinding the investment 

tax credit, and the pressures that a rescission might generate on the 

demand for bank credit. The general conclusion was that elimination 

of the tax credit would have negligible short-run effects, and that 

its long-run effects would be highly questionable.  

Mr. Hickman had a slight preference for alternative A of the 

staff draft directives, with the second paragraph as revised by Mr. Hayes.  

The words "current conditions in the money market" in the staff's draft 

troubled him in view of the sharp run-up in bill rates now underway.  

However, the exact wording of the directive was not too significant to 

him. As he had indicated, he favored "no change." 

Mr. Bopp said that as he balanced various considerations bear

ing on policy for the next three weeks he found the weight falling on 

the side of no change. That conclusion rested on three points, no one 

of which alone was very persuasive, but which in combination suggested 

that the best course--for the present, at least--was not to tighten 

further through open market policy.  

First, Mr. Bopp was not impressed with the likelihood that the 

President's new program would be very effective in relieving the burden



9/13/66 -67

on monetary policy. The tax measures would not have much effect for 

many months, and it remained to be seen what would be done on the 

expenditure side. Yet the fiscal program should help to some extent 

in restraining demand; and, although it would be unwise to try to lower 

interest rates, as the President suggested, it seemed desirable--for 

the time being, at least--not to take action which would raise them.  

Second, it seemed to Mr. Bopp that the future effects of the 

System's new discount policy were still very uncertain. Conversations 

with large Philadelphia banks suggested that vigorous efforts had already 

been made to slow the growth of business loans. Most banks expected to 

hold such loans at about current levels or within the usual seasonal 

rise. The banks believed that they would be able to meet their loan 

demands by issuing consumer-type CD's, borrowing Federal funds, and 

selling assets--in that order. Borrowing from the Federal Reserve 

would be a last resort.  

To make the new discount policy effective, Mr. Bopp continued, 

open market operations would have to move aggressively to force banks 

much more extensively into the discount window. If the attitudes of 

Philadelphia banks were typical, open market action might have to be 

vigorous indeed. The resulting effect on market rates could be drastic.  

Announcement of the new policy was favorably received. He would be 

inclined, therefore, to move cautiously in implementing the new discount 

policy and would not push open market policy so far as to force a 

materially larger volume of borrowing.



9/13/66 -68

Third, Mr. Bopp observed, as the staff reports indicated 

behavior of total bank credit and the money supply had been more 

reasonable recently. He found little comfort in that fact in view of 

likely future demands for credit. On the other hand, it was increasingly 

important to be alert to the cumulative effects of restrictive policy 

actions already taken. For the time being an attitude of watchful 

skepticism seemed to be the most appropriate.  

Mr. Bopp observed that the directive suggested by Mr. Hayes would 

accomplish the kind of no-change position he had in mind, with the 

deletion in the first paragraph proposed by Mr. Mitchell.  

Mr. Patterson commented that in analyzing the economy every 

three or four weeks one might be reading more into figures than one 

should. But even allowing for strikes and seasonal quirks, some 

indicators for the Sixth District indicated a slowing down in the 

District economy's forward momentum. One such sign was the slackening 

in employment gains. Another was the decline in new car sales in July.  

A third was a reduction in residential building. Nevertheless, non

residential construction was still keeping the total contract volume 

ahead of last year. And over-all District business conditions were 

undoubtedly still on the upside. That he gathered not only from the 

behavior of longer statistical trends but from the Atlanta Bank's 

directors and other contacts.  

The banking figures for the District showed some interesting new 

developments, Mr. Patterson reported. Starting in early August, total



9/13/66 -69

loans at the large banks had declined for four straight weeks. Business 

lending had also fallen off, even though reports showed loan demand 

remaining high. That curtailment of loans confirmed statements by bankers 

in recent conversations to the effect that they were eager to restrict 

the pace of their lending operations. Recent unfavorable deposit flows 

were probably partly responsible for that pressure. District banks 

usually lost deposits at this time of the year, but this year they lost 

50 per cent more demand deposits from mid-July to the end of August than 

last year. Furthermore, they had gained little in the way of time 

deposits during the same period. Since the banks were dependent to 

some extent on an inflow of deposits from outside the District, pressures 

in northern money market centers were evidently being transmitted to 

the Sixth District.  

Mr. Patterson remarked that District bankers, of course, were 

saying the same thing indirectly when they reported that large companies 

that had not borrowed from them for many years now wanted to make use of 

their standing commitments. Those conditions, and other national develop

ments, suggested to him that tightened credit conditions had begun to 

take hold.  

Mr. Patterson went on to observe that after having labored so long 

for that to happen, one might be tempted to say: "Let's pour on more of 

the same." But unless those trends were reversed and permissible rates on 

negotiable CD's raised, he did not believe the Committee's open market 

policy should become more restrictive, at least at this time. He was



9/13/66 -70

especially worried that the short-term financial markets might not 

stand too much additional strain. He was in the dark about how to 

translate that prescription into policy for the next three weeks.  

However, he thought the new discount rules made guidance by net 

borrowed reserve figures more difficult than ever. Since the System 

was so concerned with the trend of bank lending, he wondered if it 

might not be desirable, at least experimentally, to use seasonally 

adjusted bank loans as a principal guide, while taking account of 

changes in bank security portfolios, member bank borrowing, and 

conditions in money and securities markets. However, the "no change" 

directive was acceptable to him.  

Mr. Lewis commented that various monetary indicators had 

shown a marked change in direction since early summer. Whether judged 

by bank reserves, money supply, or interest rates, a significantly 

different trend had apparently developed since about May or June.  

From May to August, the money stock declined at a 3 per cent annual 

rate after rising 6 per cent in the preceding year. Total member 

bank reserves and reserves available for private demand deposits 

similarly shifted from increases to decreases. Federal Reserve holdings 

of Treasury securities and changes in reserve requirements contributed 

net to effective reserves at only a 3 per cent rate compared with 

8 per cent in the preceding year.  

Likewise, Mr. Lewis continued, interest rates had gone up 

much more rapidly since May than in the preceding year. Yields on



9/13/66 -71

long-term Government bonds had increased at a 20 per cent annual rate 

since May compared with 10 per cent in the preceding year. Yields on 

commercial paper had gone up at a 39 per cent rate since May compared 

with 23 per cent in the preceding year.  

Such a shift of monetary indicators this past summer seemed 

to Mr. Lewis to have been appropriate. Under conditions of essentially 

full use of available resources, of accelerating price increases, and 

of unusually stimulative fiscal policy, it seemed to him that monetary 

expansion was appropriately limited. Looked at in another way, it 

seemed likely that under the influence of high interest rates, price 

inflation, and a strong propensity to invest, the demand for money to 

hold had been declining and therefore the supply of money also 

appropriately declined.  

Since he saw no pause in the inflation, Mr. Lewis said, and 

since the fiscal situation appeared to be even more stimulative in the 

last half of 1966 than in the first half, he believed the Committee 

should continue in the near future about the same policy as that which 

had prevailed in the last three months. The turn of fiscal policy last 

week was, of course, immensely pleasing. He thought the Committee 

needed to study very carefully what might be the magnitude and timing 

of the effect.  

With respect to discount rates, it had seemed to Mr. Lewis 

some time back that the rates should be raised. But, as circumstances



9/13/66 -72

had developed, that did not seem now to be of the first importance.  

The System had been able to achieve a considerable monetary restriction 

despite a discount rate far out of touch with the market. During the 

three summer months there was very little increase in borrowing from 

the Fed in spite of the rapid rise in market interest rates. So far as 

he could see, discounting could be kept within reasonable bounds in the 

course of normal administration of the window. While he disliked the 

windfall profit which accrued to those banks which borrowed from the 

Reserve Bank at 4-1/2 per cent and lent at 6 per cent or more, he 

believed it was sufficiently limited in amount and sufficiently dispersed 

among banks that it need not for the moment weigh very heavily in the 

System's considerations.  

Mr. Robertson then presented the following statement: 

I think this is one of those times when it is particu
larly difficult to be sure of the ideal course for monetary 
policy to follow.  

Inflationary pressures are persisting, as the staff 
materials have underlined. Economic activity is expanding 
vigorously, bolstered by strong business investment outlays 
and growing Federal expenditures. Moreover, I take it that 
further escalation from added Vietnam outlays has to be 
considered as a possibility, even though we are still too 
much in the dark about such a development as of now to base 
current policy upon it.  

To counter these inflationary pressures, we now have 
the promise of help from a somewhat greater degree of 
fiscal restraint. However, it is very hard to judge just 
how much effective restraint the Administration package is 
likely to provide, and how soon. To a certain extent, over
bullish expectations may have been moderated by the very 
announcement of an official determination to achieve a more 
restrictive fiscal posture. But the actual effects on 
spending may stretch out over a number of quarters ahead.



9/13/66

Meantime, monetary policy has also become tighter, 
with lagged effects that must similarly be expected to 
stretch out over the quarters ahead. In the face of strong 
credit demands, we have managed to put bankers under enough 
pressure to slow down the rates of growth of bank credit, 
deposits, and the money supply. Our indicators of the 
cost and availability of credit are also signaling new 
degrees of tightness, and thanks to our new program of 
discount administration, we have some extra insurance 
that such tightness will prove better balanced than before.  

Given what we have recently accomplished with the 
reserve pressures we have brought to bear, I think it is 
time to begin guarding against the possibility of substan
tially less than expected as well as greater than expected 
bank credit expansion. With this view, I was glad to see 
the staff draft directive A include a "two-way" proviso 
clause this time, and I hope we make that a part of 
whatever directive we adopt this morning.  

In my view, our general objective for policy at this 
juncture would be to hold about the current degree of 
restraint. I think that would be our best posture as we 
wait for the combination of recent public policy steps to 
begin to have their effects. What money market signals 
these may give us in the interim is, I judge, open to some 
question. Since mid-August, net borrowed reserves and 
Treasury bill rates have moved in largely opposite 
directions, and I take it the staff is not at all sure 
this performance will be any more consistent in the weeks 
immediately ahead.  

If member bank borrowings amount considerably higher 
as large banks seek discount window assistance to meet their 
September squeeze, I would again urge the Manager not to 
engage in open market purchases simply to reduce such 
borrowing, but instead to be prepared to operate so as to 
keep such injection of borrowed reserves from significantly 

easing money market conditions. But I do not think that 

any net borrowed reserve figure or particular money market 
rate can be a target for us in the present circumstances.  
I would rather take the money market and reserve conditions 

we have currently prevailing, and tell the Manager to 
increase those pressures somewhat if bank credit expands 

sharply more than seasonally expected, but also to be 

prepared to ease up somewhat on such pressures if bank 
credit should expand substantially less than seasonally 
expected.

-73-



9/13/66 -74

I think these views are most in accord with the 
language suggested in staff directive alternative A, if 
the words "substantially less" are substituted for "no 
more" in the second-paragraph phrase reading "if bank 
credit expands no more than seasonally expected"; and 
if the words "by tempering' are substituted for "while 
accommodating moderate" in the last clause of the first 
paragraph.  

Chairman Martin remarked that, having just returned after an 

absence of two months, he obviously was insufficiently informed on 

recent developments to make a long statement. While on the side-lines 

during his absence he had been cheering for the System team and he 

thought it had done exceedingly well. He congratulated Messrs. Hayes 

and Robertson on the quality of their leadership in a difficult period.  

He was impressed today, the Chairman continued, by the high 

degree of agreement on policy. The intent of the Committee seemed 

clear--there should be no overt action in either direction, and market 

conditions should be kept as stable as possible. The difficult 

question was how to compose a directive that would most effectively 

implement such a policy. Personally, he could accept either of the 

alternatives suggested by the staff, with or without various amend

ments that had been offered. As was often the case, the proposed 

directives were subject to different interpretations, depending on how 

one read the words. He had felt defeated over the years in the effort 

to develop directives that were understandable to the public and to the 

Committee and that worked. The Chairman then invited suggestions 

regarding the directive.



9/13/66 -75

In the ensuing discussion the Committee agreed on a first 

paragraph for the directive consisting of that contained in the staff's 

alternative B, with the final clause deleted. Discussion of the second 

paragraph was concerned mainly with the choice between the proposals of 

Mr. Hayes and Mr. Maisel, or some modifications thereof. Specific 

questions considered were whether the proviso clause should refer to 

deviations of "bank credit", "credit", or either of these in combina

tion with "money"; and whether the deviations should be considered from 

"current expectations" or "normal seasonal growth." The Committee 

concluded that the proviso clause should relate to "deviations of bank 

credit from current expectations", as proposed by Mr. Hayes, after 

taking note that the current expectations for bank credit movements 

included allowance for some prospective disintermediation.  

Mr. Maisel commented that he understood the policy contemplated 

by the directive would be most accurately described by the label the 

staff had put on its original alternative A, namely, "No further 

firming, with qualifications." 

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 
and directed, until otherwise directed by 
the Committee, to execute transactions in 
the System Account in accordance with the 
following current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is 
expanding vigorously, despite the substantial weakening in



9/13/66 -76

residential construction, with inflationary pressures per
sisting. Aggregate credit demands continue strong and 
short-term financial markets remain under strain. The 
balance of payments continues to reflect a sizable under
lying deficit. In this situation, and in light of the new 
fiscal program announced by the President, it is the 
Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist inflationary 
pressures and to strengthen efforts to restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining firm but orderly conditions in 
the money market; provided, however, that operations shall 
be modified in the light of unusual liquidity pressures or 
of any apparently significant deviations of bank credit from 
current expectations.  

Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Robertson had appeared on behalf 

of the Board before the Senate Banking and Currency Committee this 

morning regarding H.R. 14026, a bill that would, among other things, 

give flexible authority to all Federal supervisory agencies to set 

maximum rates on deposit-type accounts. The Chairman invited 

Mr. Robertson to comment.  

Mr. Robertson observed that his testimony had been quite brief.  

He had said that the Board's views had not changed from the time of his 

testimony before the Committee on August 4, 1966; that the Board 

endorsed the bill, except for the one-year limitation of the effec

tiveness of its provisions that had been added by amendment in the 

House. He had indicated that the Board considered that limitation unwise 

(except with respect to a "sense of Congress" provision regarding a 

reduction in interest rates) and that the limitation might well thwart



9/13/66 -77

the effective use of the new authority. In response to the only 

question asked of him, he had expressed the view that the bill as 

written was better than nothing.  

Chairman Martin then noted that a staff memorandum dated 

September 1, 1966 and entitled "Contingency planning for the U.S.  

Government securities and other financial markets" had been distributed 

to the Committee.1/ He invited Mr. Holland to comment.  

Mr. Holland said that the memorandum had been prepared by Board 

staff members, in consultation with staff of the New York Reserve Bank 

and the Treasury, in accordance with the Committee's instructions at 

the previous meeting. The object was to bring up to date a similar 

contingency plan prepared a year ago when there also was concern about 

a possible sterling crisis. As in the earlier memorandum, the purpose 

was not to resolve basic issues of policy but rather to discuss a 

"holding operation" that would allow time for such policy decisions in 

light of the specific circumstances prevailing, and the approach was 

fairly general. The differences from the earlier contingency plan 

stemmed primarily from three main differences in underlying conditions: 

dealer bond inventories now were considerably smaller than a year 

earlier, credit conditions in general were considerably tighter, and 

there now were likely to be problems in markets for securities other 

1/ A copy of the memorandum referred to has been placed in the 
Committee's files.



9/13/66 -78

than U.S. Government securities. No formal action by the Committee was 

required today, but the staff would take account of any comments on the 

memorandum that the members might have.  

No comments being heard, Chairman Martin suggested that the 

staff memorandum be kept on file for possible use in case of need.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, October 4, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 12, 1966 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on September 13, 1966 

Alternative A 
(No further firming, with qualifications) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is expanding 
vigorously, despite the substantial weakening in residential construc
tion, with inflationary pressures persisting. Aggregate credit 
demands continue strong and short-term financial markets remain under 
strain. The balance of payments continues to reflect a sizable 
underlying deficit. In this situation, and in light of the new 
fiscal program announced by the President, it is the Federal Open 
Market Committee's policy to help to counter inflationary pressures 
and restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments, while accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of possible needs 

to moderate unusual liquidity pressures, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view 
to maintaining about the current conditions in the money market; 
provided, however, that if bank credit expands substantially more 

than seasonally expected, operations shall be conducted with a view 

to seeking some further firming of money market conditions; and, 
if bank credit expands no more than seasonally expected, some easing 

of money market conditions shall be sought.  

Alternative B 

(Firming to extent feasible, with qualification) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 

meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is expanding 

vigorously, despite the substantial weakening in residential construc

tion, with inflationary pressures persisting. Aggregate credit demands 

continue strong and short-term financial markets remain under strain.  
The balance of payments continues to reflect a sizable underlying 

deficit. In this situation, and in light of the new fiscal program 

announced by the President, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 

policy to resist inflationary pressures and to strengthen efforts to 

restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, 

by restricting the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 

money supply.



-2

To implement this policy, System open market operations until 
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 
supplying the minimum amount of reserves consistent with the main
tenance of orderly money market conditions and the moderation of 

unusual liquidity pressures; provided, however, that if bank credit 
expands more rapidly than expected, operations shall be conducted 
with a view to seeking still greater reliance on borrowed reserves.


