









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 1, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Bopp 
Clay 

Daane 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 

Mitchell 

Robertson 

Shepardson

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Axilrod and Gramley, Associate Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 

of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors

PRESENT:



3/1/66

Mr. Strothman, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Willis, Ratchford, Brandt, Baughman, and 
Jones, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Nelson and Lynn, Directors of Research 
at the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, the Secretary reported that 

advices had been received of the election by the Federal Reserve 

Banks of members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market 

Committee for the term of one year beginning March 1, 1966, and it 

appeared that such persons would be legally qualified to serve 

after they had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Karl R. Bopp, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, with Edward A. Wayne, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate; 

W. Braddock Hickman, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland, with Charles J. Scanlon, President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

George H. Clay, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City, with Eliot J. Swan, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate; 

Watrous H. Irons, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 

of Dallas, with Darryl R. Francis, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate.



3/1/66

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the following officers of the 
Federal Open Market Committee were 
elected to serve until the election 
of their successors at the first 
meeting of the Committee after 
February 28, 1967, with the under
standing that in the event of the 
discontinuance of their official 
connection with the Board of 
Governors or with a Federal Reserve 
Bank, as the case might be, they 
would cease to have any official 
connection with the Federal Open 
Market Committee:

Wm. McC. Martin, Jr.  
Alfred Hayes 
Robert C. Holland 
Merritt Sherman 
Kenneth A. Kenyon 
Arthur L. Broida 
Charles Molony 
Howard H. Hackley 
David B. Hexter 
Daniel H. Brill 
David P. Eastburn, George Garvy, Ralph T.  

Green, Albert R. Koch, Maurice Mann, 
J. Charles Partee, Robert Solomon, 
Clarence W. Tow, and Ralph A. Young

Chairman 
Vice Chairman 
Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Economist 
Associate Economists

Upon motion duly made and 

seconded, and by unanimous vote, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was selected to execute 

transactions for the System Open 

Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee 

after February 28, 1967.  

Upon motion duly made and 

seconded, and by unanimous vote, 

Alan R. Holmes and Charles A.  

Coombs were selected to serve at



3/1/66

the pleasure of the Federal Open 
Market Committee as Manager of the 
System Open Market Account and as 
Special Manager for foreign currency 
operations for such Account, respec

tively, it being understood that 
their selection was subject to their 
being satisfactory to the Board of 
Directors of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice subsequently 
was received that Messrs. Holmes and 

Coombs were satisfactory to the Board 
of Directors of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York for service in the 

respective capacities indicated.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on February 8, 1966, 
were approved.  

Consideration then was given to the continuing authoriza

tions of the Committee, according to the customary practice of 

reviewing such matters at the first meeting in March of every year, 

and the actions set forth hereinafter were taken.  

With respect to the continuing authority directive relating 

to transactions in U.S. Government securities and bankers' 

acceptances, Chairman Martin noted that in a memorandum to the 

Committee dated February 24, 1966, the Manager had recommended a 

reduction from $2 billion to $1.5 billion in the dollar limit 

established in paragraph 1(a) on the aggregate amount by which 

System Account holdings of Government securities might be increased



3/1/66

or decreased between meetings of the Committee. As indicated in 

the memorandum, a copy of which has been placed in the Committee's 

files, the higher limit had been established on December 6, 1965, 

because of certain circumstances which seemed to have passed.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unan
imous vote, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York was authorized 
and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to 
execute transactions in the System 
Open Market Account in accordance 
with the following continuing 
authority directive relating to 
transactions in U.S. Government 
securities and bankers' acceptances: 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to 
carry out the most recent current economic policy directive adopted 
at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities in 
the open market, from or to Government securities 
dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open 
Market Account at market prices and, for such Account, 
to exchange maturing U.S. Government securities with the 
Treasury or allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of such securities 
held in such Account at the close of business on the day 
of a meeting of the Committee at which action is taken 
with respect to a current economic policy directive shall 
not be increased or decreased by more than $1.5 billion 
during the period commencing with the opening of business 
on the day following such meeting and ending with the 

close of business on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' acceptances of 
the kinds designated in the Regulation of the Federal 

Open Market Committee in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at



3/1/66

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, 
or deferred delivery basis, for the account of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York at market discount rates; 
provided that the aggregate amount of bankers' acceptances 
held at any one time shall not exceed $125 million or 10 
per cent of the total of bankers' acceptances outstanding 
as shown in the most recent acceptance survey conducted 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities with matu
rities as indicated below, and prime bankers' acceptances 
with maturities of 6 months or less at the time of 
purchase, from nonbank dealers for the account of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for 
repurchase of such securities or acceptances in 15 
calendar days or less, at rates not less than (1) the 
discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at 
the time such agreement is entered into, or (2) the 
average issuing rate on the most recent issue of 3-month 
Treasury bills, whichever is the lower; provided that in 
the event Government securities covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to 
the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold 
in the market or transferred to the System Open Market 
Account; and provided further that in the event bankers' 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not 
repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be 
held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the 
open market. U.S. Government securities bought under 
the provisions of this section shall have maturities of 
24 months or less at the time of purchase, except that, 
during any period beginning with the day after the 
Treasury has announced a refunding operation and ending 
on the day designated as the settlement date for the 
exchange, the U.S. Government securities bought may be 
of any maturity.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase directly from the 
Treasury for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
(with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue 
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts 
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be 
necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the 
Treasury; provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of the Federal



3/1/66 -7

Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, and 
provided further that the total amount of such certificates held 
at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed 
$500 million.  

Chairman Martin then noted that on February 21, 1966 

Mr. Young had distributed to the Committee certain materials 

prepared by the Secretariat relating to a proposed reorganization 

of the Committee's instruments governing System foreign currency 

operations. (Copies of Mr. Young's memorandum and attachments 

have been placed in the Committee's files.) The Chairman invited 

Mr. Young to comment on the materials.  

Mr. Young said that the members would recall that at the 

meeting of November 23, 1965 the Committee had asked the staff to 

review System operations in foreign currencies and to submit a 

report. Work on the report had progressed to an advanced stage 

but had not been completed. At the same time, the staff had made 

a study of the Committee's existing foreign currency instruments-

the authorization, guidelines, and continuing authority 

directive--and had concluded that their essential content could be 

recast into simpler and clearer form in two new instruments--an 

authorization and a directive. Among the materials distributed 

were drafts of the proposed new instruments, an explanatory 

memorandum, and copies of the existing instruments with marginal 

notes indicating the disposition made of all passages in 

developing the proposed new instruments.



3/1/66

Mr. Young noted that the subject was a complex one and that 

the members had had relatively little time to study the documents 

distributed. For those reasons, and also because the staff report 

on foreign currency operations was not yet available, he thought 

the Committee might want to defer action regarding the recommendation 

that the three existing instruments be replaced by two new ones.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee reaffirm its 

existing foreign currency instruments today and plan on considering 

the proposed replacements at its next meeting, when all members 

would have had an opportunity to review them carefully. There was 

general agreement with this suggestion.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unan
imous vote, the Authorization 
Regarding Open Market Transactions 
in Foreign Currencies, as reaffirmed 
on March 2, 1965, was reaffirmed: 

Pursuant to Section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act 
and in accordance with Section 214.5 of Regulation N 
(as amended) of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, the Federal Open Market Committee takes 
the following action governing open market operations 
incident to the opening and maintenance by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York (hereafter sometimes referred 
to as the New York Bank) of accounts with foreign 
central banks.  

I. Role of Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

The New York Bank shall execute all transactions 
pursuant to this authorization (hereafter sometimes 
referred to as transactions in foreign currencies)



3/1/66

for the System Open Market Account, as defined in the 
Regulation of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

II. Basic Purposes of Operations 

The basic purposes of System operations in and 
holdings of foreign currencies are: 

(1) To help safeguard the value of the dollar in 
international exchange markets; 

(2) To aid in making the existing system of 
international payments more efficient and in 
avoiding disorderly conditions in exchange 
markets; 

(3) To further monetary cooperation with central 
banks of other countries maintaining 
convertible currencies, with the International 
Monetary Fund, and with other international 
payments institutions; 

(4) Together with these banks and institutions, 
to help moderate temporary imbalances in 
international payments that may adversely 
affect monetary reserve positions; and 

(5) In the long run, to make possible growth in 
the liquid assets available to international 
money markets in accordance with the needs of 
an expanding world economy.  

III. Specific Aims of Operations 

Within the basic purposes set forth in Section II, 
the transactions shall be conducted with a view to the 
following specific aims: 

(1) To offset or compensate, when appropriate, the 
effects on U.S. gold reserves or dollar 
liabilities of disequilibrating fluctuations 
in the international flow of payments to or 
from the United States, and especially those 
that are deemed to reflect temporary forces 

or transitional market unsettlement; 
(2) To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in 

spot exchange rates and moderate forward



-10-

premiums and discounts judged to be 
disequilibrating; 

(3) To supplement international exchange arrange
ments such as those made through the 
International Monetary Fund; and 

(4) In the long run, to provide a means whereby 
reciprocal holdings of foreing currencies may 
contribute to meeting needs for international 
liquidity as required in terms of an expanding 
world economy.  

IV. Arrangements with Foreign Central Banks 

In making operating arrangements with foreign central 
banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the New 
York Bank shall not commit itself to maintain any specific 
balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  

The Bank shall instruct foreign central banks regard
ing the investment of such holdings in excess of minimum 
working balances in accordance with Section 14(e) of the 
Federal Reserve Act.  

The Bank shall consult with foreign central banks 
on coordination of exchange operations.  

Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the New York 
Bank with the central banks designated by the Board of 

Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N (as amended) 
are to be referred for review and approval to the Committee, 
subject to the provision of Section VIII, paragraph 1, 
below.  

V. Authorized Currencies 

The New York Bank is authorized to conduct trans

actions for System Account in such currencies and within 

the limits that the Federal Open Market Committee may 

from time to time specify.

3/1/66



3/1/66

VI. Methods of Acquiring and Selling Foreign Currencies 

The New York Bank is authorized to purchase and 
sell foreign currencies in the form of cable transfers 
through spot or forward transactions on the open market 
at home and abroad, including transactions with the 
Stabilization Fund of the Secretary of the Treasury 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 
1934 and with foreign monetary authorities.  

Unless the Bank is otherwise authorized, all trans
actions shall be at prevailing market rates.  

VII. Participation of Federal Reserve Banks 

All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3 G (1) of the Board of 
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to 
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated 
January 1, 1944.  

VIII. Administrative Procedures 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes a 
Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman and the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the 
Board of Governors (or in the absence of the Chairman 

or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors the 

members of the Board designated by the Chairman as 

alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of 

the Committee his alternate) to give instructions to 

the Special Manager, within the guidelines issued by 

the Committee, in cases in which it is necessary to 

reach a decision on operations before the Committee 

can be consulted.  

All actions authorized under the preceding 

paragraph shall be promptly reported to the Committee.  

The Committee authorizes the Chairman, and in his 

absence the Vice Chairman of the Committee, and in the 

absence of both, the Vice Chairman of the Board of 

Governors:

-11-



3/1/66

(1) With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding 
with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign 
currency operations between the System and 
the Secretary; 

(2) To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary 
on such policy matters as may relate to the 
Secretary's responsibilities; 

(3) From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National 
Advisory Council on International Monetary 
and Financial Problems.  

IX. Special Manager of the System Open Market Account 

A Special Manager of the Open Market Account for 
foreign currency operations shall be selected in 
accordance with the established procedures of the Federal 
Open Market Committee for the selection of the Manager 
of the System Open Market Account.  

The Special Manager shall direct that all transactions 
in foreign currencies and the amounts of all holdings in 
each authorized foreign currency be reported daily to 
designated staff officials of the Committee, and shall 
regularly consult with the designated staff officials of 
the Committee on current tendencies in the flow of interna
tional payments and on current developments in foreign 
exchange markets.  

The Special Manager and the designated staff offi
cials of the Committee shall arrange for the prompt 
transmittal to the Committee of all statistical and other 
information relating to the transactions in and the 
amounts of holdings of foreign currencies for review by 
the Committee as to conformity with its instructions.  

The Special Manager shall include in his reports to 
the Committee a statement of bank balances and investments 
payable in foreign currencies, a statement of net profit 
or loss on transactions to date, and a summary of 
outstanding unmatured contracts in foreign currencies.

-12-



3/1/66

X. Transmittal of Information to Treasury Department 

The staff officials of the Federal Open Market 
Committee shall transmit all pertinent information on 
System foreign currency transactions to designated 
officials of the Treasury Department.  

XI. Amendment of Authorization 

The Federal Open Market Committee may at any time 
amend or rescind this authorization.  

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Guidelines for System Foreign 
Currency Operations as amended on 
November 23, 1965, were reaffirmed: 

1. Holdings of Foreign Currencies 

Until otherwise authorized, the System will limit 
its holdings of foreign currencies to that amount 
necessary to enable its operations to exert a market 
influence. Holdings of larger amounts will be 
authorized only when the U.S. balance of international 
payments attains a sufficient surplus to permit the 
ready accumulation of holdings of major convertible 
currencies.  

Foreign currency holdings shall be invested as far 
as practicable in conformity with Section 14(e) of the 
Federal Reserve Act.  

2. Exchange Transactions 

System exchange transactions shall be geared to 

pressures of payments flows so as to cushion or moderate 

disequilibrating movements of funds and their 
destabilizing effects on U.S. and foreign official 

reserves and on exchange markets.  

In general, these transactions shall be geared to 

pressures connected with movements that are expected to 

be reversed in the foreseeable future; when expressly

-13-



3/1/66

authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee, they 
may also be geared on a short-term basis to pressures 
connected with other movements.  

Subject to express authorization of the Committee, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York may enter into 
reciprocal arrangements with foreign central banks on 
exchange transactions ("swap" arrangements), which 
arrangements may be wholly or in part on a standby 
basis.  

Drawings made by either party under a reciprocal 
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 
after any amount outstanding at that time was first 
drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

The New York Bank shall, as a usual practice, 
purchase and sell authorized currencies at prevailing 
market rates without trying to establish rates that 
appear to be out of line with underlying market forces.  

If market offers to sell or buy intensify as 
System holdings increase or decline, this shall be 
regarded as a clear signal for a review of the System's 
evaluation of international payments flows.  

It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 
transactions in order that System transactions do not 
conflict with those being undertaken by foreign monetary 
authorities.  

3. Transactions in Spot Exchange 

The guiding principle for transactions in spot 
exchange shall be that, in general, market movements in 
exchange rates, within the limits established in the 
International Monetary Fund Agreement or by central bank 
practices, index affirmatively the interaction of 
underlying economic forces and thus serve as efficient 
guides to current financial decisions, private and 
public.

-14-



3/1/66

Temporary or transitional fluctuations in payments 
flows may be cushioned or moderated whenever they 
occasion market anxieties, or undesirable speculative 
activity in foreign exchange transactions, or excessive 
leads and lags in international payments.  

Special factors making for exchange market 
instabilities include (i) responses to short-run 
increases in international political tension, (ii) dif
ferences in phasing of international economic activity 
that give rise to unusually large interest rate 
differentials between major markets, or (iii) market 
rumors of a character likely to stimulate speculative 
transactions.  

Whenever exchange market instability threatens to 
produce disorderly conditions, System transactions are 

appropriate if the Special Manager, in consultation with 
the Federal Open Market Committee, or in an emergency 

with the members of the Committee designated for that 
purpose, reaches a judgment that they may help to re
establish supply and demand balance at a level more 

consistent with the prevailing flow of underlying 

payments. Whenever supply or demand persists in 
influencing exchange rates in one direction, System 

transactions should be modified, curtailed, or 

eventually discontinued pending a reassessment by the 

Committee of supply and demand forces.  

Insofar as is practicable, the New York Bank shall 

purchase a currency through spot transactions at or 

below its par value, and sell a currency through spot 

transactions at rates at or above its par value.  

Spot transactions at rates other than those set 

forth in the preceding paragraph shall be specially 

authorized by the Committee or by the members of the 

Committee designated in Section VIII of the Authorization 

for Open Market Transactions in Foreign Currencies, 

except that purchases of exchange to meet System 

commitments may be executed without special authorization 

at rates above par when necessary.

-15-



3/1/66

4. Transactions in Forward Exchange 

Transactions in forward exchange, either outright 
or in conjunction with spot transactions, may be 
undertaken: 

(1) When forward premiums or discounts are incon
sistent with interest rate differentials and 
are giving rise to disequilibrating movements 
of short-term funds; 

(2) When it is deemed appropriate to supplement 
existing market supplies of forward cover, 
directly or indirectly, as a means of 
encouraging the retention or accumulation of 
dollar holdings by private foreign holders; 

(3) To allow greater flexibility in covering System 
commitments, including those under swap 
arrangements; 

(4) To facilitate the use of holdings of one 
currency for the settlement of commitments 
denominated in other currencies.  

Forward sales of authorized currencies to the U.S.  
Stabilization Fund out of existing System holdings or in 
conjunction with spot purchases of such currencies also 
may be undertaken in order to allow greater flexibility 
in covering commitments of the U.S. Treasury.  

In all other cases, proposals of the Special Manager 
to initiate forward operations shall be submitted to the 
Committee for advance approval.  

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the following continuing authority 
directive to the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York with respect to 
foreign currency operations was 
approved: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized 
and directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions 
any or all of the following currencies in accordance with

-16-



3/1/66

the Guidelines for System Foreign Currency Operations 
as reaffirmed March 1, 1966; provided that the aggregate 
amount of foreign currencies held under reciprocal 
currency arrangements shall not exceed $2.8 billion 
equivalent at any one time, and provided further that 
the aggregate amount of foreign currencies held as a 
result of outright purchases shall not exceed $150 
million equivalent at any one time: 

Pounds sterling 
French francs 

German marks 

Italian lire 

Netherlands guilders 
Swiss francs 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Austrian schillings 
Swedish kronor 
Japanese yen 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also 
authorized and directed to operate in any or all of the 
foregoing currencies in accordance with the Guidelines 

and up to a combined total of $275 million equivalent, 
by means of: 

(a) purchases through forward transactions, 
for the purpose of allowing greater 
flexibility in covering commitments under 

reciprocal currency agreements; 

(b) purchases and sales through forward as well 

as spot transactions, for the purpose of 

utilizing its holdings of one currency for 

the settlement of commitments denominated 

in other currencies; 

(c) purchases through spot transactions and 

concurrent sales through forward trans

actions, for the purpose of restraining 

short-term outflows of funds induced by 

arbitrage considerations; and 

(d) sales through forward transactions for the 

purpose of influencing interest arbitrage 
flows of funds and of minimizing speculative 

disturbances.

-17-



3/1/66

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also 
authorized and directed to make purchases through spot 
transactions, including purchases from the U.S. Sta
bilization Fund, and concurrent sales through forward 
transactions to the U.S. Stabilization Fund, of any of 
the foregoing currencies in which the U.S. Treasury has 
outstanding indebtedness, in accordance with the 
Guidelines and up to a total of $100 million equivalent.  
Purchases may be at rates above par, and both purchases 
and sales are to be made at the same rates.  

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also 
authorized and directed to make purchases of sterling 
on a covered or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar 
up to a total of $200 million equivalent.  

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also 
authorized and directed to assume commitments for 
forward sales of lire up to $500 million equivalent as 
a means of facilitating the retention of dollar holdings 
by private foreign holders.  

Upon motion duly made and 

seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the following procedures with 
respect to allocations of the 
System Open Market Account were 

approved without change: 

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account 

shall be reallocated on the last business day of each 

month by means of adjustments proportionate to the 

adjustments that would have been required to equalize 

approximately the average reserve ratios of the 12 

Federal Reserve Banks based on the most recent available 

five business days' reserve ratio figures.  

2. The Board's staff shall calculate, in the 

morning of each business day, the reserve ratios of each 

Bank after allowing for the indicated effects of the 

settlement of the Interdistrict Settlement Fund for the 

preceding day. If these calculations should disclose a 

deficiency in the reserve ratio of any Bank, the Board's 

staff shall inform the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account, who shall make a special adjustment as of the 

previous day to restore the reserve ratio of that Bank

-18-



3/1/66

to the average of all the Banks. However, such adjust
ments shall not be made beyond the point where a 
deficiency would be created at any other Bank. Such 
adjustments shall be offset against the participation 
of the Bank or Banks best able to absorb the additional 
amount or, at the discretion of the Manager, against the 
participation of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  
The Board's staff and the Bank or Banks concerned shall 
then be notified of the amounts involved and the 
Interdistrict Settlement Fund shall be closed after 
giving effect to the adjustments as of the preceding 
business day.  

3. Until the next reallocation the Account shall 
be apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in 
paragraph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as 
provided for in paragraph 2.  

4. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of 
delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 
Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 
that day.  

A proposed list for distribution of periodic reports 

prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the Federal 

Open Market Committee was presented for consideration and approval.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 

made and seconded, and by unanimous 

vote, authorization was given for 

the following distribution: 

1. The Members of the Board of Governors.  
2. The Presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks.  

3. Officers of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

*4. The Secretary of the Treasury.  

*5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs 

and the Deputy Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs.

*Weekly reports of open market operations only.

-19-



3/1/66

*6. The Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury working on 
debt management problems.  

*7. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.  
8. The Director of the Division of Bank Operations of the 

Board of Governors.  
9. The officer in charge of research at each of the Federal 

Reserve Banks not represented by its President on 
the Federal Open Market Committee.  

10. The alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee 
from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the 
Assistant Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York working under the Manager of the System 
Account; the Managers of the Securities Department 

of the New York Bank; the Vice President of the 

Foreign Function having supervisory responsibility 

for operations; the Senior Foreign Exchange Officer 

of the Foreign Function; the Managers of the Foreign 
Department; the officer in charge, the Assistant Vice 

President, and the Adviser of the Research Department 

of the New York Bank; and the confidential files of 
the New York Bank as the Bank selected to execute 

transactions for the Federal Open Market Committee.  

11. With the approval of a member of the Federal Open Market 

Committee or any other President of a Federal Reserve 

Bank, with notice to the Secretary, any other employee 

of the Board of Governors or a Federal Reserve Bank.  

The Committee reaffirmed by 

unanimous vote the authorization, 
first given on March 1, 1951, for 
the Chairman to appoint a Federal 

Reserve Bank to operate the System 

Open Market Account temporarily in 

case the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York is unable to function.  

The following resolution to 

provide for the continued opera
tion of the Federal Open Market 

Committee during an emergency was 

reaffirmed by unanimous vote:

*Weekly reports of open market operations only.

-20-



3/1/66

In the event of war or defense emergency, if the 
Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or in the event of the unavailability 
of both of them, the Secretary or Acting Secretary of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) 
certifies that as a result of the emergency the avail
able number of regular members and regular alternates 
of the Federal Open Market Committee is less than seven, 
all powers and functions of the said Committee shall be 
performed and exercised by, and authority to exercise 
such powers and functions is hereby delegated to, an 

Interim Committee, subject to the following terms and 

conditions: 
Such Interim Committee shall consist of seven 

members, comprising each regular member and regular 

alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee then 
available, together with an additional number, suffi
cient to make a total of seven, which shall be made up 
in the following order of priority from those available: 
(1) each alternate at large (as defined below); 
(2) each President of a Federal Reserve Bank not then 
either a regular member or an alternate; (3) each First 

Vice President of a Federal Reserve Bank; provided that 
(a) within each of the groups referred to in clauses 
(1), (2), and (3) priority of selection shall be in 
numerical order according to the numbers of Federal 
Reserve Districts, (b) the President and the First Vice 
President of the same Federal Reserve Bank shall not 
serve at the same time as members of the Interim 

Committee, and (c) whenever a regular member or regular 
alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee or a 
person having a higher priority as indicated in clauses 

(1), (2), and (3) becomes available he shall become a 
member of the Interim Committee in the place of the 

person then on the Interim Committee having the lowest 

priority. The Interim Committee is hereby authorized 

to take action by majority vote of those present 

whenever one or more members thereof are present, 

provided that an affirmative vote for the action taken 

is cast by at least one regular member, regular alternate, 

or President of a Federal Reserve Bank. The delegation 

of authority and other procedures set forth above shall 

be effective only during such period or periods as there 

are available less than a total of seven regular members 

and regular alternates of the Federal Open Market 

Committee.

-21-



3/1/66

As used herein the term "regular member" refers to 
a member of the Federal Open Market Committee duly 
appointed or elected in accordance with existing law; 
the term "regular alternate" refers to an alternate of 
the Committee duly elected in accordance with existing 
law and serving in the absence of the regular member for 
whom he was elected; and the term "alternate at large" 
refers to any other duly elected alternate of the 
Committee at a time when the member in whose absence he 
was elected to serve is available.  

The following resolution 
authorizing certain actions by the 
Federal Reserve Banks during an 
emergency was reaffirmed by unan
imous vote: 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes 
each Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions 
set forth below during war or defense emergency when such 
Federal Reserve Bank finds itself unable after reasonable 
efforts to be in communication with the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or with the Interim Committee acting 
in lieu of the Federal Open Market Committee) or when 
the Federal Open Market Committee (or such Interim Commit
tee) is unable to function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of 
economic conditions and the general credit situation 
then prevailing (after taking into account the possibility 
of providing necessary credit through advances secured 
by direct obligations of the United States under the last 
paragraph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such 
Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and sell obligations 
of the United States for its own account, either outright 
or under repurchase agreement, from and to banks, dealers, 
or other holders of such obligations.  

(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations 
of the United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable 
to tender the actual securities representing such 

obligations because of conditions resulting from the 

emergency, such Federal Reserve Bank may, in its 

discretion and subject to such safeguards as it deems 
necessary, accept from such seller, in lieu of the

-22-



3/1/66

actual securities, a "due bill" executed by the seller 
in form acceptable to such Federal Reserve Bank stating 
in substantial effect that the seller is the owner of 
the obligations which are the subject of the purchase, 
that ownership of such obligations is thereby transferred 
to the Federal Reserve Bank, and that the obligations 
themselves will be delivered to the Federal Reserve Bank 
as soon as possible.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretion 
purchase special certificates of indebtedness directly 
from the United States in such amounts as may be needed 
to cover overdrafts in the general account of the Treasurer 

of the United States on the books of such Bank or for 
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, but such 

Bank shall take all steps practicable at the time to 

insure as far as possible that the amount of obligations 

acquired directly from the United States and held by it, 
together with the amount of such obligations so acquired 

and held by all other Federal Reserve Banks, does not 

exceed $5 billion at any one time.  

Authority to take the actions above set forth shall 

be effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve 

Bank is able again to establish communications with the 

Federal Open Market Committee (or the Interim Committee), 
and such Committee is then functioning.  

By unanimous vote the Commit

tee reaffirmed the authorization, 

first given at the meeting on 

December 16, 1958, providing for 

System personnel assigned to the 

Office of Emergency Planning, 
Special Facilities Branch, on a 

rotating basis to have access to 

the resolutions (1) providing for 

continued operation of the 

Committee during an emergency and 

(2) authorizing certain actions 

by the Federal Reserve Banks 

during an emergency.  

There was unanimous agreement 

that no action should be taken to

-23-



3/1/66 -24

change the existing procedure, as 
called for by resolution adopted 
June 21, 1939, requesting the Board 
of Governors to cause its examining 
force to furnish the Secretary of 
the Federal Open Market Committee a 
report of each examination of the 
System Open Market Account.  

Reference was made to the procedure authorized at the 

meeting of the Committee on March 2, 1955, and most recently 

reaffirmed on March 2, 1965, whereby, in addition to members and 

officers of the Committee and Reserve Bank Presidents not currently 

members of the Committee, minutes and other records could be made 

available to any other employee of the Board of Governors or of a 

Federal Reserve Bank with the approval of a member of the Committee 

or another Reserve Bank President, with notice to the Secretary.  

It was stated that lists of currently authorized persons 

at the Board and at each Federal Reserve Bank (excluding secretar

ies and records and duplicating personnel) had recently been 

confirmed by the Secretary of the Committee. The current lists 

were reported to be in the custody of the Secretary, and it was 

noted that revisions could be sent to the Secretary at any time.  

It was agreed unanimously that 
no action should be taken at this 
time to amend the procedure authorized 
on March 2, 1955.



3/1/66 -25

This concluded the consideration of the continuing authoriza

tions of the Open Market Committee, and the Committee turned to a 

review of operations during the period since the meeting of the 

Committee held on February 8, 1966.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies 

for the period February 8 through February 23, 1966, and a supplemen

tal report for February 24 through 28, 1966. Copies of these reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that 

the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged again this week.  

The Stabilization Fund opened the month with a gold balance of 

roughly $80 million, with prospective sales during the month of at 

least $34 million to the French, $19 million to settle the U.S.  

share of the Gold Pool deficit for February, and about $18 million 

for other scattered transactions. Those sales would just about 

clean out the Stabilization Fund's holdings. It was still hoped 

that the Russians would be compelled to sell as much as $200 million 

of gold to finance Canadian wheat imports during March and April, 

and that might enable the U.S. to fend off further reductions in 

the Treasury gold stock until April. If the Russian sales did not



3/1/66 -26

come through, the Treasury presumably would have to transfer $75 

to $100 million from its stock to the Stabilization Fund before 

the end of this month.  

Mr. Coombs reported that strong buying pressure had 

continued on the London gold market, and that the Pool had been 

forced to put in a total of $78 million worth of gold since the 

beginning of the year. It was hoped that sizable Russian gold 

sales would relieve the pressure on the Pool's resources during 

the next two months or so, but thereafter the Russians probably 

would stay out of the market. As he had mentioned on previous 

occasions, he did not think the outlook in the gold market was 

favorable. He was apprehensive that serious trouble might be 

encountered in that area before the year was over, with possible 

repercussions on other markets.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs said, sterling had run 

into new troubles during the past two weeks. The Bank of England 

had had to give support to the rate each day last week, probably 

to a total of $50 million or so, and it was in the market again 

yesterday. However, yesterday the British authorities had let the 

rate slip below par. That involved some risk; whenever the rate 

moved below par there was the risk that selling pressures would 

cumulate. In his judgment, however, their decision to back away 

rather than to try to hold the rate was a wise one because market 

participants felt that with a British election in prospect a new



3/1/66 -27-

element of uncertainty had been injected into the market. A number

of factors seemed to be involved in the difficulties for sterling.

The U.K. trade figures for January were disappointing, although

that perhaps was fortuitous; more seriously, the trend of wages

and prices remained inflationary; and the expectations of an

election, now scheduled for March 31, had further unsettled the

market. Also unsettling was the discussion of a suggestion by a

group of European and American economists that the margins for

exchange rate fluctuations might be widened. That suggestion was

disturbing because of fears that sterling might move to the lower

limit of the wider range, and that such a development might be a

prelude to devaluation.

Mr. Coombs went on to say that the Bank of England began

the month of February with net outpayments of close to $400 million,

of which $290 million represented debt payments to the System and

to the U.S. Treasury. During February, more than $300 million of

forward contracts also fell due and, with the adverse shift in the

market atmosphere, a number of those contracts were apparently

settled by running down existing sterling balances rather than

buying the sterling needed with dollars. Despite the fact that

the Bank of England's reserves benefited during the month to the

extent of $100 million by operations undertaken by the Federal

Reserve Bank of New York and by the Bank of Italy, they approached



3/1/66 -28

the month end with a prospective deficit of somewhat more than 

$250 million. Today Chancellor Callaghan was expected to announce 

that the British Government had taken into the reserves nearly 

$900 million of the British Government's portfolio of U.S. secu

rities which had been progressively liquefied during the past year 

or so. That would serve not only to cover the February deficit, 

but would also add about $630 million to British official reserves.  

At the same time, the British Government would announce that the 

$750 million swap line with the Federal Reserve had been completely 

repaid.  

Mr. Coombs said that he would like to bring the Committee 

up to date on the progress being made at the Bank for International 

Settlements meetings in negotiating a new international credit 

package designed to deal with the sterling balance problem. As 

Mr. Hayes, Mr. MacLaury, and he had mentioned at previous Committee 

meetings, the general objective was to put together an over-all 

package of roughly $1 billion, of which the U.S. share would be 

$315 million, to supersede the credit package provided last 

September to the Bank of England. The credit lines that had been 

granted by most of the continental central banks were due to reach 

the end of their six months' terms about the middle of March. At 

the last BIS meeting, further progress was made in shaping up a 

draft which would probably be technically acceptable to most of



3/1/66 -29

the European central banks concerned. Two of the European central 

banks, however, insisted that they could not participate in any 

new package until the British Government negotiated a backstop 

arrangement of medium-term credit from the International Monetary 

Fund or other sources, which would provide refinancing of central 

bank credits if the Bank of England should be unable to repay them 

at their final maturity.  

Meanwhile, Mr. Coombs continued, it was informally agreed 

that on March 15 the European parties to the September credit 

package would extend their credit lines for another three months, 

but for the limited purpose of offsetting reserve drains occasioned 

by liquidation of the sterling balances. In his opinion it was 

unfortunate that the new credit authorizations would be subjected 

to a more restrictive use than those of September. However, there 

might not be too much difference in substance because any future 

speculative attack on sterling would, in all probability, be 

accompanied by a substantial running down of the sterling balances.  

He was inclined to think, therefore, that no serious damage would 

be done if the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasury were to pursue 

a roughly parallel course by informally restricting part of their 

combined credit lines to the Bank of England to use in financing 

liquidation of sterling balances. At the present moment, the 

unused portion of those lines amounted to $1,070 million, comprised



3/1/66 -30

of the Federal Reserve swap line of $750 million, a Treasury 

authorization of $200 million established last September, and the 

$120 million remaining under a Federal Reserve authorization for 

$200 million, also provided last September. He suggested that 

$400 million of the $1,070 million temporarily be earmarked for 

the specific purpose of offsetting drains on British reserves 

arising out of liquidation of the sterling balances. If and when 

the BIS proposal for a new credit package should become effective, 

the U.S. share of such credit assistance directed to the sterling 

balance problem would decline from $400 million to $315 million.  

Mr. Coombs said he suggested that the Committee proceed 

informally in the matter because the negotiations on the new credit 

package were still in process. It was not as yet clear whether 

the Basle decision to restrict use of the temporary new credit 

lines could be maintained. With British elections ahead, and with 

the possibility existing of a new run on sterling, the continental 

Europeans might find it necessary to take a less restrictive 

attitude. By acting informally, the System could accommodate 

itself to the present fluid situation without endangering its own 

position or that of the Bank of England.  

Mr. Daane commented that his personal inclination would be 

to keep the U.S. credit arrangements with the British as flexible 

as possible and not to take the more restrictive attitude.



3/1/66 -31-

However, he supposed that if the U.S. joined with other countries

in a package that involved restrictions it would have to go along

with them.

Mr. Coombs remarked that if more restrictive terms were

adopted and if the British wanted to draw on the credit lines, the

Europeans probably would insist that their credits not be drawn

on unless there was a pro rata drawing on the U.S. for the same

purpose. Thus the initiative could be left with the British; even

if the Committee were to place no restrictions on the use of

System credits, the Bank of England would be compelled to restrict

its use of them in order to draw on the European central banks.

Mr. Coombs added that that circumstance provided an excellent

example of the way in which the U.S. could find itself locked into

situations by application of the principle of multilateral surveil-

lance, which gave enormous bargaining power to small countries that

might be inclined to take extremely conservative positions.

Chairman Martin commented that the matter Mr. Coombs had

raised was an extremely important one, and that it would be

desirable for all members of the Committee to follow developments

with respect to sterling closely over the coming weeks.

Mr. Daane remarked that it was desirable, in his judgment,

for the Committee to allow the Special Manager the maximum possible

degree of flexibility to deal with the situation.



3/1/66 -32

In reply to questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said 

that the Bank of England's total use of its swap line with the 

System probably had amounted to about $2 billion. The Bank had 

twice drawn the full amount available and it had made a number of 

additional drawings of a few days each around month-ends. Of the 

$200 million authorized in September for System covered purchases 

of sterling, $80 million had been used. Last fall $30 million had 

been employed in direct support of the sterling rate. The remainder 

had been used last week, when the System bought $50 million of 

sterling from the Bank of England against dollars. Since the 

System had swapped the sterling with the BIS for lire, and had used 

the lire as part of the repayment of its swap drawing on the Bank 

of Italy, last week's transaction served the interests of both the 

System and the Bank of England. There was no risk exposure to the 

System in using the authorization in question, because the sterling 

acquired under it was fully guaranteed by the Bank of England. The 

authorization for covered sterling purchases did not specify any 

time limit but it was, of course, subject to review and modifica

tion by the Committee. The System held somewhat less than $25 

million of uncovered sterling in its working balances, but he 

planned to reduce that amount to about $20 million in the next 

week or so.  

In response to other questions, Mr. Coombs noted that the 

September credit package had totaled roughly $930 million. The



3/1/66 -33-

U.S. share, divided equally between the System and the Treasury,

was $400 million, or somewhat over 40 per cent; other central banks,

not including the Bank of France, participated to the extent of

about $530 million. The new package under discussion totaled

slightly more than $1 billion, of which the U.S. share of $315

million would be a little over 30 per cent; and the Bank of France

might possibly participate. The terms being considered allowed

for 3-month credits renewable for periods of up to nine or twelve

months. Thus, they would be consistent with the Committee's one-

year outside limit on swap drawings, although they might call for

a somewhat more generous interpretation of renewal possibilities

within that limit. If the arrangements were completed, the System

and the Treasury might reduce their authorizations for covered

sterling purchases from the present combined level of $400 million

to $315 million. Alternatively, the authorizations might be

continued at $400 million, with $315 million earmarked for the more

restrictive purpose. The matter remained to be negotiated with the

Treasury.

Mr. Daane said he thought the latter course--continuing the

$400 million authorization--would be preferable. Mr. Coombs agreed.

To pursue the former course, he said, would amount to cutting back

U.S. credit facilities to the Bank of England at the instigation

of a small group of European countries. That, in his judgment,



3/1/66 -34-

would be an unfortunate precedent, which might be followed by

efforts to get other countries to reduce their lines of credit to

the U.S.

Mr. Swan asked whether the informal earmarking Mr. Coombs

had suggested earlier would be for British drawings under the swap

line or for U.S. covered purchases of sterling under the September

authorizations. Mr. Coombs replied that to retain the greatest

flexibility it might be best to relate the earmarking to the over-

all total of available U.S. credit lines to Britain--including the

System's $750 million swap arrangement with the Bank of England,

which was now wholly on a standby basis; the Treasury's $200 million

authorization for covered sterling purchases, which was not now in

use; and the $120 million remaining under the Committee's $200

million authorization for covered sterling purchases. From the

technical point of view, however, he was anxious to keep available

for market intervention for general purposes the authorization for

covered purchases of sterling, since that could be done at the

System's initiative, Under certain circumstances the Bank of

England might be hesitant about drawing on the swap line, and in

any case such drawings gave the general impression of defensive

operations. Operations by the New York Bank in the market were

likely to be far more effective; they could be an extremely

powerful tool.



3/1/66 -35

Mr. Mitchell asked whether an increase in the size of the 

swap arrangement with the Bank of England might be desirable.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he would prefer to see the size of some of 

the other swap lines increased first, because the line with the 

British was on the high side relative to others. In general, he 

thought the System's network, taken as a whole, was too small, 

considering the continuing growth of international trade and 

payments. It would be desirable to increase it by $1 billion or 

so.  

In reply to questions by Mr. Wayne, Mr. Coombs said he was 

not sure that an increase in the swap line with the Bank of England 

would have an adverse effect on the willingness of other central 

banks to extend credit to the British. It was true that some 

European central bankers thought the U.S. had been overly lenient 

in its dealings with the British and that it should have taken a 

firmer line. His own feeling was that a much more serious situation 

would have resulted had the U.S. followed such advice. He did not 

think the attitude of particular countries, such as France or the 

Netherlands, would seriously damage the chances of negotiating 

increases in the System's swap lines because the United States had 

a great deal of bargaining power. One general difficulty at the 

moment was that the whole international financial system was being 

subjected to formal review; many approaches were being considered,



3/1/66 -36

of which swap arrangements were only one, and there was some 

tendency for action to be frozen pending the outcome of those 

discussions. Also, at present the U.S. was mainly focusing its 

bargaining power on the negotiations for increasing international 

liquidity through a collective reserve unit and expanded IMF 

facilities.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he thought it reasonable to draw 

a distinction between the size of the standby facilities the 

System extended to the Bank of England, which was a matter of 

public record, and the maximum amount of assistance the U.S. might 

be prepared to extend to the British under emergency conditions.  

He could conceive of circumstances in which the U.S. would be 

willing to provide additional credits on an ad hoc basis but not 

through an enlarged swap arrangement.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether there was any evidence that 

market participants were beginning to take short positions in 

sterling and, if so, whether it would be desirable for the System 

to intervene in the market to buy pounds.  

Mr. Coombs replied that there was some indication that 

people who had maturing forward contracts were using existing 

holdings of sterling to settle them rather than buying spot 

sterling for that purpose. He recently had indicated to the Bank 

of England that the System was prepared to buy sterling on a



3/1/66 -37

covered basis, but the Bank had felt such action was not desirable 

at present. In his judgment their position was correct; the market 

was convinced that a sterling rate above par would not be realistic 

now, although no one could be sure what the equilibrium rate was.  

If the sterling rate began to slide, however, the System could step 

in.  

Chairman Martin noted that any further liquefication of the 

British portfolio of U.S. securities would involve an additional 

drain on the U.S. balance of payments. Mr. Wayne then asked 

whether the step Mr. Coombs had noted the British would announce 

today--taking about $900 million of their U.S. holdings into their 

reserves--would have much impact on the U.S. balance of payments.  

Mr. Coombs replied that about 85 per cent of the impact had already 

been felt on the U.S. payments balance; $500 million had shown up 

in the second and third quarters of 1965 alone.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unan
imous vote, the System open market 
transactions in foreign currencies 
during the period February 8 through 
28, 1966, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that the System's $100 million 

standby swap arrangement with the Netherlands Bank would mature on 

March 15, 1966, and he requested the Committee's approval of its 

renewal for another three months. No drawings were outstanding on



this arrangement; indeed, for the first time in a long time no 

drawings by either party were outstanding on any of the System's 

swap lines.  

Renewal of the standby swap 
arrangement with the Netherlands 
Bank for a further period of three 
months was approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

February 8 through 23, 1966, and a supplemental report for 

February 24 through 28, 1966. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

A further sharp rise in long-term interest rates 
was the main feature of the period since the last 
meeting of the Committee and market participants 

appear convinced that more of the same lies ahead.  

Against the background of vigorous economic expansion 

and growing inflationary fears, a heavy calendar of 
corporate, municipal, and Government agency issues 

met generally with a cautious investor response.  

Anticipation of higher yields and lesser availability 

of funds later on in the year has tended to bring 

borrowers into the market ahead of need, while making 

investors--who seem periodically on the verge of 

succumbing to the temptations of the historically 

high yields now prevailing in many sectors of the 

market--inclined to wait and see.  

Government agency issues encountered some 

difficulties during the period. The poor response to 

the Export-Import participation certificates, and an

3/1/66 -38-



3/1/66

announcement of a $410 million FNMA issue scheduled 
for mid-March, reminded the market of the substantial 
extent to which the 1967 budget relies on agency asset 
sales. The poor response to the Export-Import Bank 
financing--$360 million placed out of a $700 million 
offering, despite a 5-1/2 per cent coupon--was not a 
true reflection of the state of the agency market.  
The Export-Import Bank participation certificate had 
few attractive features in present market conditions.  
The 18-month call feature made it unattractive for 
long-term investors, and the lack of marketability 
made it unattractive to corporations and others with 
liquid funds to invest. Given their tight money 
positions, commercial banks were understandably 
anxious to reserve lendable funds to serve customer 
relationships, rather than purchase a beneficial 
interest in loans made by the Export-Import Bank.  
System action to make the certificates eligible at the 
discount window was apparently not rated an important 
inducement.  

The FNMA participation certificates, on the other 
hand, will provide a more meaningful test for the 
market. There already appears to be a substantial 
interest in the longer maturities to be offered-
provided the price is right--but pricing of the 
intermediate maturities may be a problem. Other 
recent routine agency issues--a $340 million 9-month 

FICB issue, and a $506 million 8-month FHLB issue--met 

with only a lukewarm response despite a 5.15 per cent 

coupon. And a $250 million 14-month FNMA issue--priced 
to yield 5.38 per cent--was a real success only because 

of large--and unexpected--demand from an international 

institution at the last minute. The contrast of this 

most recent experience with the earlier ease of placing 

agency issues is a warning that serious rethinking of 

the general approach to agency financing may be 

required in the months ahead.  

In the Government securities market, yields in the 

5-10 year area rose by 1/4 per cent or more in the past 

three weeks, extending the "hump" in the yield curve and 

bringing yields to over 5 per cent on issues for 

maturities out to 1974. With Governments in the 20-year 

maturity area yielding around 4-3/4 per cent, yields in 

the long end of the Government list are well above 1960 

peaks, while new corporate issues are now close to their

-39-



3/1/66

previous postwar highs. Dealers have been extremely 
cautious, keeping their net positions in coupon issues 
close to zero or short and seeking to find a price 
level that will bring in buyers. There has been some 
bank selling, and some investors have made modest 
purchases as prices declined. While the market has 
been under pressure at times, most of it appears to 
have been professionally generated, and it has not 
been accompanied by panicky or urgent investor selling 
in any size. Thus, while rates have moved rapidly at 
times, the market has not been disorderly. While most 
market participants feel that the adjustment has 

further to go, the technical position of the market is 
strong. Favorable developments in the shape of a 

determined move in the fiscal policy area, or good 

news from Viet Nam, could still have a pronounced 
steadying effect on the Government bond market.  

The short-term area of the market has been some

what steadier, although CD rates have inched higher, 
the three-month Treasury bill has touched 4.70 on 
several occasions, and the one-year bill auctioned 
six days ago went at an average of 4.95 per cent--1/4 
per cent higher than a month ago and equivalent to 
5.21 per cent on a bond yield basis. Despite a strong 
demand for short-dated Treasury bills from public 
funds and from the temporary investment of money either 
raised in the capital markets or awaiting investment 
there, dealers have been very cautious and have been 
working with minimal trading positions in bills. As 

a result, dealer financing needs have been reduced, 
and this has tended to reduce the strain on the money 

market banks and on other short-term markets generally.  

At the same time, however, Federal funds rates have 

been consistently at a premium, with the likelihood 
that continued pressure on bank reserve positions may 
result in an effective rate of 4-3/4 per cent on funds 

from time to time in the near future.  

Dealers appear to be in a relatively good position 

to go into the March tax and dividend period, but heavy 

runoffs of CD maturities at banks will intensify the 

seasonal pressures and some strain on short-term rates 

is a likely prospect in the next few weeks.  

Even keel considerations posed no handicap to 

open market operations over the past three weeks.  

Dealers had managed to dispose of the bulk of the

-40-



3/1/66

modest amounts of the new issues they had acquired in 
the February refunding by the payment date on 
February 15, although some buying of the new 5's by 
Treasury trust accounts was necessary to slow the 
decline of prices below par. During the last two 
weeks, both the new 4-7/8 per cent 18-month notes and 
the longer 5 per cent notes have performed well, with 
the latter up 2/32 over the period, in sharp contrast 
to the performance of the rest of the market.  

While the settlement of the February refunding 
posed no problems, operations were handicapped by a 
persistent tendency for reserve availability to exceed 
projections as float ran unusually high and required 
reserves fell short of seasonal expectations. Con
sequently, in the weeks ending February 16 and 
February 23 action taken to supply reserves before the 
weekend had to be reversed later on. On one occasion 
reserve objectives had to be temporarily sidetracked 
to take account of the unsettled state of the market.  
During the period, the System purchased short-dated 
Treasury coupon issues for the first time since last 
September. Purchases of such issues had not been made 
since that time because of a succession of cir
cumstances--including a desire to avoid action at a 
time where strong market feelings of developing upward 
rate pressures were being confounded by various 
official statements about interest rate objectives.  
Recently we have been seeking an opportunity to provide 
some portion of reserve needs by undramatic purchases 
of available coupon issues. Such an opportunity arose 

on February 17 when we had a substantial amount of 

reserves to supply at a time when there was a scarcity 

of Treasury bills available in the market. Our 

purchases, confined to 1966 and 1967 maturities, made 

some dealers think twice about their short positions 

and induced some temporary short-covering, but 

otherwise had no effect on the bond market. In the 

future we plan to purchase additional modest amounts 

of coupon issues from time to time when supplying 

reserves, while trying to avoid an impression that 

special significance attaches to our purchases.  

In conclusion, a few words may be in order about 

the Treasury's cash position in the weeks ahead.  

Given the heavy cash drains anticipated before 

mid-March and again before mid-April, there is a 

possibility that the Treasury may want to take

-41-



3/1/66 -42

advantage of its temporary borrowing facilities at the 
Reserve Banks. At the moment, there is some uncertainty 
about the outlook, which is partly dependent on how 
much various agency asset sales may raise in the coming 
months. All in all, it appears that the Treasury's cash 
position is developing at least as satisfactorily as had 
been anticipated earlier. Given the pre-refunding of 
part of May maturities, direct Treasury financing 
problems do not at this moment appear troublesome over 
the balance of the fiscal year.  

Mr. Scanlon asked whether the Manager thought he had accom

plished the firming action the Committee had decided on at its 

previous meeting. Mr. Holmes replied that a good start had been 

made, but he would consider the action to be still in process.  

Mr. Maisel noted that in his statement the Manager had 

referred several times to problems associated with Federal agency 

issues. Developments with respect to agency issues might dominate 

the Government securities market over coming months, since the 

Treasury was depending on them to build up its cash balance.  

Accordingly, there might be advantages if the System traded in 

agency issues. Perhaps the continuing authority directive ought 

to be reviewed to consider whether it should be revised to authorize 

such transactions. He did not know enough about the subject to 

hold a firm opinion at the moment, but felt that consideration 

should be given to that possibility. More generally, he thought 

it would be useful for the staff to examine the question of the 

appropriate relationship between the System and the market for 

agency issues, and for the Committee to plan on discussing the 

subject at a future meeting.



3/1/66 -43

Mr. Hayes agreed that the subject of agency issues was 

important, and noted that the Treasury was studying it now.  

However, while the System might be able to offer the Treasury some 

advice on debt management aspects, he could see nothing to indicate 

that it would be desirable for the System to trade in those 

securities.  

Mr. Daane felt that exploration of the fundamentals of the 

subject would be worthwhile. But he agreed with Mr. Hayes that 

the System should not enter the agency issue market, particularly 

in view of the budgetary implications.  

Chairman Martin observed that the question Mr. Maisel had 

raised might well be considered in the study of the Government 

securities market that the System and the Treasury jointly were 

about to launch. There was general agreement with that suggestion.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the open market transactions 
in Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period 
February 8 through 28, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

The staff economic and financial report at this meeting 

was in the form of a visual-auditory presentation. (Copies of the 

charts have been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

The introductory portion of the review, presented by 

Mr. Brill, was as follows:



3/1/66

The time of year has come again for the staff to 
present to the Committee an annual exercise in which 
we dissect the economic model underlying the Budget 
and explore the financial implications of the 
projected spending and income flows. The purpose of 
these exercises is to gauge the pressures in financial 
markets one might expect to encounter in pitting a 
particular monetary policy against the pattern and 
level of demands for goods and services projected by 
the Administration.  

Today, however, our presentation must take a 
somewhat different tack. The economic world has been 
moving swiftly since early January, when the final 
touches were being put on the Council's model.  
Moreover, data now available for late 1965 reveal a 
surge in activity barely evident in the economic 
information available at that time. It would hardly 
profit to ignore these new data and new developments 
in setting forth to explore the financial outlook.  
We have, therefore, modified the CEA model, revising-
in most cases upward--the projected spending and income 
estimates. It is this revised model that serves as 
the basis for our analysis of the financial outlook.  

First, however, we will review briefly the 
salient elements of the CEA model.  

Mr. Koch commented as follows: 

The Administration GNP projection for 1966 is 
centered on $722 billion, give or take $5 billion. In 
current dollars, the increase for the year is $46 
billion, about the same as in 1965. With the GNP price 
deflator projected to rise about 1.8 per cent, the 
increase in constant dollars amounts to 5.0 per cent, 
compared with 5.5 per cent in 1965. Projected growth 
is fairly uniform throughout the year, with the 
fourth quarter projected at $739 billion.  

In the CEA model, the main expansionary forces are 

Federal spending for defense and business spending for 
fixed capital. Federal purchases of goods and services 
rise $7 billion between 1965 and 1966, mostly for 
defense. But with GNP rising rapidly, the proportion 
of GNP devoted to defense increases little.  

Transfer payments are expected to advance almost 

$5 billion, with Medicare coming in at a $2 billion 

annual rate at midyear and rising rapidly thereafter.

-44-



3/1/66

Grants-in-aid to State and local governments, included 
in transfers and other payments, also show a considerably 
larger rise than during 1965.  

Thus, in addition to the direct contribution to GNP 
from rising purchases of goods and services, scheduled 
increases in other Federal payments would support rising 
private demands.  

This expansion of Federal expenditures is just 
about matched by the growth of tax receipts. The first 
quarter bulge in receipts reflects increased social 
security taxes. Thereafter growth in receipts stems 
mainly from increased personal and corporate income.  

Consequently, the Federal deficit, as measured in 
the national income accounts, is estimated to remain 
not far from the level of late 1965 throughout most of 
1966.  

The other major expansionary force in the Council 
model, business fixed investment, is projected to rise 
10 per cent for the year, compared with 15 per cent in 
1965. Increases in spending after midyear are quite 
moderate. At year end, fixed capital investment 
accounts for 10.6 per cent of GNP, little different 
from the share in late 1965.  

Over all, developments projected for 1966 in the 
CEA model are not far from a replica of those in 1965.  
The increase in defense spending is larger than last 
year, but this is about offset by a smaller rise in 
business fixed investment. The steady growth in State 
and local spending continues. Disposable income rises 
about as much as in 1965, and with the consumer spending 
rate remaining unchanged, consumption increases about 
the same amount as last year.  

With substantial growth in total demands, further 
pressure is exerted on available resources, particularly 
manpower. But the projected rise in the GNP deflator 

is about the same as in 1965, with declining food prices 

helping to offset a somewhat faster rise in industrial 

prices. The unemployment rate is calculated to decline 

to an average of 3-3/4 per cent for the year, compared 
with 4.6 per cent in 1965.  

As Mr. Brill noted earlier, the CEA projection was 

constructed in late 1965; new data and new developments 

since then suggest the need for a new perspective on 

the outlook. The revised GNP data for the fourth 

quarter alone suggest greater strength in demands than 

was evident earlier.

-45-



3/1/66

The staff's reassessment raises expenditures 
moderately in several key categories, and the over-all 
effect of this implies significant differences in the 
degree of resource utilization. Basically, we look for 
more business investment spending and larger State and 
local purchases. The effects of this on income also 
raise consumer outlays.  

We have not, however, departed from the CEA 
projection of defense expenditures. Like everyone else, 
we are aware of the uncertainty attaching to the 
ultimate magnitude and time pattern of the defense 
effort, but military clairvoyance is not our forte.  

The staff's projection of State and local purchases 
is significantly larger than the Council's. Pressures 
are strong for expansion of spending on a host of 
community services--from education to waste disposal.  
A sizable volume of these increased services will be 
financed through the scheduled increase in Federal 
grants-in-aid. Federal purchases are also shown as 
increasing strongly, in line with the Budget message.  

Available evidence suggests a marked increase in 
business fixed investment this year. In about a week, 
we shall have a new reading on business spending plans; 
pending this we have assumed continuation throughout 
the year of the expansion rate indicated in the earlier 
survey for the first half. Indeed, on the basis of a 
recently released private survey, our own estimate may 
prove too low. Projecting a slowdown after midyear, as 
in the CEA model, hardly does justice to the very 
expansive psychology now pervading the economy, nor to 
the underlying determinants of this type of spending.  
Sales are rising rapidly, and profits are projected to 
rise faster than GNP, although not as much as last year.  
Manufacturing capacity is currently harder pressed than 
at any time since late 1955, and new orders for machinery 
and equipment are still mounting, as are unfilled orders.  
Thus, we expect that by the fourth quarter, nearly 11 
per cent of GNP will be accounted for by business spending 

on fixed capital.  
Inventory investment rose sharply late in 1965, 

despite rapid liquidation of steel stocks. Continued 

strong demands for inventory are likely, in a setting 

of rapid expansion in final sales and growing prospects 

of supply shortages, delivery delays, and price increases.

-46-



3/1/66

In absolute terms, projected inventory accumulation may 
appear high. Nevertheless, the stock-sales ratio is 
expected to remain at the 1965 level.  

Unlike other types of economic activity, prospects 
for housing starts are for some further decline. For 
the single-family component of private starts, 
underlying demographic factors will continue relatively 
neutral, and upgrading may be limited by further 
increases in building costs. The already higher level 
of borrowing costs will also be a factor whose effect 
may be felt increasingly as the year progresses. In 
the case of multi-family starts, which accounted for 
all of the year-to-year drop in 1965, a further 
downward adjustment is indicated.  

U.S. exports of goods and services are expected to 
increase rapidly this year, with demand conditions 
abroad generally buoyant. However, U.S. imports will 
also be rising rapidly, and net exports may thus be 
only moderately larger. An improvement of $800 
million is projected, but the margin of uncertainty is 

large. Imports of goods and services include military 
expenditures abroad; these are expected to increase 
about $1/2 billion this year.  

Merchandise imports are not expected to rise as 
fast this year as last, mainly because steel imports 

should not increase further from the high 1965 level.  
Nevertheless, total merchandise imports are projected 
to rise as fast as GNP, and hence, as in 1965, to 
remain higher in relation to GNP than in any other 
year since the Korean War.  

Increases projected for government spending and 
investment outlays would generate a large rise in 
consumers' after-tax income. Disposable personal income 
is expected to rise rapidly, and the projected increase 
for the year is more than in 1965. Gains in employment 

and wage and salary disbursements are projected at the 

rapid rate of late 1965, and government transfer payments 

will rise sharply.  
With this growth of income, total consumer spending 

is projected to show a larger dollar rise than last year, 
but about the same percentage increase.  

The consumer spending rate advanced last year from 

the reduced 1964 level. But in 1966 a slight decline 

appears likely, in part because a much smaller rise is 

anticipated this year in expenditures for autos and 

hence in total consumer spending on durable goods.

-47-



3/1/66

After 4 years of sharp increases, sustained high auto 
demand, rather than a large further increase, seems 
the more likely prospect. This assumption is 
consistent with the findings of the latest Census 

survey of intentions to buy. Spending on nondurable 

goods and services, on the other hand, is expected to 
increase in step with disposable income, and the 
decline in the over-all spending rate for 1966 would 
therefore be small.  

Summarizing the expenditure changes, the staff 

projection for the year is a GNP in current dollars of 

about $731 billion, 8 per cent above 1965, with a 
fourth quarter GNP close to $750 billion. Allowing 
for an increase of 2.2 per cent in the deflator, the 
increase in real GNP would be 5.9 per cent, almost a 
full point more than the CEA projection, and the 

largest increase of recent years.  

Mr. Partee continued the discussion, focusing on the 

implications for resource use and prices, as follows: 

With GNP growing rapidly, manpower demands will 

intensify this year. The supply of trained workers 
is already diminished, and substantial additions of 

younger workers and women to the labor force will be 

required.  
Bringing into employment many inexperienced workers 

will tend to offset the gains in output per manhour 
arising from the enlarging volume of new plant 

capacity. Thus, we would expect productivity growth 

to slow somewhat further from last year's reduced pace.  

The length of the workweek in the private economy, 
which is already high, should show little change.  

On these assumptions, civilian employment would 

have to increase by 2.2 million from fourth quarter 

to fourth quarter, in order to produce the projected 

GNP. And the build-up of the armed forces is scheduled 
to absorb an additional 300,000 men.  

To meet these very strong demands for manpower, 
the total labor force may expand by 1.9 million, about 

600,000 more than the long-term trend would suggest.  
Unemployment would fall throughout the year, with the 
unemployment rate dropping to 3.3 per cent for the 

fourth quarter, nearly a full percentage point below 

the fourth quarter 1965 rate.

-48-



3/1/66

In recent months, wage rate increases have 
accelerated in many industries, as available supplies 
of labor have been reduced. Consequently, increases 
in average hourly earnings during 1965 were larger 
than from 1960 to 1964 and were generally above the 
guidepost. The largest gains occurred in such 
industries as retail trade and services, where 
average wage rates are low and excess labor supplies 
until recently had acted to limit wage advances.  
Increases in minimum wage rates were also a factor in 
raising wages in some of these industries in 1965.  

In manufacturing, wage gains generally have 
continued to be moderate and close to the guidepost.  
Here too, however, there has been some tendency for 
average wage increases to accelerate, reflecting 
higher overtime costs, selective upgrading of jobs 
and pay scales to reduce the incidence of voluntary 
quits, and more rapidly rising wages in the non-union 
sectors of manufacturing.  

The prolonged stability in unit labor costs in 
manufacturing since 1959 thus seems likely to give way, 
as direct and indirect wage costs come under pressure 
from intensive utilization of manpower resources and 
slower productivity growth. In the immediate months 
ahead, the degree of acceleration in the advance of 
wage rates should be moderate, because few major 
contracts can be reopened this year. Nevertheless, 
any increase in the advance of wage rates would tend 
to steepen the rise in industrial commodity prices 

already underway.  

Manufacturing capacity also is likely to be under 

sustained pressure. In January, the capacity 

utilization rate was about 92 per cent. This year, 
capacity is estimated to grow by 7.0 to 7.5 per cent-

much more than last year. But manufacturing output is 

projected to rise almost as much, so that the capacity 

utilization rate would remain around 92 per cent. In 

the 1955-57 boom, a 92 per cent rate was reached in 

only one quarter--in late 1955.  
The projected environment of further rapid 

expansion in demands and strong pressures on labor, 

capacity, and materials should be conducive to somewhat 

larger and more widespread price increases this year.  

But unless increases in costs are larger and more 

pervasive than now seems likely, or unless Vietnam 

developments inspire buying sprees, the acceleration in

-49-



3/1/66

the rise of industrial prices should be moderate. As 
a rough estimate, we would expect industrial prices to 
rise on average about 2.5 per cent this year, compared 
with the 1.5 per cent increase of the past 12 months.  

In contrast, prices of foodstuffs--up 10 per cent 
over the past year--are likely to turn down before 
year end, barring very unfavorable weather. The high 
hog prices of the past six months are stimulating 
recovery in production, and prices of hogs and pork 
could begin to fall as early as this spring. These 
prospective developments should limit the rise in the 
total wholesale price index, perhaps to about one-half 
the 4 per cent increase of the past 12 months.  

In terms of consumer prices, foods should reverse 
direction this spring or summer. Any decline in prices 
of foodstuffs, however, will be more than offset by 
further and larger increases this year in the nonfood 
categories.  

Prices of nondurable goods and services are 
expected to rise more in this year's stronger markets.  
And consumer durables prices are likely to rise 
somewhat, in contrast with last year's declines, which 
reflected mainly reductions in excise taxes.  

Turning now to financial implications, it seems 
clear that the increased spending contemplated in the 
staff's GNP model--a gain of 8 per cent in current 
dollars--could not occur without a significant increase 
in credit demands. Our financial projection seeks to 
assess the potential dimensions of the resulting credit 
flows, in order to gain some insight into the pressures 
that might develop in financial markets.  

The financial projection is to be interpreted in 
the light of two principal assumptions that underlie it.  
First, it is assumed that the expansion in GNP shown 
here can be realized despite mounting pressures in 
markets for credit portrayed in the projection. To the 
extent that spending plans would be revised in response 
to the financial developments portrayed, the financial 
flows and market pressures would themselves be affected.  

Second, with respect to monetary policy, we 
postulate a somewhat more restrictive posture than in 

1965--in terms of growth in reserves and bank 
deposits--because the GNP model suggests heightened 
price pressures. Without prejudging how restrictive 
policy should be, we have assumed that growth of total

-50-



3/1/66

reserves would be about 4 per cent--compared with a bit 
over 5 per cent last year.  

Consistent with that reserve expansion, and given 
other aspects of the projection, we would expect a 
reduction in growth of the money stock to about a 3 
per cent annual rate, the lowest since 1962, as the 
influence of rising interest rates partly offsets the 
public's growing demand for transactions balances.  
Growth in time deposits also is assumed to decline, 
with a less rapid expansion in negotiable CD's held by 
corporations the principal factor. Bank credit expansion, 
consequently, would slow to about 8 per cent for the 
year, compared with 10 per cent in 1965.  

Mr. Gramley continued the discussion, focusing on the 

implications of the policy assumption, together with the GNP model, 

for developments in markets for credit, as follows: 

With these assumptions in mind, we turn now to the 
credit flows consistent with the GNP model. Total funds 
raised are seen as rising nearly 13 per cent, to $81 
billion in 1966, with most of the increase coming from 
Federal borrowing. Total Federal borrowing may be more 
than $9 billion this year, when planned sales of loan 
participation certificates and Federal agency issues 
are added to Treasury financing. Private borrowing-
already large last year--is expected to rise, but only 
moderately further.  

In fact, the ratio of private borrowing to private 
spending would decline slightly in 1966. This is 
attributable partly to a slight decline projected for 
State and local borrowing, reflecting a larger increase 

in receipts than in expenditures. Also, consumer credit 
is expected to rise at about last year's rate--despite 

a sharp increase in total consumer spending--since auto 

purchases are projected to increase less rapidly than 

last year.  
The projected expansion of total funds raised is, 

by the way, only moderately larger than what the 

Administration's GNP model would have implied. In that 

model, a less rapid growth of private spending would 

have resulted in a smaller expansion of private credit, 
but Federal borrowing would have been somewhat

-51-



3/1/66

higher--because of lower tax receipts. On balance, 
total funds raised might have risen about 10 per cent, 
as opposed to 13 per cent in our projection.  

Corporate demands for credit are projected to 
rise substantially further this year, even though 
total private credit flows increase only moderately.  
The increase projected for corporate fixed investment 
and inventories is sharp, almost twice the expected 
increase in gross retained earnings. Consequently, 
external borrowing rises further from last year's 
already high level.  

This increase in corporate borrowing may take the 
form principally of an expansion in bond issues. Given 
the difficulties likely to be faced by banks in 
supplying funds to meet all loan demands, growth in 
corporate bank loans could scarcely be accommodated at 
a pace much faster than last year's. Consequently, we 
are projecting corporate bank loan expansion at no 
more than the high 1965 pace, with nearly all of the 
1966 increase in borrowing hitting the security markets.  
The corporate bond market, as a result, is expected to 
be a major focal point of pressures in credit markets 
as the year progresses.  

The securities markets during 1966 must also 
absorb sharply increased marketings of Federal 
securities, including participation certificates. As 
a result, the projected growth in total funds raised 
is concentrated largely in security issues rather than 
in loans. The projection calls for a slight decline in 
mortgage borrowing, and for little change in other loans 
from the exceptionally high 1965 pace.  

The banking system, nonetheless, will face 
heightened pressures on available resources this year.  
As noted earlier, growth in total bank credit is 
projected to slow down. But expansion in bank loans 
other than mortgages is expected to be as much, or a 

bit more, than last year, leaving little room for 

expansion in other earning assets.  
Consequently, we expect banks to cut back sharply 

on their acquisitions of municipal securities, and to 

liquidate Federal securities in somewhat larger volume 

than last year. They might also acquire mortgages at 

a somewhat slower pace.  
This projection of changes in bank earning assets 

implies a significant further increase in the ratio of

-52-



3/1/66

bank loans to deposits, and banks would thus be likely 
to tighten their lending policies substantially further 
over the course of the year.  

The bank share of total funds supplied is projected 
to decline significantly in 1966, reflecting both the 
reduced growth rate of bank credit and the expansion in 
total credit flows. The share falls below that of the 
past 5 years, but banks would be supplying a much larger 
portion of total funds than during earlier postwar 
expansions, when inflows of time deposits to banks were 
small.  

The share of funds supplied by nonbank interme
diaries, meanwhile, also is projected to decline in 
1966. Inflows of savings to mutual savings banks and 
savings and loan associations may decline slightly 
further, under the pressure of competition from 
commercial banks and rising market rates of interest.  

To fill the gap, there would have to be a jump in 
the portion of funds supplied directly to credit markets 

by the nonfinancial public--that is, by businesses, 
State and local governments, and especially households.  

In the past, it has taken a substantial boost in 
interest rates to bring these investors into security 
markets in volume.  

Evidence from past periods of monetary restraint 
provides clues as to the orders of magnitude that 
might be involved in such an adjustment of interest 

rates. Given the credit flows indicated and the policy 

assumed in the projection, it seems plausible that late 

in 1966 rates on 3-month Treasury bills may be 50 basis 

points or so above current levels. At these rates, 
banks would once again encounter difficulties in 

attracting CD's under present Regulation Q ceilings.  

Yields on 3-5 year Governments might rise a little 

faster than those on bills, especially if the Treasury 

seeks to prevent too much debt shortening by offering 

intermediate-term issues, and continues to be inhibited 

from issuing long-term securities by the 4-1/4 per cent 

ceiling.  
Long-term rates of interest would likely be under 

continuing upward pressure. Mortgage rates probably 
would adjust upward gradually, given the heavy commitment 

of institutional lenders to the mortgage market, although 

other mortgage terms would undoubtedly become significantly 
more restrictive. Municipal yields, however, could move 

up substantially in response to reduced bank demand.

-53-



3/1/66

Yields on corporates would also rise sharply in 
response to a swelling volume of flotations, and 
sometime during the year we might see 6 per cent rates 
even for top quality issues. At these rates, corpora
tions would be forced to reconsider the desirability of 
financing investment through capital market issues--as 
opposed to other sources of finance--and also to 
reconsider investment programs.  

Outflows of private capital should be held down 
this year by tighter domestic credit conditions, 
working hand-in-hand with voluntary restraints. But 
the net outflow of U.S. private capital was cut back 
very sharply last year, partly as the result of a 
repatriation of liquid funds that is unlikely to be 
repeated. Consequently, no further cut back in net 
outflows is projected--instead, some increase seems 
likely.  

Direct investment outflows this year are likely 
to be held below last year's level by the Commerce 
Department's voluntary program, but they will be at a 
higher rate than in the second half of 1965. A 
year-to-year reduction of about $300 million is 
projected; this would be consistent with a $700 million 
cut in terms of the Commerce program, which employs a 
somewhat different measure of direct investment abroad.  

Other outflows of U.S. capital--including bank 
lending, transactions in foreign securities, and 
movements of liquid funds--are projected at about the 
same rate as in the second half of 1965, somewhat 
above the average for all of last year.  

The concluding part of the staff presentation was given by 

Mr. Brill, as follows: 

Before turning to the policy implications of the 
foregoing analysis, let me stress again the 
uncertainties involved in projections, particularly at 

a time when the economy is moving as rapidly as ours 
has been in the past few months. The growth projected 
in GNP is substantial, but we could be underestimating 
the expansion ahead by a margin that is significant for 
policy purposes.  

Given the pressure on available resources suggested 

by the projection, we could also be underestimating the 
strength of factors pushing on prices. Certainly, our

-54-



3/1/66

projection suggests stronger upward pressure on prices 
this year. But barring a wave of scare buying by 
consumers and businesses, or further escalation in 
Vietnam, the potential price rise doesn't appear to be 
of 1955-56 proportions.  

What appears more likely is some moderate 
acceleration of the rise in the industrial commodities 
index, perhaps to a rate of about 2-1/2 per cent, as 
against 1-1/2 per cent over the past 12 months. The 
index for all commodities would increase less, because 
of the expected drop in food prices. The equivalent, 
in terms of the GNP deflator, would be a rise of 
somewhat less than 2-1/2 per cent.  

But for international reasons particularly, any 
increased pressures on industrial prices would be 
unfortunate. Merchandise imports already are very high, 
and military spending abroad is increasing. Outflows 
of capital for direct investment, though projected to 
decline in 1966, will remain large. Altogether, our 
balance of payments position seems likely to remain 
troublesome.  

Would the degree of restraint postulated in our 
financial projection be sufficient to check the advance 
of spending and prices? Given the present state of 
knowledge, we must still rely heavily on intuitive 
judgments as to the strength and timing of responses to 
monetary policy. My own judgment is that a constraint 
on reserve growth this year to 4 per cent would raise 

interest rates high enough to begin cutting deeply into 
private demands. In fact, if additional fiscal policy 
actions were taken to slow the expansion in private 
spending, the projected degree of monetary restraint 
might even prove over time to be excessive.  

How rapidly should this degree of restraint be 

achieved? There are advocates of a rapid and dramatic 

monetary action, one that might bite quickly into 

spending plans and might, at the same time, unblock 
fund-flows by assuring investors that interest rates 

had attained peak levels. Recognizing merits to this 
argument, I still find myself favoring gradual 
intensification of restraint.  

First, the pace at which long-term interest rates 
have been rising in recent weeks borders on the 

precipitous. Financial markets are taut--indeed, 
unsettled. It might be well to pause a bit and see how 
the economy adjusts to so sharp and extensive a change

-55-



3/1/66

in borrowing costs and asset values. Second, investor 
attitudes are now strongly shaped by Vietnam 
uncertainties, and these attitudes would not necessarily 
be modified by a dramatic monetary action, whatever 
explanation accompanied it. These factors, plus our 
inability to pinpoint the desirable degree of restraint, 
argue to me for a series of cautious moves, rather than 
for a large, rapid or dramatic action.  

Translating this general policy stance to specific 
operating targets, we may note first that total reserve 
growth thus far in 1966 has been somewhat above the 4 
per cent figure for the year assumed in the projection-
principally because of an increase in reserves to support 
growth in Treasury balances. The money stock in January 
and February together grew only a little faster than the 
projected 3 per cent rate, although some increase in the 
expansion rate of money may occur in the weeks ahead, 
since Treasury deposits are projected to decline. Thus 
far, time deposit growth has been much slower than the 
projection given here.  

To stay on the course of reserve growth assumed in 
the projection would seem to indicate the need to move 
somewhat further in the direction of lessened reserve 
availability, perhaps to a range around $200 million for 
net borrowed reserves. Over the next few weeks, pressures 
on bill rates resulting from that course of action might 
arise, but probably would not be severe, because dealer 
inventory positions are relatively low and investors still 
seem to be disposed to keep their portfolio maturities 
short. The 3-month bill might thus move in a range 
between 4.70 and 4.80 per cent.  

But interest rates in bond markets are already 
moving up sharply, and tighter bank reserve positions 
would accentuate that movement, particularly in light of 
the burgeoning calendar of new corporate and municipal 
offerings.  

Given the present unsettled condition of the bond 

markets, postponing a significant deepening of the net 
borrowed reserve target for three weeks or more may be 
more appropriate. Even with net borrowed reserves 
averaging near $150 million, continued upward pressure 
on long-term rates can be expected, but Treasury bill 
rates probably would show only a moderate further 
adjustment.



3/1/66 -57

Mr. Ellis asked if Mr. Brill would explain the background 

for the staff's projection of inventory developments.  

Mr. Brill said that the staff estimated that the first

quarter rise in inventories was likely to be at a rate close to 

that of the fourth quarter. The large fourth-quarter increase had 

been a surprise to everyone, particularly since steel stocks were 

being liquidated rapidly then. Moreover, the increase now shown 

in the published figures for the fourth quarter was likely to be 

revised upward again by a significant margin. In this context 

the increase projected for the first quarter might be considered 

moderate, given the turnaround in steel, the general ebullience 

in the economy, and the probable increase in the price component 

of the figures. Some of the efforts to build stocks might fail, 

but the short-fall was not likely to be great.  

Mr. Daane asked whether the staff thought an Administration 

announcement of further fiscal action would have a substantial 

effect in quieting present expectations.  

Mr. Brill remarked that the effect would depend on the 

type of fiscal action announced. A modification of the investment 

tax credit, for example, might have a bigger impact on the forces 

that were providing the main upward thrust to the economy than 

would a general tax increase.  

Mr. Holmes agreed. He added that in his judgment any 

steps toward a firmer fiscal policy would have a large impact on



expectations in financial markets. Fiscal policy was an area of 

great concern to market participants, who were focusing on the 

projected demands on capital markets.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

The business situation and outlook remain very 
strong, with the Vietnam buildup a major contributing 
factor. The most disturbing feature of the economy at 

present is the growing evidence of inflationary 

pressures. As recognition of these pressures and worry 

over inflation are becoming more widespread, additional 

pressures are being generated. The high rate of 
inventory accumulation in the fourth quarter of 1965 
was a danger sign, and this accumulation is probably 

continuing. We can hardly view with equanimity the 
3.6 per cent rise in the wholesale price index over 
the past year, or the 5.8 per cent annual rate of 
increase in the three months through the end of January.  
While the rate of increase in industrial wholesale 
prices has been less, it does show signs of acceleration.  
The entire price picture is disturbing.  

Balance of payments statitstics during most recent 
weeks have made better reading than for some time past.  
Nevertheless, the outlook for the year as a whole is 
decidedly cloudy. On the one hand export prospects 

appear to be reasonably good, as long as supply 
bottlenecks and price pressures do not undermine our 
competitive position. But much higher imports, 
military outlays, and tourist expenditures are also in 

the offing. In the capital area, new foreign security 

issues have been running at a high level; fortunately, 
banks have kept well below their lending limits under 

the voluntary restraint program, at least in part 

because of heavy domestic credit demands. The rise in 

U.S. interest rate levels has decreased the spread 

between domestic and foreign rates, with beneficial 

effects on private holdings of dollars. Balances held 

by overseas branches of U.S. banks in their head offices 

reached a record total of $1,776 million on February 19, 

up $450 million since the year end.

3/1/66 -58-



3/1/66

As for credit developments, the growth in bank 
credit and in a number of related liquidity indicators 
appears to be moderating in February, after an 
exceptionally rapid advance in January. While loan 
demand continues very strong, it is possible that the 
banks are now coming under sufficient liquidity pressure 
to have tightened loan policies to the point at which 
the actual rate of bank credit growth is responding.  
Loan-deposit ratios since late 1965 have not been 
advancing as fast as before, and bankers may now feel 
that they are close to some limit which it would be 
unsafe to exceed. Also, many bankers report that their 
holdings of U.S. Government securities are about as 
low as they would like to see them go, given their 
liquidity requirements and their needs for collateral 
on public deposits. Liquidation of municipals is 
inhibited by reluctance to incur significant capital 
losses. Finally, the banks are finding it very hard 
indeed to attract additional CD money, in spite of an 
advance in CD rates that has moved much faster than in 
the periods following earlier changes in Regulation Q.  
Apparently this difficulty in attracting time deposits 
may be attributed to the rapid growth of the economy, 
with the implied need for transactions balances, plus 
the rise in capital outlays relative to corporate cash 
flows and liquidity.  

In any event, a special survey (made at the Board's 
request) of lending policies and bank resources at 
selected Second District banks showed virtually all 
banks embarked upon some sort of program to restrain 
loans in the face of above average-to-unusually strong 
demand; and this restraint has been stepped up in some 
banks in the last few weeks. Yet we cannot be sure 

that the current degree of monetary policy restraint will 

produce an adequate slowdown in bank credit growth.  

Several large New York banks have indicated that they 

believe the prime rate should be raised to assist in 

their rationing process; but for the time being they 

are restrained by fears of political reactions.  

It seems to me that, with inflation a real and 

present danger, a coordinated Government program is 

needed to preserve the integrity of the dollar for 

domestic as well as international reasons. This would 

involve holding the line on the wages and cost front 

and a close coordination of fiscal and monetary policy.  

Unfortunately there seems to be much uncertainty as to

-59-



3/1/66

whether, and how soon, fiscal policy will play a 
significantly restraining role; but since it is clearly 
undesirable to place too much of the burden on monetary 
restraint alone, we are probably justified in moving 
rather cautiously in the hope that the Administration 
will decide on more restrictive tax and spending 
policies. Certainly the important role assigned to the 
sale of assets in the 1966 and 1967 fiscal-year Federal 
budgets is placing a much greater strain on interest 
rates than the size of the deficits alone would suggest.  
A second reason for our moving slowly is to give a little 
more time to evaluate the effect of previous policy moves 

on the rate of bank credit expansion and to try to sort 
out exaggerated expectations from the prospective balance 
of demand and supply factors. Under these conditions, 
it would seem to me unwise to contemplate a further rise 
in the discount rate or in Regulation Q ceilings at 
this juncture, and by the same token we should avoid for 
the time being such a sharp increase in open market 

pressures as to make a higher discount rate virtually 

inevitable. The time may perhaps be approaching when 
strong overt moves will be needed in the areas of both 
fiscal policy and general monetary policy. We should 
not rule out the possibility--particularly if fiscal 
policy moves are not forthcoming--that a supplemental 
voluntary domestic credit restraint program may be 
required. However, there are many undesirable features 
in the last-named type of approach, and it should not, 
I believe, be adopted until other more normal measures 
have been fully utilized.  

For the near term, I should think the Manager 
should be instructed to continue the policy agreed upon 
at our last meeting, i.e., to seek a gradual reduction 

in reserve availability. To me this might point to net 

borrowed reserves centering in the $150 to $200 million 

range, if this can be accomplished without too rapid 

additional rate adjustments. Actually, it seems likely 

that the market has already discounted such a move, 

and thus it would not in itself necessarily lead to 

significant upward pressures on the Treasury bill rate-

although there will be seasonal pressures on short rates 

in the weeks ahead. The proposed policy on reserves 

could push the Federal funds rate up more frequently 

to 4-3/4 per cent, but this would not be a cause for 

concern.

-60-



3/1/66 -61

Since I am really advocating continuation of the 
gradual reduction in reserve availability which was 
sought at the last meeting but not completely achieved 
to date, only a modest change in the wording of the 
directive is required, and the staff's proposed 
alternative B seems quite appropriate.1/ 

Mr. Ellis observed that one of the embarrassments of 

prosperity was the danger of having to forego the benefits and 

privileges of special programs designed to assist distressed areas.  

New England was just about to be designated as eligible for a 

Regional Action Planning Commission, under the terms of the 

Economic Development Act. Such designation had been threatened, 

however, by the disturbing prevalence of prosperity. New England 

unemployment (seasonally adjusted) fell to 3.6 per cent in January 

compared to the 4 per cent national average. Declines occured in 

all six States, reaching a low of 2.1 per cent in New Hampshire.  

Apparently the designation was based more on long-term data, 

however, so New England was to have the advantage of being 

classified along with Appalachia, the Ozarks, and upper Michigan 

in qualifying for the program. Extensive Federal funds were to 

be available to support economic development research and planning 

at the community, area, and regional levels.  

The leading indicators covering New England business 

prospects suggested continued expansion, Mr. Ellis reported.  

1/ Alternative draft directives suggested by the staff are appended 

to these minutes as Attachment A.



3/1/66 -62

Initial returns from the Boston Reserve Bank's capital expen

ditures survey were very bullish. Construction contract awards 

during the most recent three months averaged 4 per cent ahead of 

last year. Purchasing agents continued to report a two-to-one 

preponderance of upward trends in new orders to manufacturers.  

District banks reported a continued high level of loan 

demand, in excess of normal seasonal patterns, Mr. Ellis 

continued. For the first time some of the banks reported that 

they were rejecting acquisition loans and many reported that 

they were taking a posture of being less-eager lenders. Their 

attitude toward continued active participation in the home 

mortgage market was viewed as an important factor in determining 

whether mortgage rates would rise further in New England. A 

sharp inflow of time and savings deposits in the past year and 

currently had encouraged the weekly reporting member banks to 

increase their real estate lending in the month by 17 per cent.  

At reporting Boston mutual savings banks withdrawals exceeded 

new deposits during January, but interest credited resulted in 

a new deposit increase. Withdrawals in January exceeded last 

year's experience by one-third. As a consequence, virtually 

no money was flowing out of State from the large mutuals. Only 

five of the ten largest Boston mutuals had raised their rates 

since December 6, and only two of those five paid as much as 

4-1/2 per cent on special savings.



3/1/66 -63

Mr. Ellis thought that both the green book 1 / and chart 

presentation documented the prevalent consensus that the major 

threat to a sustained prosperous economy was the strengthening 

of inflationary pressures. To the expanding demands from 

government, business, and consumers, must now be added the 

incremental effects of inventory demands. It was necessary to 

anticipate that decisions by all of those consuming groups would 

be increasingly affected by changed price expectations. To the 

extent that the wage guidelines were exceeded, those demand 

pressures would be supplemented in their inflationary impact by 

wage-cost pressures.  

Despite the widespread recognition of strengthening 

inflationary pressures, Mr. Ellis said, there did not seem to be 

a matching determination to reverse the thrust of fiscal policy.  

Present programs seemed to call mainly for a lessened expan

sionary posture. At the same time, there was a general consensus 

that monetary policy must and would do its part in fighting 

inflation. But, while some people feared the System would act 

too abruptly and bring the economy to a halt and downturn, others 

feared it would be too timid. Quite obviously the search had to 

be for a "middle course." 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



3/1/66 -64

In Mr. Ellis' judgment, the Committee had launched a 

middle course at its previous meeting by deciding to moderate 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply by 

seeking a gradual reduction in reserve availability. The 

results had appeared tentatively in slightly higher money rates, 

member bank borrowings, and net borrowed reserves but, as the 

Manager had reported, the move was still in process. With 

the Committee having embarked on that policy course, the 

critical question became one of how to define and execute a 

gradual movement. One way was to consider a longer time 

interval and time the increments of action accordingly. For 

example, the Committee might take, as a June 1 target, a net 

borrowed reserve position averaging $300 million, plus or minus 

$50 million, to be achieved by lifting the target $50 million 

per month for three months. Depending on conditions and 

expectations, that action could be expected to yield a higher 

level of borrowings and interest rates. Such a development 

might then be confirmed by a discount rate increase of 1/4 per 

cent, thereby reaffirming an intention to rely on gradual and 

incremental moves at this sensitive stage in the economy's 

evolution.  

Taking such a course of action as his objective, Mr. Ellis 

found the present directive quite appropriate, with exclusion of 

the reference to Treasury financing; operations should continue



3/1/66 -65

to be conducted "with a view toward a gradual reduction in 

reserve availability." He would classify alternative B of the 

staff drafts as calling for no change in a policy which was in 

process of firming.  

Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh 

District reflected the same sort of expansion and inflationary 

pressures in almost all areas that were seen in the national 

economy. Employment continued to rise and labor shortages were 

becoming increasingly apparent; the problem was immediate, and 

not in the future. The unemployment rate was about at the 

minimum, ranging between 3 and 3.5 per cent. District 

industrial production continued to expand, with nondurable 

manufactures up and durables showing relatively little change, 

and with a rise in minerals output reflecting increased 

production of petroleum. Sales of new automobiles were strong, 

as were department store sales, which were up 9 per cent from a 

year ago. Agricultural conditions were particularly favorable 

at this time.  

Mr. Irons found that District financial figures continued 

to reflect the strength of credit demands and the relatively 

illiquid position of banks. District banks had been very large 

users of Federal funds during the past four weeks, with net 

purchases running up to almost $1 billion in one recent week.



3/1/66 -66

Bankers were trying to be restrictive in their loan policies, 

especially on loans that did not relate to the production of 

goods. But they still found loan demand extremely strong.  

Mr. Irons commented that the national economic situation 

had been covered adequately in the chart presentation and there 

was no need to review it in detail again. Briefly, it was 

evident that aggregate demands had become excessive; increases 

in defense spending, business fixed investment, inventories, 

State and local government spending, and consumer outlays were 

all putting pressure on markets for goods and on financial 

markets.  

The most desirable means of cutting back aggregate demands 

at present, in Mr. Irons' judgment, would be a positive, strong 

fiscal policy move in the form of a tax increase of some type.  

He was not sure that monetary and credit action could bring about 

the desired results without the assistance of fiscal policy.  

Nevertheless, in the absence of fiscal action it was up to the 

Committee to do what it could.  

Mr. Irons agreed with the comments made earlier that the 

Desk was still moving toward the objective decided upon at the 

previous meeting, and he favored continuing the policy adopted 

then. In the coming period net borrowed reserves might be 

deepened gradually to the $150-$200 million range, with an



3/1/66 -67

attempt made to avoid any operations that might stimulate sharp, 

appreciable further increases in interest rates. He would very 

much hope that short-term rates would not increase so much 

relative to the discount rate that the System would be almost 

compelled to raise the discount rate again. With a gradual 

movement of net borrowed reserves to that range the bill rate 

might go to 4.70 per cent or a few points higher, and the rate 

on Federal funds might frequently be at 4-3/4 per cent. He 

hoped rates would not move beyond those levels. He also hoped 

that fiscal policy actions that would have a more direct effect 

on the demand situation would be taken. He did not consider the 

present to be a time for dramatic monetary policy action; there 

were too many uncertainties in the picture. Nor would he want 

to make a monetary policy recommendation that involved projections 

for several months into the future. The existing uncertainties 

suggested that judgments on appropriate monetary policy should 

be made on a short-run basis for the time being.  

Mr. Swan reported that except for residential construction 

the various sectors of the Twelfth District economy continued to 

reflect strength. January employment trends were, if anything, 

somewhat stronger in the Pacific Coast States than in the 

country as a whole, with the unemployment rate declining three

tenths of a percentage point to 5.1 per cent. There was another



3/1/66 -68

substantial addition to aerospace employment in the month, although 

it was a little less than the December gain. Estimates of future 

labor requirements by major firms in the District indicated 

further significant employment increases ahead if the firms were 

able to find the workers.  

The District banking picture was much the same as elsewhere 

in the country, Mr. Swan said. In the three weeks ending 

February 16, the increase in loans at weekly reporting banks was 

more than offset by reductions in securities holdings. Commercial 

and industrial loans expanded, but by less than in the comparable 

period of last year. Savings deposits continue to decline, as 

they had fairly consistently thus far in 1966. However, other 

time deposits increased further. District banks continued to be 

net buyers of Federal funds on a rather substantial scale.  

With respect to policy for the next three weeks, Mr. Swan 

said he was in complete agreement with Messrs. Hayes and Irons as 

to the desirability of a very gradual further implementation of 

the decision made at the previous meeting, and he favored a net 

borrowed reserve target somewhere in the $150-$200 million area.  

As Mr. Brill had pointed out, to maintain some reasonable rates 

of increase in total and nonborrowed reserves, it probably would 

be necessary to move slowly to a somewhat lesser degree of reserve 

availability. He was encouraged by the reduction in the growth



3/1/66 -69

rates of aggregate reserves in February, even though so far it was 

only a one-month development and he did not know the nature of the 

lags involved. Finally, he agreed that this was not the time for 

an overt or major action, either in terms of reserve availability 

or a change in the discount rate.  

Mr. Galusha commented that recent economic statistics for 

the Ninth District paralled those of the nation. It was important 

to note that every indication was for the continuation of 

livestock prices at present high levels. Numbers of cattle had 

remained relatively constant, which would assure continued price 

pressures.  

The present national economic outlook appeared to require 

some slight tightening of monetary conditions, Mr. Galusha 

continued. Possibly, further increases in interest rates and further 

firming of credit terms could be achieved without a change in the 

level of net borrowed reserves. If so, fine; but, if not, then 

some modest change should be effected. He would, however, stress 

the word "modest." Now did not seem to be the time for a 

dramatic, well-publicized change in monetary policy.  

Mr. Galusha had several reasons for that belief. First, 

the current flow of economic intelligence was not monotonously 

and overwhelmingly bullish. Quite obviously, too much should not 

be made of the latest retail and auto sales figures, nor of the



3/1/66 -70

latest survey of consumer buying intentions. But perhaps those 

bits of information should give the Committee slight pause, 

modestly corroborated as they were by the reappearance for the 

first time in months of precautionary statements, however 

discreetly expressed, by a few business leaders. Secondly, there 

had been a good deal of concern expressed about the condition of 

financial markets. Although he did not fully understand the 

bases of that concern he was willing to defer to those with 

greater experience in the ways of financial markets and to regard 

the concern as another reason for the wisdom of making haste 

slowly. To a comparative newcomer, the market appeared to be 

still beset by a number of disruptive forces which seemed 

unpredictable both in timing and scope. The present would appear 

to be one of those times when the Committee had to be reactive 

rather than active.  

Mr. Galusha's final reason for wanting to avoid a 

dramatic change in policy at the present time was also, in his 

opinion, the most important. It was simply that such a change 

could sharply reduce chances for a tax increase later this year.  

Yet it was very much in the interest of world economy, the U.S., 

and, indeed, the Federal Reserve itself, that aggregate demand be 

curbed to the extent necessary not by further monetary restraint 

but by an increase in tax rates. It was not reasonable to assume



3/1/66 -71

that whatever the near-term future brought there would be no new 

Administration tax bill, or that a tax increase could not be got 

through Congress. The Committee could, he thought, be more 

confident than was possible a few weeks ago that a tax bill, if 

needed, would be forthcoming.  

Mr. Galusha felt he could not be as specific as Mr. Ellis 

had been regarding the appropriate course of action over the next 

few months. Perhaps the Committee should be giving some thought 

as to how it should act if, a few weeks hence, the future 

promised a GNP level for 1966 of, say, $735 billion and contained 

insufficient hint of a tax increase. It might be useful to 

speculate whether, with such an outlook, a gradual tightening of 

monetary conditions--the use of open market operations to push 

interest rates up gradually--would be best. It might be better 

at that time to run certain obvious political risks and follow a 

more dramatic course, possibly increasing discount rates again 

ahead of the market or increasing reserve requirements. Actually, 

the near future might present an excellent opportunity both to 

alter the structure of reserve requirements, which cried for 

attention in his District, and to tighten monetary conditions in 

a dramatic way.  

Perhaps fortunately, however, the issue of whether to move 

gradually or dramatically was for the future, Mr. Galusha said.



3/1/66 -72

At the moment, it would seem, prudence dictated a decidedly gradual 

tightening of monetary conditions. Accordingly, he favored 

alternative B of the staff's draft directives.  

Mr. Scanlon observed that businessmen and bankers in the 

Seventh District were convinced that manpower and productive 

facilities were being utilized at practical capacity. Demand for 

most types of goods, especially durables, was strengthening 

further. Demand for steel from all user categories continued to 

rise. Auto inventories were the highest relative to current sales 

since early 1961, and there had been more than seasonal weakness 

in used car prices; nevertheless, confidence was high among 

industry leaders that output and sales of both cars and trucks 

would equal or exceed last year's records. Recent evidence 

suggested that loan demand had continued to be basically very 

strong in most parts of the District and was expected to remain 

so.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon would like to see the Manager 

continue the policy adopted at the Committee's last meeting but 

not yet completed. He would favor alternative B of the draft 

directives. However, he would change the word "emergence" to 

"strengthening" in the first-paragraph reference to inflationary 

pressures, thus making the phrase read, "to resist the 

strengthening of inflationary pressures."



3/1/66 -73

Mr. Clay commented that the basic question before the 

Committee was the ability of the national economy to meet the 

demands being made upon it without creating a serious price 

inflation problem. While the price record of this business 

upswing generally had been very good, particularly when weighed 

against the economic growth achieved, the present situation was 

a much more precarious one. With military expenditures imposed 

upon civilian spending, the pace of expansion was very rapid at 

a time when the room for growth had become more limited. In 

addition, expectational factors appeared to have become of 

considerable importance in accelerating demands for goods, such 

as in business inventory accumulation. Upward price movement had 

increased somewhat more than earlier. In the tighter situation 

now prevailing in the economy, further price pressures appeared 

highly probable.  

Under those circumstances, Mr. Clay said, monetary policy 

should make me its contribution toward restraining the growth in 

aggregate demand to the output of goods and services that was 

attainable without creating a price inflation problem. On the 

other hand, that also meant that monetary policy should provide 

reserves in sufficient volume to finance the national economy's 

growth. Just what program of action would lead to that result 

was not so readily determinable. Accepting the need for further



3/1/66 -74

restraint, the proper course at this time would appear to be a 

reduction in the degree of reserve availability, approached 

cautiously so as not to create avoidable disturbances in the money 

and capital markets.  

Although tightening of reserve availability would put 

upward pressure on interest rates, Mr. Clay felt this should not 

be the aim of further monetary restraint. Particularly, it would 

seem desirable to avoid such upward pressure on interest rates as 

would call for another increase in the Federal Reserve discount 

rate at this time--granting that the pursuit of that policy might 

justifiably lead to a discount rate change later. Carrying out 

the program in that way would provide further opportunity for 

evaluating the economy's performance as well as additional 

knowledge of the course of fiscal policy.  

In Mr. Clay's opinion the net borrowed reserve target 

might be set at $200 million, with recognition that the Manager 

might not find it feasible to attain that goal within the 

constraints already mentioned. The money and capital markets 

continued very sensitive to further upward movement in yields.  

The impact of such open market operations would be increased by 

the reduced liquidity of business firms and commercial banks at 

this stage of the business upswing. Moreover, the mid-March 

seasonal pressures would need to be taken into account. It



3/1/66 -75

also remained to be seen what would be the effect of further 

reductions in reserve availability upon market expectations.  

The draft economic policy directive, with alternative B 

as its second paragraph, appeared satisfactory to Mr. Clay.  

Mr. Wayne said that the productive facilities of principal 

Fifth District industries apparently were being utilized about as 

fully as the availability of labor and materials would permit.  

The resulting pressures were reflected in reports of price and 

wage increases, which were reaching the Richmond Bank with 

increasing frequency. Furthermore, unfilled orders, which had 

been unusually large for many months, continued to rise. Upward 

pressures were particularly strong in textiles, where recent 

trade reports had attributed maintenance of a considerable measure 

of price stability to "industrial statesmanship." In the Reserve 

Bank's latest survey, business optimism appeared to be rising 

again from an already high level, and manufacturers on balance 

reported further increases in orders, employment, wages, and 

prices. A spokesman for an aluminum company which had headquar

ters in the District and recently announced a substantial program 

of expansion, said that the national supply might increase by some 

six per cent this year but not until the second half. Meanwhile, 

orders were already at new highs, requiring temporary use of 

some mild form of nonprice rationing. Among the District's weekly



3/1/66 -76

reporting banks, business loans rose more than seasonally in the 

four weeks ended February 16 and were considerably stronger than 

in the nation as a whole.  

On the national front, Mr. Wayne was in general agreement 

with the analysis of the staff as presented in the green book and 

in the chart show this morning.  

In the present situation, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that it 

would be appropriate to continue the policy the Committee adopted 

at its last meeting of a gradual reduction in the level of reserve 

availability. Reserve projections for the next few weeks 

indicated that that could be accomplished by reducing the rate at 

which reserves were supplied without the necessity of any actual 

absorption of reserves. He would be reluctant to try to project 

policy beyond the next three weeks. Alternative B of the draft 

directives represented, as he saw it, a continuation of the policy 

objective adopted at the Committee's last meeting and was 

acceptable to him.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

Both the reports of current developments and the 
staff's projection of the future convey the picture of 
a business expansion under more and more upward 
pressure. Investment in inventories and fixed capital 
is moving up at what appears to be an unsustainable 
rate, price increases are becoming more pervasive, and 
our vulnerability to a substantial degree of price 
inflation is mounting.



3/1/66

This picture could be altered sharply, of course, 
for example by a major de-escalation of the war in 
Vietnam and a change in public psychology. But this 
eventuality seems too uncertain to count on.  
Consequently, we need appropriate stabilization 
policies to deal with the more likely alternative of 
growing rather than declining pressures upon prices 
and resources from this source. To be explicit, 
absent any new stage of fiscal restraint, monetary 
conditions will probably have to be tightened further.  

Just how far and how fast monetary firming might 
appropriately proceed at this stage can be a matter of 
debate. The evidence reported for this meeting suggests 
that a good bit of monetary tightening is already well 
under way. And I suspect some people will soon be 
raising questions as to how much more pressure the 
banks and the money and capital markets can stand 
without starting to become disorganized. Nonetheless, 
I would not want to hang our policy on market rates 
and terms alone--or even primarily.  

Given these circumstances, and considering the tax 
and dividend date strains lying just ahead, I think it 
would be wise to continue, slowly and cautiously, the 

gradual tightening of reserve availability. This I 
would like to see accomplished by slowly deepening the 
net borrowed reserve target, thereby forcing banks to 
borrow somewhat more at the discount window or to 

curtail the expansion of credit. A change in the 

discount rate is not called for at this time.  

To make my policy intent clear, let me say that I 

would like to see net borrowed reserves averaging 

around $150 million. At the same time, I would like 

again to suggest that net borrowed reserves be permitted 

to range up to as much as $100 million on either side of 

$150 million, depending upon the accompanying strength 

of bank deposit expansion. This would mean dropping 

toward $250 million, if required reserves turn out to 

be much stronger than expected, or, alternatively, 

moving back down toward as little as $50 million net 

borrowed reserves if credit demands are less than 

expected.  

Mr. Robertson added that he favored alternative B for the 

directive. He agreed with Mr. Scanlon's objective in proposing a

-77-



3/1/66 -78

rephrasing of the reference to inflationary pressures in the first 

paragraph. He thought, however, that the objective might be better 

attained simply by deleting the words "the emergence of"; the 

phrase would then read, "to resist inflationary pressures." 

Mr. Shepardson said that both the staff presentation and 

the comments around the table thus far seemed to be in agreement 

on the high level of activity and the pressures existing in the 

economy at present. The uncertainties with respect to developments 

in Vietnam also had been noted; but in his judgment the 

probability of any immediate easing in that situation was smaller 

than that of further escalation. He shared the view that fiscal 

action would be a desirable means of attempting to curb some of 

the excess demands that seemed to be developing, But he was 

skeptical that fiscal action would be taken soon and he was 

concerned about how far conditions might get out of hand before 

such action was taken.  

Mr. Shepardson did not think this was the time for a 

drastic change in monetary policy and he agreed that there should 

be a continuing gradual reduction in reserve availability. He 

was concerned, however, about the interpretation of the word 

"gradual." It seemed to him that too often a decision in favor 

of a gradual approach was implemented in an overly gradual manner 

and the System found itself arriving "too late with too little."



3/1/66 -79

He did not advocate eliminating the word from the directive but 

he would like to see continued movement toward the objective 

agreed upon. Net borrowed reserves of $200 million appeared to 

be an appropriate target, and he hoped it would be reached in the 

period before the next meeting.  

Mr. Shepardson said that alternative B of the draft 

directives was acceptable to him, and he agreed with Mr. Robertson's 

suggestion with respect to the first paragraph.  

Mr. Mitchell thought the staff's policy analysis was 

correct except in one respect--he believed too much emphasis was 

placed on interest rates and not enough on availability. In the 

present situation, he thought, the Committee should have less 

implicit and explicit concern with the rate structure and more 

concern with availability.  

Mr. Mitchell went on to say that several members had 

expressed the view today that fiscal policy could do a better job 

than monetary policy in curbing excess demands at present. He 

agreed with that view; but he also agreed that it was not useful 

for the Committee simply to confine itself to making that 

statement. The problem for the Committee was to decide what it 

could and could not do. He saw no possible way by which the 

Committee could relieve the anxieties in the capital markets.  

But there were problems the Committee could do something about,



3/1/66 -80

and it should focus its attention on them. In particular, it 

seemed to him that the banking system was not doing all that it 

could to restrain the exuberance of its customers. That was 

because bankers were not sure just how far the Committee would 

go in permitting them to accommodate loan demands. In some way 

the Committee should make it clear that it was not going to make 

it possible for banks to meet all of the demands placed on them.  

It was in this sense that he considered it important to focus on 

availability.  

Although the Manager had reported that on one occasion 

he had had to sidetrack reserve objectives, Mr. Mitchell said, 

for most of the recent period the Desk had been able to work 

toward reduced reserve availability. But open market operations 

were not the System's only tool; the Reserve Banks also could 

make a contribution through the manner in which they administered 

their discount windows. They might be a little firmer in defining 

continuous borrowing, and they could make it clear to banks 

borrowing continuously that adjustments had to be made in their 

asset positions.  

As to the directive, Mr. Mitchell thought the first 

paragraph probably was adequate, and that the Committee might 

dispense with the second paragraph entirely.



3/1/66 -81

Mr. Daane said he had little to add to the discussion.  

He shared the hope several members had expressed that the 

Administration would move on the fiscal front, calling for a tax 

increase of some type with a view to curbing aggregate demand.  

That curbing seemed to him clearly required by current cir

cumstances, and he feared that too great a burden would be 

placed on monetary policy to achieve it. In his judgment an 

attempt by the Committee to implement such a monetary policy--and 

he would not shirk the responsibility if the need arose--would 

result in interest rate levels well beyond those projected by the 

staff.  

While continuing to hope for fiscal action, Mr. Daane 

remarked, he would favor the course others had suggested of 

trying to achieve the gradual reduction of reserve availability 

decided on at the previous meeting. His own target for net 

borrowed reserves would be in the neighborhood of $200 million.  

But he would like to emphasize one point--he hoped the Committee 

would not ask for nor expect too much precision in moving to 

such a target. During a recent visit to the Desk he had been 

particularly impressed with the difficulties the Manager faced 

in meeting targets because of such factors as widely divergent 

reserve projections.  

Mr. Daane agreed with much of what Mr. Mitchell had to 

say about the role the Reserve Banks might play. He was



3/1/66 -82

disturbed by the seeming unwillingness of commercial bankers to 

act on their own initiative in curbing their customers' demands.  

That was highlighted a few weeks ago at the Board's meeting with 

the Federal Advisory Council, when several members had indicated 

that banks would welcome advice from the supervisory agencies on 

the subject. Although he was not sure how it might best be done, 

he would be sympathetic to any steps the System could take to 

help stiffen the attitude of bankers and lead them to exercise 

more prudence and restraint.  

Mr. Daane favored alternative B of the draft directives, 

and would accept Mr. Robertson's proposed amendment to the first 

paragraph.  

Mr. Maisel thought there was little disagreement on the 

present situation or need for monetary constraint. He, therefore, 

would discuss only the proposed directive which, particularly in 

light of prior discussion around the table, seemed to him 

unusually unclear.  

In comparing the changes in reserves, bank credit, and 

the money supply for the past three months, one found very sharp 

differences. Rates of growth were high in December, moderate in 

January, and small in February. Because of the sharp differences 

among those months, Mr. Maisel found a good deal of difficulty 

in interpreting the proposed directive. Depending upon which



3/1/66 -83

period was used, the directive could be interpreted in very 

different ways. Since to be useful one must designate the 

comparison period, he would suggest that the changes so far this 

year be used as the proper base.  

In accordance with his previous suggestions, Mr. Maisel 

believed that for the period ahead the Committee should attempt 

to set its goals in terms of the basic underlying monetary 

variables rather than in terms of interest rates or net borrowed 

reserves. With that in mind, he would suggest replacing the 

words "moderating the growth" near the end of the first paragraph 

with the words "by maintaining reduced growth." That suggestion 

was based on the assumption that the preliminary reported growth 

rates of 3.6 per cent for nonborrowed reserves and 6.7 per cent 

for bank credit were correct. Similarly, he suggested that 

alternative A of the second paragraph, which he supported, be 

revised to read "maintaining the present rate of growth in 

reserve availability," rather than "maintaining the present 

degree of reserve availability"; it was unclear to him whether 

the word "degree" applied to an existing total or an existing 

rate of change. Around the table today it had appeared as if 

the directives could be interpreted as a maintenance of existing 

amounts of reserves, a cut in reserves, or a cut in the rate of 

growth. His point clearly applied equally to alternative B; it



3/1/66 -84

was not clear there either whether "reduction in availability" 

meant in amount or rate of growth in reserves.  

As he had also indicated previously, Mr. Maisel was 

concerned that the Committee attempt to communicate more 

information to the public to avoid speculation on Committee 

action. Thus, he would support the idea that free reserves be 

allowed to vary more, depending upon what was happening in the 

reserve base and in required reserves. Under that policy in 

the latest period the Committee might not have been as concerned 

with reacting to unforeseen changes in required reserves. He 

also thought that it would be proper to indicate to the market 

that in attempting to moderate credit expansion for the next 

quarter or half year, the Committee would be less concerned than 

in the past by changes in the amount of discounting or by 

deviations between the discount and money market rates. He 

especially felt that the System should make it clear that 

movements in the prime rate were a function of the commercial 

banks. It would be most unfortunate if discount rate policy 

were used primarily to set prices for banks. The System should 

try to make it clear that it did not plan to use the discount 

rate for that purpose.  

Mr. Maisel added that because he thought the Committee 

should be concerned with the rate of growth in total reserves



3/1/66 -85

he did not agree with Messrs. Mitchell and Daane; he felt that 

borrowings at the discount window should be offset through sales 

in the open market. If borrowings of reserves rose, holdings 

of nonborrowed reserves should fall. The Committee should set 

its goals in terms of a cut in the growth of total reserves to 

a rate between that experienced in January and February.  

Mr. Hickman observed that business activity continued to 

speed ahead. Evidence mounted that the type of policy prescribed 

by the Committee at the previous meeting was appropriate for the 

next three weeks.  

It was now known that inventory accumulation had been 

proceeding at a faster pace and in larger amounts than originally 

estimated, Mr. Hickman noted. The buildup of business 

inventories in the fourth quarter, when steel inventories were 

being reduced, was apparently associated with widespread 

anticipations of future shortages and further price increases.  

Those conditions were continuing and a further large expansion 

of inventories was expected.  

With new orders and backlogs still rising, particularly 

in durable goods, the industrial sector remained under serious 

pressure, Mr. Hickman said. The steel companies that reported 

regularly to the Cleveland Reserve Bank indicated that unadjusted 

new orders in February, a seasonally weak month, were the same



3/1/66 -86

as in January, which in turn represented the highest level since 

last March. He had also been informed by one of the Bank's 

directors, on a confidential basis, that lead times of suppliers 

to the machine tool industry were more critical than at any 

time since the Korean War.  

Reflecting pressures in the industrial sector, 

Mr. Hickman continued, prices of industrial commodities were 

still moving up. Spot prices of raw materials had risen sharply 

since the Committee's previous meeting. Farm and food prices 

had also climbed sharply, but the Cleveland Reserve Bank's 

analysts believed that wholesale prices of foodstuffs probably 

were now at or near their peak. Higher food prices at retail 

were still indicated, which would inflate the consumer price 

index, wage demands, and price expectations in general. With 

newspapers and other periodicals full of accounts of rising 

prices, the country was faced with the type of inflationary 

psychology that characterized the mid-1950's; that in turn 

would make it all the more difficult to hold back prices and 

wages.  

Mr. Hickman said that the latest data on the financial 

front suggested that System policy was finally beginning to bite.  

The Manager was to be complimented on his contributions to that 

result. In February, increases in nonborrwed reserves, bank



3/1/66 -87

credit, and the money supply appeared to have been considerably 

smaller than in the preceding two months. The rise in long-term 

bond yields had taken some of the steam out of the stock market, 

which in turn should help to restrain capital spending.  

Mr. Hickman went on to say that the Committee thus 

appeared to be in a fairly good position to take whatever further 

steps might be needed to help control the excessive pace of 

economic activity. It would, of course, be helpful if fiscal 

policy complemented monetary policy in the period ahead.  

Lacking such help, he believed the Committee should move very 

gradually and cautiously towards further monetary restraint.  

He would underscore the words "cautiously" and "gradually" partly 

because monetary policy was already beginning to bite, and also 

because more time would be needed to formulate appropriate 

fiscal policy.  

Mr. Hickman therefore recommended that the Committee move 

gradually and cautiously towards a deeper level of net borrowed 

reserves over the next three weeks, say a range of $175 to $200 

million. If credit demands, as reflected in the behavior of 

required reserves, turned out to be as strong or stronger than 

recently, he would favor Mr. Robertson's proposal to allow net 

borrowed reserves to go even deeper. Conversely, if credit 

demands slackened, he would be satisfied with slightly shallower



3/1/66 -88

net borrowed reserves. For the reasons indicated, he would prefer 

alternative B of the draft directives.  

With regard to Mr. Mitchell's suggestion, Mr. Hickman 

said that the Cleveland Reserve Bank administered its discount 

window in a firm fashion at all times. He thought the figures 

would support the statement that it was clear to banks in the 

Fourth District that they were expected to repay their borrowings 

as soon as possible.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that a decision as to whether to take 

further restrictive action today hinged primarily on an assessment, 

first, of the strength of inflationary pressures and, second, 

whether steps already taken were sufficient to contain them.  

While industrial prices had not increased much more rapidly 

recently, they were still rising, and pressures for further 

increases--possibly much faster increases--were clearly present.  

One new bit of information bearing on the problem was the 

Wharton School's index of capacity utilization, just released.  

The index showed that the rate of industrial utilization was 

now at 94.2 per cent of capacity, higher than at any time in the 

past fifteen years with the exception of the Korean War period.  

One of the most disturbing evidences of pressure, 

Mr. Bopp said, was the rapid buildup of new and unfilled orders 

and of inventories. As a straw in the wind, a discussion with



3/1/66 -89

executives of several large industrial firms in the Philadelphia 

area revealed that at least part of the spurt in orders and 

inventories was motivated by anticipations of price increases, 

lengthening delivery schedules, and scarcities. Pressures from 

those sources did not pervade all industry groups; where they 

existed, they were not regarded as being exceptionally severe.  

At this point, Mr. Bopp continued, like everyone else 

he felt far from complacent about prices and saw many signs of 

possibly serious price pressures in the near future. But he 

would not now recommend drastic steps to meet that possibility.  

A second question was the extent to which restraint had 

already been effective, Mr. Bopp said. The Philadelphia 

Reserve Bank's survey of loan and deposit experience of 

commercial banks in the Third District produced results that 

were difficult to evaluate. On the one hand, the tone of replies 

was clearly that banks felt tight and expected stronger pressures 

in the future. To a certain extent, the data bore them out; 

loan-deposit ratios were high and cash assets were at a low ebb.  

On the other hand, there was some reason to believe banks might 

not be so tight as they might indicate. The seasonal slack in 

loan demand had been slightly more pronounced this year than 

last and the banks had been selling Federal funds. Moreover, 

there had been little selling of securities to meet loan demand,



3/1/66 -90

and the Philadelphia banks had not been so aggressive in the CD 

market as banks in other areas. The degree to which banks had 

instituted policies of vigorous credit rationing was 

questionable. On balance, it seemed to him that while the banks 

were girding for an expected squeeze, it had not yet appeared 

to any pronounced degree compared to other periods of restraint or 

to the situation confronting banks in the New York City area.  

The short time interval which had elapsed since the 

February 15 refunding provided scant evidence of the effect of 

action already taken, Mr. Bopp observed, and thus afforded little 

in the way of guidance to determine whether additional policy 

moves should be made at this time. Given the current sensitive 

condition of financial markets, any sudden and substantial move 

toward more restraint now would likely reflect itself quickly in 

substantial upward movements in rates. He would, therefore, 

continue the more moderate and gradual course adopted at the 

last meeting of the Committee.  

Mr. Bopp said he had serious qualms about a directive 

expressed in terms of a single variable, particularly one over 

which the Manager had no direct and immediate control.  

Nevertheless, in the light of many discussions of the problem, 

alternative B of the draft directives reflected his general 

judgment of appropriate policy for the immediate future, with the 

deletion of "the emergence of" from the first paragraph.



3/1/66

Mr. Patterson thought that the Committee, having altered 

its policy only three weeks ago, wanted to be sure that economic 

and financial conditions had really changed before deciding on 

a different course of action. Certainly, no developments in the 

Sixth District indicated a dramatic change. The vigorous pace 

of consumer spending in the Southeast appeared to have carried 

over into 1966, and the banks had contributed to that expansion 

through further increases in consumer and other loans.  

Many banks in the District were not yet under much 

restraint, Mr. Patterson said. Only 194 out of 521 member banks 

found it necessary to liquidate Government securities this past 

year to keep up with their lending. Most of the banks surveyed 

by the Atlanta Reserve Bank recently confirmed that they still 

had some leeway in unpledged securities to accommodate future 

loan demands.  

How much room commercial banks had in meeting prospective 

demands was something monetary policy should take into account, 

Mr. Patterson continued. By the same token, the Committee could 

not overlook the fact that the demand for credit from other than 

commercial bank channels had been very heavy and was likely to 

rise even further. Therefore, it was not surprising that 

interest rates had continued to increase. Even higher rates 

were in prospect if savings slowed down significantly, and that



3/1/66 -92

would have the further effect of aggravating the inflationary 

pressures present in the economy.  

In that atmosphere, Mr. Patterson thought, the policy 

shift formulated at the previous meeting was sound. That course 

of action had not been in effect long enough to be responsible 

for the recent slowing down in reserves and deposits. But those 

developments were certainly consistent with the direction of 

our operations. He would not think that a policy change every 

three or four weeks was advisable. Thus, unless the Committee 

felt the change of three weeks ago was in error, it should 

continue such a policy.  

At the last meeting, Mr. Patterson noted, he had suggested 

that the Committee carry out a probing operation aimed at getting 

a tighter control of reserves. That still struck him as an 

appropriate objective today. Such a program would not make the 

Committee especially popular either with those who saw no need 

for restraint or with those eager to apply the brakes in earnest.  

Thus, in allowing credit to expand at the fastest sustainable 

rate, the Committee might be walking something of a tightrope.  

Yet, that type of action was perhaps the best it could hope for 

and one to be tested in the months to come. He believed that net 

borrowed reserves somewhere between $150 and $200 million over the 

next three weeks would probably come close to meeting that 

objective. He favored alternative B of the draft directives.



3/1/66 -93

Mr. Francis commented that aggregate demand for goods and 

services had been rising rapidly. As one indication of total 

demand, retail sales had risen at a 13 per cent annual rate since 

October compared with a 4-1/2 per cent trend rate from 1953 to 

1965. Both employment and output had gone up at an advanced rate.  

Yet, production had not been able to keep pace with the huge 

demand, and prices had increased. In contrast to the 1958 to 

1964 period in which there was little net change, wholesale prices 

had risen at a 4.7 per cent annual rate since September, double the 

rate during the previous year.  

The Government's fiscal actions appeared to Mr. Francis 

to be expansionary. The "high employment budget" apparently 

would show a deficit in the current six-month period as against 

a small surplus in the last half of 1965. More important, the 

Government was stimulating the private sector by increasing 

sharply its orders for military goods. Those orders did not all 

show up as outlays in the current budget, but the economy got the 

stimulus as industry began production. Then, too, Government 

debt had continued to become more liquid, despite some lengthening 

of average maturity in the February refunding. With the 4-1/4 

per cent interest rate limitation on bonds, the average maturity 

of the debt was likely to continue to shorten in the near future.



3/1/66

With private demand rising with such great momentum and 

with the Government acting in so stimulative a way, Mr. Francis 

said, the Committee needed to do all it reasonably could to 

restrict total demand to reasonable proportions. It was 

desirable that potential borrowers not get all the credit they 

wanted. If, in a time of excessive total demand, potential 

borrowers received all the credit they wanted, that would 

contribute further to excessive demand, resulting in further 

acceleration in price rises.  

As for policy, it seemed desirable to Mr. Francis to 

keep the growth rates of total reserves and money to very modest 

proportions. The less expansionary developments regarding 

Federal Reserve holdings of Government securities, total reserves, 

and money since late December seemed to him to be quite 

satisfactory. He would like to see those trends continued in the 

near future. If such actions should motivate banks to reduce 

their excess reserves or to increase their borrowings from Reserve 

Banks, Federal Reserve holdings of Governments should be 

correspondingly less in order to control total reserves, credit, 

and money.  

Mr. Francis said he would not be concerned if, in the face 

of such policy, interest rates continued to rise. High rates 

were probably the most efficient method of rationing appropriately

-94-



3/1/66 -95

the available credit supplies among the competing demands and 

would tend to reduce the rate of expansion in aggregate demand.  

He would not raise the discount rate at this time, since he 

believed that for the time being the Committee could accomplish 

what was necessary through open market operations. He favored 

alternative B of the draft directives.  

Chairman Martin commented that there was a high degree 

of agreement on policy today, although the Committee still had a 

problem with respect to its choice of target variables--a problem 

that Mr. Maisel had pointed up very well. The Chairman also was 

sympathetic with Mr. Mitchell's remarks. As to policy, he 

thought the Committee was moving in the right direction and he, 

too, favored the gradual approach.  

Chairman Martin then noted that recently he and Secretary 

of the Treasury Fowler had discussed the possibility of having 

the three Federal bank supervisory agencies issue a joint 

statement calling for restraint in extensions of credit. He 

personally was somewhat dubious about the proposal; it seemed 

to him that it amounted to a program of voluntary domestic credit 

restraint without detailed guidelines, and was likely to lead to 

difficulties.  

However, the Chairman continued, there was an alternative 

possibility that he would like to raise for consideration, in



3/1/66 -96

which all Reserve Bank Presidents would hold informal discussions 

with individual bankers in their Districts, as some were already 

doing. It could be pointed out in those discussions that 

restraint on credit extensions was required at present, that it 

was not desirable to meet all demands for credit, and that the 

System did not intend to supply the reserves that would be needed 

to do so. It would be important to avoid any suggestion that the 

discount windows were to be closed. At the same time, it was 

incumbent on the Reserve Banks to do a good job in administering 

their discount windows, and if there were any instances in which 

insufficiently rigorous standards were being applied they should 

be corrected.  

The Chairman said he recognized the difficulties of such 

an approach and the problems that would arise in implementing 

it, but he thought it would be preferable to a formal statement 

by the supervisory agencies. There was no better organization 

than the System, with its twelve regional Banks, for pointing 

out the nature of the current problem to commercial banks.  

In the ensuing discussion a number of members expressed 

agreement with the Chairman's view that a joint statement on 

the subject of credit restraint by the supervisory agencies 

would be undesirable. Among the objections seen to such a 

statement were that it would be a misuse of supervisory authority,



3/1/66 -97

and that it might be interpreted as implying a lack of willingness 

to employ the usual tools of stabilization policy--both fiscal 

and monetary--in curbing excessive demands.  

A number of problems likely to arise in the suggested 

informal discussions with bankers also were noted. Among these 

were the difficulties of setting priorities among various kinds 

of bank credit, and the possibility that individual bankers would 

ask the Reserve Banks to establish a system of priorities for 

them to follow. Several members expressed the view that it would 

be undesirable for the Reserve Bank Presidents to indicate 

priorities; such judgments, they thought, should be made by the 

bankers themselves. Some members thought the best course might 

be for the System to confine itself to the question of the 

aggregate volume of reserves to be supplied, but others indicated 

that the bankers would find conversations of the type suggested 

useful in subsequent discussions with their loan officers and 

with customers. The diversity in attitudes of individual 

bankers and the consequent need for varying the approach taken 

with them was noted, as was the desirability of talking both with 

bankers that were frequent borrowers at the discount window and 

with those that were not. Also touched on was the desirability 

of avoiding any implication that the System was attempting to 

promote rationing over interest rate changes as a device for



3/1/66 -98

allocating bank credit, by remaining neutral on the subject of 

interest rates.  

At the conclusion of the discussion Chairman Martin 

commented that he thought it was fair to say that a number of 

members of the Committee were opposed to the suggested joint 

statement by the supervisory agencies, and that there was 

considerable sympathy with the thought that the System should do 

what it could through conversations with bankers. It was 

important that these conversations be informal and held on an 

individual basis, and that they not be viewed as an alternative 

to the usual instruments of monetary policy. He was not 

particularly concerned about the possibility that the press would 

exaggerate their implications; there already had been press 

stories to the effect that some Reserve Bank Presidents had been 

discussing the problems of credit restraint with bankers, and 

keeping in continual touch with bankers on such problems was part 

of the System's job.  

Returning to the subject of today's policy decision, 

Chairman Martin noted that the majority of the Committee appeared 

to favor alternative B of the draft directives, and that several 

had agreed with Mr. Robertson's suggested deletion of the words 

"the emergence of" from the reference to inflationary pressures 

in the first paragraph. Mr. Maisel, however, had expressed a 

preference for a different formulation.



3/1/66 -99

Mr. Maisel commented that he could accept alternative B.  

He hoped, however, that the Desk would interpret the language 

calling for a "gradual reduction in reserve availability" as 

meaning a gradual reduction in the rate of growth of aggregate 

reserves.  

Mr. Hayes said he thought the language of the first and 

second paragraphs of the directive taken together made that point 

quite clear.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unan
imous vote, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York was authorized 
and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to 
execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the 
following current economic policy 
directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy is 
expanding vigorously, with prices continuing to creep up 
and credit demands remaining strong. Our international 
payments continue in deficit. In this situation, it is 
the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist 
inflationary pressures and to help restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by 
moderating the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, 
and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to attaining some further 
gradual reduction in reserve availability.



3/1/66 -100

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, March 22, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 28, 1966 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on March 1, 1966 

First Paragraph 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 

meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding vigorously, 
with prices continuing to creep up and credit demands remaining 

strong. Our international payments continue in deficit. In this 

situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to 

resist the emergence of inflationary pressures and to help restore 

reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by 

moderating the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 

money supply.  

Second Paragraph 

Alternative A (No change in policy): 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 

a view to maintaining the present degree of reserve availability.  

Alternative B (Moderate firming): 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 

a view to attaining some further gradual reduction in reserve 

availability.


