









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 1, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 

Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 

Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and 

Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Partee, Solomon, 

Tow, and Young, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hersey and Reynolds, Advisers, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, Senior Attorney, Legal Division 

Board of Governors



11/1/66 -2

Messrs. Willis, Ratchford, Brandt, Baughman, 
and Jones, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, 
Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Fousek and MacLaury, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of 
the meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on October 4, 1966, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions 

and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign 

currencies for the period October 4 through 26, 1966, and a 

supplemental report for October 27 through 31, 1966. Copies of 

these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said that the Treasury gold stock would again remain unchanged this 

week and there was a good chance of getting through November as well 

without any drop in the gold stock. That respite from previous 

sales reflected in part the halt in French reserve gains during 

recent months, and the widely publicized decision of the French



11/1/66 -3

authorities to forego this month their regular 30-ton purchase in 

the absence of reserve gains. During October the gold pool came 

out about even on balance, with prices in the London gold market 

remaining within a narrow range of $35.15-$35.165. Since July, 

South Africa had not been adding to its reserves with the result 

that new production of gold had been coming from that country to 

London in substantially larger amounts than earlier in the year.  

On the other hand, it seemed increasingly unlikely that Russia 

would have to sell gold in the foreseeable future.  

There were many cross-currents in the sterling picture 

in October, Mr. MacLaury commented, but the underlying trend in 

the market was generally one of strength. As the Committee would 

recall, in July, at the time of extremely heavy selling of 

sterling, the Bank of England had extended very substantial 

support in the forward market as well as in the spot market. A 

large portion of the forward sterling purchases it had made at 

that time--i.e., those with three-month maturities--fell due in 

October. Most of those contracts represented hedging of one 

sort or another, and since the sellers in most cases did not 

have sterling receipts coming in, they had to buy sterling to 

make delivery; and, in effect, they bought it from the Bank of 

England. Thus, the Bank of England was able to pick up from 

the market most of the dollars it needed to meet the heavy



11/1/66 -4

maturities, when it was not able to roll the contracts forward.  

On several occasions during the month, however, the timing of 

dollar purchases and commitments did not coincide and, on 

balance, there probably was some net dollar drain in paying off 

the sizable maturities that were not rolled over.  

The Bank of England had borrowed $360 million overnight 

at the end of September, Mr. MacLaury continued. Also, because 

of an increase in sterling balances in September, it was required 

under the terms of the sterling balance credit arrangement to 

repay $125 million of previously borrowed funds to the Bank for 

International Settlements. As a result, the Bank of England 

would have needed nearly $500 million at the end of October just 

to refinance previous borrowings. Of that amount, the U.S. put 

up $250 million on an overnight basis--from yesterday to today-

with $200 million from the Treasury and $50 million from the 

System. As it turned out, however, sizable dollar receipts 

from the market in the last few days of the month would permit 

the Bank of England to announce tomorrow that it had made a net 

reduction of foreign indebtedness as well as a satisfactory gain 

in its official reserves. Thus, the U.S. credits to the Bank of 

England this month-end represented only a partial refinancing 

of credits previously extended to the British. Taking into 

account the net repayments of debt, the increase in reserves,



11/1/66 -5

and the substantial reduction in forward commitments, the over

all improvement in the British position in October amounted to 

about $400 million. That was an encouraging pattern.  

The dollar continued to show strength during the month 

against most continental currencies except the German mark, 

Mr. MacLaury reported. The Belgian franc and Italian lira held 

around par, and the French franc was frequently just below par.  

In each case, it appeared that the central bank concerned 

supported its currency on occasion through the sales of dollars 

in its market. In the last few days the System Account had 

bought about $12 million equivalent of lire in New York, $10 

million of which would be used tomorrow (November 2) to reduce 

the System's $100 million drawing on the Bank of Italy to $90 

million. Even greater progress had been made during the month 

in reducing System drawings of Swiss francs from the Swiss 

National Bank. Total repayments in Swiss francs since the 

previous meeting of the Committee amounted to $45 million 

equivalent, leaving $100 million still outstanding--including 

the $75 million Swiss franc drawing on the BIS. In contrast 

to the currencies just mentioned, the German mark strengthened 

considerably during the month and the German Federal Bank took 

in about $100 million. That mainly reflected the persistence 

of very tight money conditions and the improvement in Germany's



11/1/66 -6

trade surplus that began earlier this year. The German cabinet 

resignations last week did not seem to have had any lasting impact 

on the exchange market.  

Finally, Mr. MacLaury said, his impression was that the 

weakening tendency of the Canadian dollar during October was 

attributable to the cumulative effects of the reduction in the 

rate of new Canadian capital issues in the United States from 

the first to the second half of the year, combined with short

term capital outflows from Canada.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether his understanding was correct 

that the Bank of England's position had improved by roughly $400 

million in October after all window-dressing operations were 

discounted. Mr. MacLaury replied that that understanding was 

correct.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 

and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period 

October 4 through 31, 1966, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury reported that two drawings by the Bank of 

England on its swap line with the System, of $50 million each, 

would mature at the end of November. The Bank of England was 

highly conscious of the desirability of paying down those 

drawings, and it was possible that they would do so before the 

maturity date. He would recommend renewal of the drawings,



11/1/66 -7

however, if that should prove necessary. One would be a first 

renewal and the other a second renewal.  

Possible renewal of the two 
drawings by the Bank of England was 
noted without objection.  

Mr. MacLaury then noted that on December 2, 1966, the 

System's drawing on the Bank of Italy which, as he had indicated 

earlier, would be reduced tomorrow from $100 million to $90 

million, would come up for a first renewal. He hoped that 

further progress would be made toward repaying the drawing, but 

recommended renewal if it did not prove possible to liquidate 

it in full.  

Possible renewal of the drawing 

on the Bank of Italy was noted without 

objection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

October 4 through 26, 1966, and a supplemental report for 

October 27 through 31, 1966. Copies of both reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



11/1/66

The more buoyant psychology that had emerged in 
financial markets prior to the last Committee meeting 
has developed further over the past four weeks. The 
factors underlying this improved sentiment have been 
described in some detail in the written reports to the 
Committee and I will not enumerate them here. Pressure 
on the markets subsided markedly, interest rates moved 
lower, and the corporate and municipal calendar showed 
no signs of an unusual buildup. At the same time, 
bank credit--as measured by the credit proxy--declined 
in October in contrast to the 5-6 per cent rise 
projected at the time of the last meeting. While 
commercial banks were constrained by a substantial loss 
in CD's over the month, the recent decline in Treasury 
bill rates has tended to ease somewhat the pressure in 
that area as well.  

The important question that market participants 
have been debating is whether the sign of reduced 
pressure in financial markets represents the beginning 
of a cyclical downtrend in interest rates and credit 
demand or whether it has been a temporary lull, in 
part an unwinding of the tensions and psychoses of 
late August in the bond markets and of early September 
in the short-term financial markets. Many banks and 
market observers feel that loan demand remains very 
strong and will soon be reasserting itself vigorously.  
They ascribe the current shortfall in credit expansion 
to anticipatory borrowing earlier and to some lessened 
feeling of urgency to borrow now. At the same time, 
with interest rates declining, borrowers in the capital 
market, they argue, have tended to postpone needs but 
may soon be seen again in force. This group also sees 
less likelihood of a tax increase now than a few weeks 
ago, and on balance is generally optimistic about the 

business outlook.  
The other major group would read something more 

fundamental into recent indications of reduced credit 

demand, and would generally argue that the tight money 
and fiscal actions taken to date have already taken 
the edge off business expansion, and that a tax increase 

is no longer necessary. Vietnam is a complicating 

factor for both schools of thought, but the latter 

group would tend to view military spending as the only 

major support of the domestic economy.



11/1/66

The resolution of views just outlined is, of 
course, identical with the issue that the Committee 
faces today. For the time being market participants 
would agree that the pressures on financial markets 
have subsided. The question of "how long" remains.  

System open market operations over the period 
have, of course, been strongly affected by the 
progressive shortfall of the bank credit proxy, 
required reserves, and other aggregate measures from 
the expectations of four weeks ago. A somewhat more 
comfortable tone has been permitted to emerge in the 
money market, partly reflecting the change in expecta
tions, and net borrowed reserve figures have fluctuated 
widely without exciting either the press or the market.  

Early in the period--in the week ending October 12, 
for example--there appeared to be some tendency for the 
larger banks to anticipate reserve needs at the discount 
window. In that week heavy average borrowings and a 
net borrowed reserve figure of about $500 million were 
associated with a generally comfortable Federal funds 
market. In the week ending October 19 country banks 
built up their excess reserves substantially in the 
first week of their settlement period, with the 
result that a far lower level of net borrowed 
reserves--around $300 million--was consistent with 
about the same tone in the Federal funds market.  

Last week, as excess reserves were put to use by 
country banks, a somewhat higher level of net borrowed 
reserves than the $366 million that eventuated would 

have been consistent with the general money market 
atmosphere of recent weeks. But, as the written 

reports spell out, after injecting about $250 million 

of reserves on Monday, October 24, when the money 

market was firm and net borrowed reserve estimates 

for the week were around $600 million, we were faced 

with unexpectedly large revisions in the figures on 

Tuesday. While we absorbed reserves on Tuesday we 

did not think it worthwhile to press too hard, 
particularly in light of the behavior of the credit 

proxy.  
Looking ahead, the Board staff is projecting a 

2 per cent decline in the credit proxy for November, 
as the blue book 1/ indicates; the New York Reserve 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



11/1/66

Bank projection is for a larger decline. I confess that 
at the Desk we had been anticipating some resurgence 
in private credit demand in November, and had also 
expected the Treasury financing program to result in 
the acquisition of Government securities by banks.  
Thus I find the projections hard to believe. I 
believe that in the circumstances, the proviso clause 
of the directive 1/ may be hard to interpret. On the 
basis of my understanding of the Committee's intentions 
in the recent past, I would think that the proviso 
clause should be interpreted as calling for tighter 
money market conditions only if bank credit appeared to 
be expanding again at a rapid rate in November. Perhaps 
a rate in excess of the average expansion so far this 
year would be required to bring the proviso into play.  
On the other hand, if the staff expectations appeared 
to be borne out, some further easing of money market 
conditions might be called for. Any shading of money 
market conditions and reserve availability from recent 
patterns would of course have to take place within the 
context of even keel considerations. I would find it 
helpful if the Committee members would comment on their 
own interpretation of the proviso clause during the 
course of the go-around.  

For the past several months now we have been paying 
more attention to short-range aggregate measures--the 
credit proxy and required reserves--in conducting day
to-day open market operations. On the whole I believe 
this has worked rather well. The credit proxy, however, 
could be improved if more weight were given to some of 
the nondeposit liabilities of banks which have a 

counterpart in bank credit although they do not affect 
the proxy as it is currently calculated. I would hope 
that the staff would give early consideration to the 
improvement of the proxy in order to make it a still 
better measure of daily average bank credit.  

1/ A draft directive submitted by the staff for consideration by 

the Committee is appended to these minutes as Attachment A. A set 

of explanatory notes was attached to the draft in an experimental 

effort to clarify the staff's reasons for proposing certain 

language at particular points.

-10-



11/1/66

Treasury financing will be an important market 
factor over the remainder of the year. The books are 
open today on the November refunding, in which the 
Treasury is offering for cash $2.5 billion of 5-5/8 
per cent 15-month notes and $1.6 billion of 5-3/8 per 
cent 5-year notes in exchange for $4.1 billion of 
maturing obligations--of which $3.2 billion are held 
by the public. The offering announcement last 
Thursday met with an enthusiastic response, and the 
market anticipates that subscribers to both issues-
and especially the longer note--will receive only small 
allotments on their subscriptions. Both issues are 
attractively priced (these are the highest coupons on 
Governments since the early 1920s), and there seems to 
be a lively interest on the part of dealers, banks, 
public funds, and small investors. Some speculative 
demand is apparent, but the Treasury's decision to use 
a cash rather than a rights exchange minimizes the risk 
by keeping the size of the longer issue under control.  
The System holds $829.1 million of the maturing issue 
and I would plan to exchange the full amount for the 
5-5/8 per cent 15-month note, 

By using a cash refunding the Treasury will avoid 
attrition and can raise about $300 million in new money 
with a normal 10 per cent overallotment. Cash needs for 
the remainder of the year amount to about $2-1/2 billion, 
which the Treasury currently plans to raise through a 
strip of Treasury bills in the one-year cycle and through 
an additional offering of tax anticipation bills. The 
first part of this cash financing should be announced 
before the November 15 payment date on the refunding, 
with the second part scheduled for some time in December.  

It should be noted that the decision to postpone 
marketing of Federal National Mortgage Association and 
Export-Import Bank participation certificates has 
created problems with the debt limit as the Treasury's 
own financing has been increased. The Treasury will be 
pressing against the $330 billion temporary ceiling 
by late this month, and December could bring additional 
problems. While the Treasury probably will be able 
to live under the present ceiling through the rest of 
this year, especially if market conditions permit the 
issuance of participation certificates, there could be 
some annoying problems in operating the Treasury's cash 
position in the next two months and an increase in the 
debt ceiling may be required early next year.

-11-



11/1/66 -12

Mr. Swan asked whether the somewhat shallower net borrowed 

reserve figures of the last two weeks were likely to recur in the 

current week or whether Mr. Holmes would expect the figure to deepen 

at this point. Mr. Holmes responded that last night the Desk was 

looking at a figure of $469 million for the current week. It was 

hard to predict the final figure, however, partly because one could 

not say what revision would be indicated by the country-bank sample; 

last week the sample had added about $100 million to reserves. On 

the whole, however, he thought the figure would not be far from 

last week's, and perhaps a bit deeper. Such a figure probably 

would be consistent with a relatively constant tone in the money 

market.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that like Mr. Holmes he had reserva

tions about the proviso clause in the directive, but perhaps for 

different reasons; he was troubled by the language. He noted that 

the staff projected a decline in the bank credit proxy at an annual 

rate of about 2 per cent in November. If in fact the Committee 

wanted to moderate the disintermediation that was taking place, 

what could it achieve and what would be the implications for the 

rate structure? What should be done about attrition in CD's? 

Mr. Holmes commented that many banks thought they might be 

approaching the end of the road with respect to attrition in their 

outstanding CD's; they felt that their position with respect to 

CD's had improved, and that the outlook did not appear as



11/1/66 -13

discouraging as earlier, Of course, the average maturity of CD's 

was now quite short and the banks' positions remained vulnerable.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that bill rates might have to remain 

close to their present levels to avoid a considerable amount of 

attrition, and rates might have to drop by 20 or 25 basis points 

further to stop attrition altogether. If there was some rise in 

bill rates more CD run-offs would follow and the credit proxy might 

well decline by more than now projected.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that a rise in bill rates would tend to 

increase CD run-offs, but he thought there was a range within which 

rates might fluctuate without substantial effects. It was hard to 

say how much of a decline in bill rates would be required to bring 

attrition to a halt.  

In response to a question, Mr. Holland indicated that the 

staff's projection of the bank credit proxy in November allowed for 

a CD run-off of about $1/2 billion, with short-term rates expected 

to rise a bit.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether the one-month bill rate was the 

most relevant for assessing CD developments, and Mr. Holmes replied 

that rates on bills with maturities out to three months had to be 

considered.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances



11/1/66 -14

during the period October 4 through 31, 
1966, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.  

Chairman Martin observed that at its preceding meeting the 

Committee had agreed to consider today the subject of possible 

System operations in agency issues, and he asked Mr. Holland to 

comment.  

Mr. Holland noted that recent legislation gave the System 

authority to engage in open market operations in direct obligations 

of U.S. agencies and obligations guaranteed by such agencies, and 

that a staff memorandum on the subject, dated October 3, 1966, had 

been distributed. The question before the Committee today was 

whether it wished to take some action at this juncture in recognition 

of the new authority. The Account Manager had indicated that he was 

not prepared to recommend outright transactions in agency issues at 

this time because of a number of problems, outlined in his memorandum 

to the Committee of June 23, 1966, that required resolution; but 

that he would consider repurchase agreements in such issues to be 

a potentially useful addition to the kit of tools available for 

reserve management.  

Mr. Holland went on to say that in his judgment the immediate 

market situation was not such as to make the matter a pressing one.  

It was true, however, that dealer inventories of agency issues had 

been rising, and now were approaching $1/2 billion. On occasions



11/1/66 -15

when dealers had financing needs in connection with those holdings, 

the use of RP's against agency issues might be an appropriate means 

of making some necessary reserve injections; and such RP's might 

also facilitate flotations of agency issues. In the staff's opinion, 

the only action required to authorize RP's in agency issues, if the 

Committee so desired, was an amendment to paragraph 1(c) of the 

continuing authority directive, and a draft of an amended paragraph 

was incorporated in the October 3 memorandum.  

In response to the Chairman's invitation to comment, 

Mr. Holmes said he thought Mr. Holland's remarks had covered the 

matter well. He would add only that some dealers were now complain

ing about a shortage of agency issues. In the present atmosphere, 

which was quite different from that of June, outright transactions 

were likely to distort the market--and that was an additional reason 

for not engaging in such operations now. Repurchase agreements 

against agency issues would have been useful in the recent past on 

occasions when there was a shortage of bills in the market and it 

was necessary to supply reserves.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that the agency market was likely 

to be under great pressures in the spring. He thought it would 

be desirable to go beyond authorizing repurchase agreements against 

agency issues now, and also to authorize outright transactions in 

them.



11/1/66

Mr. Brimmer said he favored authorizing RP's against agency 

issues at this time. In the absence of some unexpected development, 

U.S. agencies probably would be in the market again in the spring, 

and it would be helpful then to have had some experience with agency 

RP's and to have accustomed the market to such operations. Moreover, 

he thought the Committee should take some action in response to the 

enactment of enabling legislation.  

Mr. Daane said he would go along, although somewhat reluc

tantly, with the proposal to authorize RP's against agency issues, 

largely for the second of the two reasons Mr. Brimmer had mentioned.  

He felt that the basic consideration in decisions on use of the 

authority should be--in words drawn from the Manager's June 

memorandum--"whether such operations would be of value in imple

menting System policy objectives." He would not favor authorizing 

outright transactions in agency issues at present.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that the Committee should give a good 

deal of attention to the matter of outright transactions. He then 

asked about the rates at which recent RP's against Treasury bills 

had been made.  

Mr. Holmes replied that all RP's recently had been made 

at the discount rate. For some time he had felt that that rate 

was undesirably low, considering the levels of short-term market 

rates in general. On three different occasions he had considered

-16-



11/1/66 -17

applying a higher rate; the continuing authority directive, of 

course, specified only a minimum rate. Unfortunately, on each 

such occasion, the market situation and psychology had developed 

in a manner that led him to conclude that a higher RP rate would 

have an undesirable impact on expectations.  

Mr. Holmes added that the subject of agency issues was 

being given extended consideration in the joint Treasury-Federal 

Reserve study of the Government securities market now underway, 

and at some later time the study group might bring forward some 

expressions of opinion.  

Chairman Martin said it seemed to him that it would be 

desirable for the Committee to authorize RP's against agency 

issues now. He thought the Committee would want to study the 

question of outright transactions further, and be prepared to 

reach a decision regarding them at a later date.  

Mr. Mitchell reiterated his view that the Committee should 

go further now. In his opinion authorizing outright transactions 

would be consistent with the position the Board had taken at the 

time the legislation was under consideration in Congress, and it 

would be appropriate on other grounds also. He did not think the 

Committee would be trying to influence the prices of agency issues 

in any manner other than that in which it now influenced Treasury 

security prices. The Committee put funds into some sector of the



11/1/66 -18

market to achieve monetary objectives--which might be defined in 

terms of reserves, money supply, total deposits, interest rates, 

or other variables. He saw operations in agency issues as a 

further means of achieving monetary objectives.  

Mr. Daane commented that he had meant to indicate that 

monetary objectives should be placed first even in the use of 

RP's against agency issues, and on that point he felt there was 

no disagreement between Mr. Mitchell and himself.  

Mr. Brimmer asked when Mr. Holmes thought the current 

study of the Government securities market would be completed.  

Mr. Holmes said the study group had made substantial 

progress recently and hoped to move further ahead in November. He 

was not able, however, to indicate a specific date for completion 

of its work at this time.  

Mr. Brimmer said he hoped the matter of the availability 

of the study would not influence the date at which the Committee 

would reach a decision on outright transactions in agency issues.  

At the same time, he personally would be reluctant to go ahead 

without having the study, and therefore he hoped that it could 

be accelerated.  

Mr. Hayes said that on the general issue he found himself 

in agreement with both Messrs. Daane and Brimmer. Authorizing 

RP's against agency issues would be useful, and he thought the



11/1/66

Committee should take that step; but he saw no need for the 

Committee to reach a judgment on the broader question of outright 

operations at this time. He strongly agreed with Mr. Daane that 

any operations in agency issues should be for monetary purposes 

alone.  

Mr. Robertson said that if the Committee thought authoriz

ing RP's against agency issues would facilitate their underwriting, 

it should authorize such RP's, to be utilized just as RP's were 

utilized elsewhere. He would favor going that far now. At some 

point the Committee would have to face the question of authorizing 

outright transactions, and it should do so in advance of the time 

at which the question of actually undertaking such transactions 

became pressing.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
paragraph 1(c) of the continuing 
authority directive to the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was amended 
to read as follows: 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to 
principal and interest by, any agency of the U.S., and 
prime bankers' acceptances with maturities of 6 months or 
less at the time of purchase, from nonbank dealers for the 
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under 
agreements for repurchase of such securities, obligations, 
or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates not 
less than (1) the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York at the time such agreement is entered 
into, or (2) the average issuing rate on the most recent 
issue of 3-month Treasury bills, whichever is the lower; 
provided that in the event Government securities or agency

-19-



11/1/66

issues covered by any such agreement are not repurchased 
by the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal 
thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred 
to the System Open Market Account; and provided further 
that in the event bankers' acceptances covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they 
shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or 
shall be sold in the open market.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

An economist has to take his economic information 

where he can find it, and I'm not above using, as the 

text of my sermon this morning, the caption on a delight

ful cartoon which appeared in The New Yorker magazine last 

week. Most of you must have seen it. It's the one showing 

two attache-case-carrying types stepping out of a building 

marked "Federal Reserve." On spotting that infamous symbol 

of the Great Depression (a man selling apples on a street 

corner), one of the two comments, "I say, don't you think 

we've cooled the boom off enough?" 
Certainly, a number of economic indicators suggest 

some cooling off. And certainly, we don't want to wait 

until there are apple-sellers on street corners before 
reversing the stance of policy. But as usual, many of 

the indicators now available are ambiguous, and some of 

the uncertainties about the future, particularly about 

defense outlays, remain. Under these circumstances, the 

appropriate stance of policy is far from being crystal 

clear.  
Looking back over the economic performance of the 

past several months, one can see many signs of a slowing 

in the rate of rise in activity. But some of this has to 

be attributed to supply constraints, perhaps as much as 

to moderation in demands. For example, the industrial 

production index slowed considerably in the third quarter, 

rising only half as fast from June to September as it had 

over the spring quarter. The reduced rate of expansion

-20-



11/1/66

did reflect production cutbacks in industries where demands 
have eased, such as in autos and home goods. But it also 
represented the reaching of labor and plant capacity limits 
in other industries, such as business and defense equipment.  
Over all, our newly revised measure of capacity use in 
manufacturing indicates that the utilization rate has remained 
fairly steady this year, at levels as high as that reached 
at the peak in 1955.  

There also have been signs of a slowing in nonfarm 
employment growth in recent months, over and above that 
attributable to the exceptionally large withdrawals of teen

agers from employment in September in order to return to 
school. Here, again, there is a mixture of supply limits 
and demand weakening, with shortages of skilled workers in 
some manufacturing industries requiring a lengthening of 
the workweek, while in other industries--such as textiles 

and construction--smaller employment growth reflects reduced 
demands. Over all, the rate of increase in employment is 
still pushing up against available supply, and the over-all 

unemployment rate will show little change for October, with 

unemployment of adult males continuing at low frictional 
levels.  

Many of us have been trying to read back from the 

financial figures to the performance of the real economy 
to demonstrate weakening. It may well be that the recent 

abatement of pressures on banks and in financial markets 

does reflect some softening in demands for goods and services, 
not just financial supply limitations as lenders ration credit 

more severely. While I would caution that the ratio of 

financing to spending can be a volatile measure in the short 
run, the recent moderation in business loans undoubtedly has 

its counterpart in some reduction in business inventory 

demand. This is not implausible after the very fast inventory 

run-up in the second quarter and the continued large accumula

tion in the July-August period; inventory-sales ratios rose 

in this period and some cutback in forward buying is not 

unexpected.  
Preliminary figures for manufacturing inventories, to 

be released today, do indicate a decline in the rate of 

accumulation in September. But a large share of the decline 

was in the auto industry, which had also accounted for a 

large share of the July-August inventory build-up. Stock

piling in machinery and defense equipment industries has 

continued strong and rising throughout, and with the 

substantial revision in the September figure for new defense 

orders--it now shows an incredible 50 per cent rise from

-21-



11/1/66

August to September, compared with what we thought was a 
very large 26 per cent increase as originally reported--we 
are likely to see a surge in materials buying and work-in
process in these industries shortly. This could well show 
up in the business loan figures shortly, too. At this 
stage of the game, I'm prone to regard recent financial 
figures as useful but still somewhat tenuous and definitely 
reversible indicators of the broader economic scene.  

Let me now turn to areas where the economic readings, 
while far from certain, are somewhat less ambiguous. First, 
retail sales figures have not been strong recently, with 
preliminary numbers showing a slight decline in sales in 
September and early October. As best we can penetrate the 
murky areas of seasonally adjusting auto sales at this time 
of year, it doesn't appear that the new models have gotten 
off to a sensational start. Since the strong rebound in 
consumption expenditures in the summer months resulted in 
a sharp drop in the savings rate to well below the rate of 
recent years, it would not be implausible to expect 
consumers now to be readjusting their spending down to 
more normal relationships with income.  

Second, the situation in housing, which I need not 
belabor for this Committee, gives every sign of becoming 
a bit worse before it becomes any better. Close to $6 
billion of housing expenditures will have been cut from 
GNP between the first and fourth quarter of this year, and 
while we may be near a bottoming-out, as some analysts 
suggest, there is no evidence in the building permits 
figures or in the credit flow figures to warrant expecta
tions of any resurgence soon.  

Third, it is becoming increasingly evident that the 
expansion in business capital outlays is going to slow 
down next year. The Edie survey of a month ago pointed in 
this direction, and preliminary--and still very 
confidential--information from a partial tabulation of 
McGraw-Hill survey results confirm the likelihood of a 
slowdown. The final survey results are now expected to 

show an increase, year over year, of from 5 to 8 per cent, 
compared with the obviously unsustainable 17 per cent 
rise this year. And while the McGraw-Hill survey has 
generally understated the rise in periods of expansion, 

this year the 5 to 8 per cent forecast might be an over
statement because the survey coverage is weak in 

commercial construction, an area hard hit by monetary 

restraint. Interpolating a plausible quarterly pattern 
for this annual increase, one might conclude that the

-22-



11/1/66

pace of spending will continue to rise rapidly through 
early 1967, begin to level off by midyear, and turn down 
before year-end.  

Fourth, since midyear the prices of a number of 
sensitive or basic industrial materials have declined 
sharply and the rate of increase in other industrial 
commodities has slowed by half. The over-all index of 
industrial commodities was nearly stable from midyear 
through September, and only a moderate rise is likely to 
be recorded for October. Both the over-all wholesale 
price index and the consumer price index have benefited 
recently from the decline in food prices.  

What this all should mean for policy depends much on 
one's notion of the lag in the effects of monetary policy, 
and the efficacy of policy in restraining induced and 
lagged cost-push. It would seem likely that, for at least 
a few quarters ahead, business spending for capital equip
ment will continue to rise rapidly and their needs for 
external financing to remain strong. An easing in monetary 
policy at this point, therefore, might not be translated 
substantially into an improvement in housing activity; in 

fact, it might serve to rekindle fairly promptly spending 

plans for shopping centers, office buildings, and other 
areas of nonresidential construction which have been 

temporarily deferred because of financing shortages, as 
well as for additional plant capacity. Or easing in 

financial conditions might encourage inventory 
accumulation just when stock-sales ratios are beginning 
to mount.  

As for price trends, wage costs are rising and are 

likely to maintain and possibly boost pressures on many 
industrial prices in the months ahead. So long as an 
exuberant pace of expansion persists, employers will 

undoubtedly attempt to pass through these higher costs.  

An easing of monetary policy, without concomitant tax 

action, might encourage such cost pass-throughs.  

Of course, arguments against premature easing have 

been made at every cyclical peak, and have often left the 

System in the position of accepting the blame for the 

subsequent turndown. There is a lag in policy effects, 

and we can't be oblivious to the long-run necessity of 

anticipating cyclical swings, as well as to the short-run 

dangers of acting too soon. But with the future course of 

defense spending and the likelihood of additional fiscal 

restraint still unresolved, and with the ambiguities noted 

in the production, inventory, employment, and credit figures,

-23-



11/1/66

the evidence isn't clear enough to me to warrant 
recommending an aggressive move toward monetary ease 
now, even if even-keel considerations weren't present.  
However, there is enough evidence in the domestic 
economy, I submit, to justify shading policy in an 
easing direction.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Monetary policy must always be based mainly on 
developments in the real economy, including those in our 
relations with the rest of the world. But there is a lot 
to learn today for monetary policy from the financial 
indicators as they have been developing. It is hard for 
me to reconcile the recent striking weakening in the 
financial data with an estimated annual rate of rise of 
GNP in the third quarter of 7.5 per cent in current dollars 
and 4.5 per cent in real terms, and with our current pro
jection of substantial further expansion in the fourth 
quarter. More weakness may be developing in the real 
economy than meets the eye, and the current financial 
numbers may be leading indicators of such weakness.  

Look first at the recent course of bank credit as 
reflected in the credit proxy. Declines have occurred in 
each of the past 3 months, and a further drop is projected 
for November. Earlier, the most dynamic component of bank 
credit was business loans, but growth in bank lending to 
business slackened markedly in August and September. Growth 
in October continued to be slow, especially in view of large 
cash needs stemming from the accelerated tax payments during 
the month.  

The developing weakness in over-all bank credit is 
dramatically reflected in the persistent downward revisions 
in our weekly projections of the change in the credit proxy.  
These have been marked down in every one of the past 10 
weeks. Our first estimate for September was +4.7 per cent, 
annual rate. It finally turned out to be -0.5 per cent 
after five successive weekly reductions. Our first estimate 
of the likely October rate of expansion was +5.6 per cent.  

Our latest figure is -2.9 per cent after another five 
successive reductions. Perhaps we will be more accurate in 
our first estimate of a further annual rate of decline on 
the order of 2 per cent for November. Inclusion in these 
bank credit proxy numbers of funds obtained from branches

-24-



11/1/66

abroad would raise them, but not materially over the last 
2 months.  

Disintermediation is part of the explanation for the 
recent weakness in bank credit. Some of the credit that 
previously had been obtained from banks has more recently 
been obtained from the money and capital markets. With 
bank credit growing less, more borrowers have been forced 
to go to the market for funds. In the process, pressures 
have developed from the marked structural changes in credit 
flows that were involved. Higher interest rates forced 
some borrowers out of the market. Lack of access to credit 
pushed out others, such as home buyers and small and medium
size businesses. Moreover, the higher cost and restricted 
availability of borrowed funds forced more spending to be 
self-financed and some spending to be curtailed. Preliminary 
flow-of-funds data for the third quarter suggest a decline 
of about 20 per cent in the total amount of private credit 
financing--to $60 billion from $75 billion in the second 
quarter.  

The cessation of growth in bank credit has been 
accompanied by a similar movement in the narrowly defined 
money supply. The money supply has been declining on 
balance since spring. The rate of increase in money 
defined to include time deposits continued fairly sub
stantial through August, but has dropped off drastically 
since. A total liquid asset measure shows similar move
ments, with the tapering off of growth starting in the 
second quarter.  

How can one explain the weakness in the narrowly 
defined money supply most recently at a time when interest 
rates have been declining and incomes presumably have still 
been rising fairly rapidly? Lagged responses are no doubt 
a partial explanation. But perhaps incomes are not rising 
as fast as the preliminary figures suggest, and perhaps 
individuals and businesses, in order to maintain current 
consumption and investment levels, are having to spend a 
larger part of their current incomes as well as having to 
draw down previously accumulated cash balances.  

But interest rates have been declining since early 
September. Isn't this development an indication that 

monetary restraint is already less severe? Perhaps it is 

to some extent, but it may also be reflecting some diminution 
in the demand for credit.  

In the business loan area, for example, our September 
bank lending practices survey provides some slight evidence 
of a moderation of loan demand. So does the slowing in the

-25-



11/1/66

actual rate of business loan expansion in the last 3 
months, since it has not been accompanied by a buildup 
in either actual or prospective security flotations by 
corporations, although it has been associated with some 
rise in commercial paper financing.  

Even in the municipal field it is somewhat surprising 
that a 40 basis point decline in yields since August has 
brought to market few issues that had been postponed 
earlier. Indeed, more postponements continue to be 
announced. In a changing economic situation, the course 
of interest rates, like the level of net borrowed reserves, 
can be a poor indicator of the degree of monetary restraint 
or ease.  

This review of the recent course of the financial 
variables suggests to me that the time has come for a 
further backing off from the restraining posture of 
monetary policy. Have we really been aiming at a 
cessation of growth in both bank credit and the money 
supply? High incomes and the drawing down of previously 
accumulated liquidity may have adequately sustained spend
ing with reduced credit growth this fall, but it is 
questionable how long this situation is sustainable.  
Moreover, we do not want to be caught again maintaining 
a set of money market variables, including net borrowed 
reserves, when the combination of the existing degree of 
tightness and demand factors is leading to declines in 
more basic indicators of policy such as total reserves, 
nonborrowed reserves, bank credit, and the money supply.  

As the next step in relaxing monetary restraint, a 
drop in net borrowed reserves to a range of, say, $200 to 
$300 million as a short-run operating guide for open 
market operations might be in order. As for timing, such 
easing might proceed as soon as Treasury financing require
ments permit, and assuming market sentiment itself does 
not in the meantime precipitate too abrupt and speculative 
an easing in financial conditions. It is also probably 
not too soon to consider a more overt move toward less 
monetary restraint than can be achieved through the open 
market operations instrument.  

Mr. Hickman referred to Mr. Koch's statement that total 

private credit financing appeared to have declined substantially in 

the third quarter and asked how much of the decline occurred in the

-26-



11/1/66

flow of bank credit relative to flows through other channels. In 

particular, was there evidence of slackening in the flows of savings 

through nonbank financial intermediaries? 

Mr. Koch replied that the slackening was sharper in bank 

credit than in other flows taken together; in the third quarter 

banks accounted for less than 15 per cent of total private credit 

flows, as compared with almost 40 per cent in the second quarter.  

Flows through other intermediaries had slackened earlier, and 

remained small in the third quarter.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

Recent newspaper stories about the U.S. balance of 
payments have been rather cheerful. The news that the 
liquidity deficit was surprisingly small in the third 
quarter, and that the official settlements balance was 

in substantial surplus, has leaked out piecemeal. Hence, 
it has been written up repeatedly, and will, of course, 
be written up again when the figures are officially 
announced in mid-November.  

Other news has also tended to allay anxiety. Observers 

have been pleasantly surprised by the recent weakness of 

the French franc, and they have been grimly reassured by 

rising unemployment in Britain, although most of them 
recognize that the real test of the sterling parity still 

lies ahead.  

It is always useful to be reminded that payments 

positions can change. But on the question whether the 
U.S. payments position has recently changed for the better 

in any fundamental sense, the answer still seems pretty 
clearly to be "no." Most of the recent sense of relief 

stems from official window-dressing transactions, from 
liquid inflows that are bound to prove temporary, and 
from the fact that the situation has not worsened in 
other respects as much as was earlier feared.

-27-



11/1/66

The deficit on the liquidity basis was at an annual 
rate of less than $1 billion in the third quarter and 
about $1-1/4 billion in the first 9 months; the latter 
figure is unchanged from last year's level. If it had 
not been for debt prepayments and shifts of foreign 
official funds from liquid to nominally nonliquid assets-
shifts which I am inclined to regard as window-dressing--the 
liquidity deficit would have been at a rate close to $2 
billion in the third quarter and a little more than that 
for the 9 months. Partial data for October indicate that 
the liquidity deficit has continued in roughly the $2 
billion range.  

The official settlements balance was in very substantial 
surplus in the third quarter, and for the first 9 months 
there was also a surplus, at an annual rate of roughly $3/4 
billion. However, a main source of this surplus was the 
massive inflow of foreign liquid funds through the foreign 
branches of U.S. banks. Discussion at the last meeting of 
this Committee made clear that these funds are fairly hot 
money, likely to flow out again when interest differentials 
and confidence factors change. Even if the funds do not 

flow out again soon, they seem certain to stop flowing in 

at anything like the recent rate, and that change alone 

will suffice to throw the official settlements balance back 
into deficit.  

If the inflow of funds from banks and branches abroad 

had been of more normal proportions--say at the average 

rate of the past few years--there would have been an 

official settlements deficit at about a $1 billion annual 

rate during the first 9 months of this year, little changed 

from last year, instead of the actual surplus. In 
October, liquid inflows from foreign branches continued 

on a reduced but still fairly large scale ($200 million 

in the latest 4 weeks), and the official settlements 

balance appears to have been very roughly zero; so again, 

without abnormally large liquid inflows there would 

probably have been a deficit at a rate of $1 billion or 

more.  

As the liquid inflows slacken or reverse in the 

months ahead, the outlook is for a sizable deficit on 

official reserve transactions, and hence for renewed 

reserve losses, probably including gold drains, unless 

something else gets better.  

The something else that could get better might be 

either capital flows (other than those special flows I 

have already mentioned) or merchandise trade. It would

-28-



11/1/66

probably be a mistake to count on any improvement in 
ordinary capital transactions over the months ahead.  
It seems more likely that having brought the outflow 
of U.S. private capital down to its lowest level since 
1959, we should now brace ourselves for the possibility 
of some renewed rise in outflows.  

The expansion plans of major U.S. corporations for 
next year seem likely to require an increased outflow 
of direct investment capital, as well as continued 
borrowing abroad. Government programs will seek to 
limit that increase, but they probably cannot entirely 
prevent it.  

U.S. commercial banks are not likely to go on 
reducing their foreign loans indefinitely. Even during 
the recent period of extremely tight credit, the reduc
tions have not been very large. Of the unadjusted 
reduction of $550 million in bank-reported claims on 

foreigners during the first 9 months of this year, more 
than half was seasonal, leaving the adjusted reflow at 

about $250 million.  

If I am correct in believing that the outlook for 
ordinary capital flows is for no further improvement, and 

perhaps for some deterioration, even if domestic monetary 

conditions stay pretty tight, then improvement in the 

over-all payments situation will require improvement in 

the merchandise trade account. So far, the trade account 

has continued to deteriorate. There was an encouraging 

4 per cent increase in exports from the second quarter 

to the third. But merchandise imports jumped even more 

sharply, by nearly 7 per cent. Hence the trade surplus 

shrank further, to an annual rate of less than $3 billion.  

For the first 9 months, the rate of trade surplus now 

stands at $3.6 billion, compared with last year's $4.8 
billion.  

Even if exports go on rising briskly over the next 

year, as Government analysts expect, a very marked slowing 

down in imports will be needed to achieve significant 

improvement in the trade balance. It seems reasonable to 

expect a slowdown whenever domestic demand pressures abate.  
But it is very difficult to judge what the precise relation

ship between domestic demand and imports will be at that 

time. The last time there was an import boom at all 

comparable to the present one was in 1950-51, and world 

conditions have changed so much since then that the parallel 

is not a close one.

-29-



11/1/66

It seems to me that the still unsatisfactory state 
of the balance of payments, and the present lack of 
evidence of any durable improvement, point towards a 
cautious approach to any easing of monetary restraint at 
this time. I think it would be unfortunate if we should 
experience a significant increase in net capital outflows 
before we can point to any improvement on the trade side.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of 

comments and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, 

beginning with Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

The expansion of total demand in the economy is now 
less hectic than it was in the spring of 1966, but it 
still appears to be proceeding at a rate in excess of the 
economy's capacity. Defense expenditures are now the main 
force behind the economic upswing, and the uncertainties 
inherent in the Vietnam situation quite naturally becloud 
the economic outlook. However, it looks as if defense 
expenditures would continue to increase substantially 
over the next year, though perhaps at a less feverish 
pace than in the third quarter. Along with the speedup 
of defense outlays, the soft spots in the civilian economy 
have undoubtedly become more pronounced and new signs of a 
possible easing of demand pressures have appeared, including 
some evidence that inventory accumulation has reached a 
point where some inventories are beginning to look excessive.  
In my judgment, however, it would be a mistake to equate the 
prospect of a modest slowing in the business expansion with 
a likelihood of actual business recession in the foreseeable 
future.  

The stability of wholesale prices since July is a 
reflection of the moderation of the growth of demand, 
together with the rapid expansion of industrial capacity.  
On the other hand, this year's advance in consumer prices 
is quite disturbing, especially because of the effects on 
future wage negotiations. With a rate of 5 per cent 
apparently having been established as a pattern for wage 
increases in coming negotiations, and with cost-of-living 

escalator clauses becoming more common, we face a major 
threat of a cost-price spiral, with all that that implies 
both domestically and internationally.

-30-



11/1/66

The basic balance of payments position remains 
precarious. While the liquidity deficit this year may be 
close to the $1.3 billion of 1965, special transactions of 
various sorts are again of great importance in holding down 
the total. The official settlements deficit will doubtless 
be much smaller, but only because extremely tight credit 
conditions in this country since mid-year have caused such 
a rapid increase in foreign private dollar holdings, 
especially balances acquired by American banks from their 
foreign branches. Whatever recovery in the current account 
might be expected from a slackening in the hectic pace of 
imports may be nullified if our competitive position is 

sufficiently damaged by the expected cost-price pressures; 
and we are clearly vulnerable on capital account. Easier 

domestic credit conditions could well bring a reversal of 
holdings of private dollar balances; and in any event we 
probably cannot continue to look to this area as a major 

means of financing our deficit. Under the circumstances, 
I believe that a concerted effort should be under way to 

attack the balance of payments deficit next year from a 

number of angles. The emphasis should probably be on 

direct investments and Government expenditures, but the 

banks should be expected to continue to play their part, 
and some modest reduction in their ceilings might be 

incorporated, if an effective over-all payments program 
can be worked out.  

There is no doubt that significant monetary restraint 

is now being felt in all financial markets, despite the 

great improvement in atmosphere since the nearly panicky 

conditions of late August. It is gratifying to note that 
total bank credit increased over the first nine months of 

1966 at a rate of only 6.5 per cent, thanks to a sharp 

slowdown to about 3 per cent in the third quarter. Also, 

the growth rate of business loans has declined recently 

and the New York banks have noted a definite easing off 

in business loan requests. They are uncertain, however, 

to what extent loan demand is really declining and to 

what extent the banks' negative attitude is discouraging 

business borrowers from making as frequent loan requests 

as in the recent past. I think it is too early to say 

that the banks have definitely brought business loans 

under close control; but it is unequivocally clear that 

business loans have shared importantly in the last few 
months' reduction in the rate of loan extensions. After 

many weeks of severe run-offs in CD's at the New York 

banks (over half of the total national run-off), the pace

-31-



11/1/66

slowed materially last week. The CD has recently been 
a competitive market instrument only in relatively short 
maturities, but there are signs that this competitive 
maturity range is widening. It is encouraging to note 
that savings institutions generally reported a rather 
substantial inflow of funds in August and September, 
and October indications are encouraging.  

No doubt some of the slackening in bank credit growth 
is being replaced by other credit flows. However, very 
rough estimates indicate that the growth rate of total 
credit outstanding may also have declined in the third 
quarter, although by less than the bank credit growth 
rate. A slower rate of expansion is also being registered 
by all the major indicators of liquidity of the nonbank 
public.  

Since we are in the midst of a Treasury financing, 
even-keel considerations preclude a change of credit policy 
at this time. In any case, I agree with the Chairman's 
comment at the last meeting that monetary policy has done 
about all it can be expected to do for the present. In 
view of the much slower expansion recently of most monetary 
variables, I would hope that the less strained tone in the 
money market might be preserved and that doubts might be 
resolved on the side of ease rather than tightness. At 
the same time it would seem premature to ease sharply, 
in view of the continuing possibility of a resurgence of 
credit demands. In trying to maintain money market 
conditions about where they are, the Manager will need 
ample leeway to exercise his judgment, but he may find 
the Federal funds rate and CD developments the most useful 
guides to market tone. If I had to pick a range for net 
borrowed reserves, I would like to see it centered around 

$400 million. I might add that, in my judgment, there is 

still a very real need for a tax increase to offset the 
continuing inflationary stimulus provided by rising defense 

outlays.  
Obviously it would be inappropriate to change the 

discount rate under present conditions. Moreover, in view 
of the cumulative evidence of a substantially slower growth 
of both total bank credit and business loans, I should think 
the System would do well to soft-pedal our earlier emphasis 
on the need for curtailing the expansion of business lending.  

As for the directive, I would agree with the staff that 
it should be revised materially. While I recognize all the 
problems involved in rewriting the directive around the table,

-32-



11/1/66

I feel a slightly different version would be more 
satisfactory.1/ First, the first sentence of the first 
paragraph ought to recognize the importance of rising 
defense expenditures in over-all economic activity.  
The sentence might then read ". . .over-all domestic 
economic activity is continuing to expand, with rising 
defense expenditures offsetting moderating tendencies 
in some sectors of the private economy." Second, I 
think we ought to have a simple and general sentence 
on the balance of payments, such as "The balance of 
payments remains a serious problem." Third, in order 
to have some reference to the possibility of furthur 
fiscal policy changes I would prefer the phrase on 
fiscal policy to say "in the light of recent and 
possible future fiscal policy measures." Finally, it 
seems to me that the proviso clause should not be 
related to current expectations in view of the staff 
estimates of further declines of bank credit in 
November. In my view, System policy has been aiming 
on balance for a moderate growth of bank credit and 

should continue to do so. I myself would think a bank 
credit growth rate of 4 to 6 per cent might be appro

priate, and I would not be particularly disturbed if 

the growth rate was temporarily a bit higher, especially 
in view of the declines over the last three months.  

With this in mind, I would suggest that the proviso 

clause read "provided, however, that operations shall be 

modified--in so far as the Treasury financing permits--in 

the light of bank credit developments during the month." 

The intent of this rather general statement would be amply 

spelled out in the record of this meeting.  

Mr. Ellis commented that because expectations affect at

titudes, which in turn affect events, perhaps it was as important 

to report shifting expectations as it was to report changes in 

performance. For example, the 90 manufacturers covered in the 

Boston Reserve Bank's quarterly sales survey reported that 

1/ The complete text of the directive proposed by Mr. Hayes is 

appended to these minutes as Attachment B.

-33-



11/1/66 -34

third-quarter sales exceeded previous-quarter levels by 3.7 per 

cent when the rise expected had been only 0.9 per cent. They 

currently anticipated a 5.6 per cent decline for the fourth 

quarter, a type of projection he had learned to discount substan

tially. It had to be reckoned with, however, in appraising their 

capital expenditure forecasts for 1967 which now--in final 

tabulation--called for a year-to-year expansion of only 3.5 per 

cent. The year-ago survey called for an 18 per cent expansion, 

which had now been converted into a 33 per cent actual gain.  

Expectations were in flux also with respect to interest 

rates on savings in Massachusetts, Mr. Ellis said. During 

September, only three of the 80 regularly reporting mutual savings 

banks were paying as high as 5 per cent on special notice accounts.  

During October, three Boston commercial banks lowered to $1,000 

the minimum account balance on which they would pay 5 per cent, 

and they were heavily advertising the change in the Boston press.  

October data on savings flows through the mutuals were too frag

mentary to be conclusive, but there had been some official note 

taken of the fact that only eight of the 179 Massachusetts mutual 

savings banks were members of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 

and subject to its rate ceilings. The other 171, with almost 80 

per cent of the deposits, looked to the Massachusetts Banking 

Commissioner for rate guidance. There was some concern that he



11/1/66 -35

(the Commissioner) might grant a ceiling of 5-1/4 per cent to 

allow the State-controlled mutuals to be competitive with the 

savings and loan associations' ceiling, set by the Federal Home 

Loan Bank Board, of 5-1/4 per cent on special certificates. Of 

course, the FDIC member mutuals hoped such action could be 

forestalled.  

Meanwhile, Mr. Ellis continued, the housewives' protests 

against high food costs had a possible parallel in complaints 

about high mortgage rates. The Massachusetts Consumers Council, 

an official government board appointed by the Governor, had been 

importuned to investigate high interest rates.  

Mr. Ellis noted that one District bank had received front 

page news attention last Wednesday when it announced a proposed 

CD rate of 5.25 per cent on 3-9 month deposits. As nearly as he 

could establish, their easy position evaporated quickly. It was 

necessary for them to borrow from the Reserve Bank on the same 

day and again over the last weekend. Apparently the market was 

not ready to back off from its 5-1/2 per cent rate on 90-day 

deposits.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that short-run, even-keel considerations 

set the framework of monetary policy for the next three weeks. The 

decline in rates and easier market conditions of the past two weeks



11/1/66 -36

had about optimised circumstances for the Treasury in its current 

financing.  

Some sense of relief accompanied his recognition of the 

need for a period of even keel, Mr. Ellis observed. Three months 

of no growth in total bank credit and the money supply required 

some appraisal as to cause. As usual, causes seemed to be 

multiple--tightened monetary policy and lessened bank liquidity 

had to be named. But increasingly he had come to sense that 

some lessened intensity of demand for credit was a cause also.  

Were it not for the pervasive effect of accelerating defense 

spending, the economic outlook would be substantially altered.  

But Vietnam was a fact that had to be reckoned with--and that 

reckoning might become more widely comprehended after the 

elections on November 8. Mr. Holmes had described the inter

pretations placed on recent financial developments by two groups 

of observers, which might be labeled the "pause" and the "turn 

down" groups, and he (Mr. Ellis) would place himself in the pause 

group. He expected bank credit to be stronger in November than 

the staff projection indicated. If no fiscal action on taxes 

was forthcoming until some time in 1967, the evidence of impend

ing recession should be quite overwhelming before the Committee 

retreated from the restraint it had been able to achieve via 

monetary policy.



11/1/66

Meanwhile, Mr. Ellis continued, the Committee again faced 

the responsibility of defining a policy of "no change" meaningfully 

for the Manager. Not the least of the difficulties was the burden 

the Committee placed on the staff by not specifying its goals so 

that their projections might at least be premised on stated goals 

of policy. He reminded the Committee that four weeks ago the 

staff projections were based on a "no change" policy involving 

net borrowed reserves of $450 million. Today the staff had 

presented the Committee with projections based on net borrowed 

reserves of $416 million, the average of the past four weeks.  

If pressures continued to lessen, four months hence the Committee 

might find itself with net borrowed reserve levels of $100 million, 

which it continued to ratify as a "no change" policy. The thrust 

of his criticism, he emphasized, was toward procedure, and not 

toward the objective of adopting a no-change position.  

Mr. Ellis thought the staff had done the Committee a real 

service in attaching notes to the suggested directive to explain 

its proposed changes in language. The first paragraph of the 

draft directive represented a substantial achievement. With 

regard to the second paragraph, however, the exclusion of the 

word "firm" from the description of the money market conditions 

to be sought, and the introduction of the term "generally steady," 

was likely to appear in retrospect as a definite turning point in

-37-



11/1/66 -38

the direction of monetary policy. He was inclined to fault the 

staff for not providing alternative wordings of the second par

agraph that reflected the kind of clear-cut choice of policies 

reflected in the remarks of Messrs. Brill and Koch this morning; 

and for simply suggesting, instead, that as an easing alternative 

the Committee might interpret the "generally steady conditions" 

mentioned in the draft as being the somewhat easier conditions 

of the last two weeks. The proviso clause, of course, had been 

devised as an escape hatch against an undesired degree of firming, 

and if the Committee gave up the concept of firm money market 

conditions he did not see any further need for the clause. He 

would be reluctant to see the proviso clause dropped--that might 

be a step on the road carrying the Committee back to the kind of 

"clause b" instruction used before December 1961--but nevertheless 

he would suggest its deletion at this time in the hope that the 

staff would bring forward more meaningful language at the next 

meeting. Basically, he was inclined to agree with Mr. Brill's 

conclusions. He favored no change in policy and opposed the 

deletion of the concept of firm money market conditions from the 

language of the directive.  

Mr. Irons reported that most of the recent economic changes 

in the Eleventh District had been consistent with what might have 

been expected on seasonal grounds. That was the case for employment



11/1/66 -39

and industrial production, although the latter was down slightly 

more than seasonally at the moment. Construction contract awards 

continued their previous pattern of easing, and there were signs 

of dampening in retail sales. Agricultural conditions could be 

described as generally good, although there were some spotty 

situations. In particular, there was considerable uncertainty 

regarding probable developments for cotton, largely because of 

sharp cut-backs in the Government support program. But in terms 

of general farm prices and farm cash receipts the picture was 

favorable.  

There were no highly significant changes in the District 

financial situation, Mr. Irons said. Bank loans were off during 

the latest period. Investments were up, largely as a result of 

operations in Treasury bills, and deposits were down. Borrowings 

from the Reserve Bank did not appear to be following a normal 

pattern; fewer of the smaller country banks were borrowing, and 

in smaller amounts, relative to the customary situation at the 

discount window. Net purchases of Federal funds had been rather 

substantial during the period and a sizable number of banks were 

in and out of the funds market on a regular basis.  

Mr. Irons' interpretation of the national situation was 

much like the analyses that had been presented this morning. The 

economy was on a very high plateau with some evidence of stability



11/1/66 -40

in sight, and with strength showing in some sectors and dampening 

tendencies in others. The large underlying questions related to 

the probable course of defense expenditures for Vietnam and the 

possibility of further fiscal policy action. Money market condi

tions had been easier in the past several weeks, with most of the 

major variables actually showing declines. In part that probably 

reflected past monetary policy, but it also reflected market 

reactions to a number of other factors, including the possibility 

of further fiscal action, guesses as to future monetary policy, 

the possibility of a real slowdown in economic activity, and a 

dampening in underlying credit demands. In his opinion, the 

Committee had been meeting with some success in achieving the 

restraint it had sought on expansive pressures in the economy, 

but it remained to be seen how lasting that might be.  

As to policy, Mr. Irons started with the presumption that 

whatever decisions the Committee reached today they would be in 

the framework of even keel, and that the Manager would be given 

considerable leeway to be guided by the feel of the market.  

Current economic trends and money market conditions seemed to 

call for continuing the degree of restraint that had characterized 

policy for the last few weeks. He would not be in favor of any 

action that could be termed aggressive, either toward tightening 

or toward easing. He would try to maintain generally steady



11/1/66 -41

conditions and a reasonably balanced set of market relationships.  

While he did not particularly like to use numbers, he agreed 

with Mr. Hayes that net borrowed reserves should be in the $400 

million area. The bill rate might be somewhere in the 5.20 - 5.40 

per cent range, and the Federal funds rate around 5-1/2 per cent.  

He mentioned those numbers only to indicate the broad range of 

conditions he favored; the Committee could specify its objectives 

simply as maintaining the degree of restraint existing in the last 

three or four weeks and trying to encourage a general tone of 

steadiness in money market conditions. He preferred the way the 

market had performed in recent weeks relative to the preceding 

weeks, and would like to maintain about the same set of market 

relationships. He would not favor a change in the discount rate 

at this time.  

Mr. Irons thought the notes attached to the draft direc

tive submitted for this meeting were useful; the explanations of 

the staff's thinking in preparing the draft were of value to the 

Committee in its own deliberations. As to the directive itself, 

he had questioned the value of the proviso clause all along--and 

he continued to have doubts about it, although he did not feel 

strongly on the matter. If the proviso was to be retained, 

however, he would prefer Mr. Hayes' wording to that of the staff 

draft, which referred to "current expectations" for bank credit.



11/1/66 -42

He was not certain what expectations were intended, but if they 

were the staff projections for the bank credit proxy reported in 

the blue book, he did not think the reference should be in the 

directive.  

Mr. Swan observed that the employment situation in the 

Pacific Coast States improved somewhat in September. Nonagricul

tural employment rose in all major groups except mining, and the 

net advance more than offset a decline in agriculture. The 

unemployment rate dropped 0.2 per cent after rising in each of 

the five preceding months; in September the rate was 4.8 per cent, 

compared with the April low of 4.4 per cent. Lumber and plywood 

prices edged down in September and October, with the sharpest 

reductions occurring in materials for residential construction.  

In the four weeks ending October 19, total credit outstanding at 

weekly reporting banks declined, with a reduction in business 

loans of about the same magnitude as in the comparable period of 

1965. There continued to be very little pressure at the discount 

window of the San Francisco Reserve Bank.  

As to the national picture, Mr. Swan said, he would agree 

with the descriptions given today of recent developments. Of 

course, the tapering off of growth rates in many areas was neither 

surprising nor unwelcome, but the Committee had to recognize that 

there was less pressure now not only in financial markets but



11/1/66

throughout the economy. He, too, would not favor overt action 

to ease at this point. He would relate the even keel to be 

maintained during the Treasury financing to the conditions of 

the last two or three weeks, rather than to the average condi

tions in the four weeks since the preceding meeting. It seemed 

to him that the easing, if one wanted to use that term, that 

had occurred in money markets was quite consistent with the 

proviso clause regarding bank credit developments contained 

in the last directive. He saw no reason to be concerned about 

that easing, and none for starting off from some position dif

ferent from the more recent one in defining even keel.  

Mr. Swan said he had found the explanatory notes attached 

to the directive to be extremely helpful. The preparation of 

such notes undoubtedly would lead to more extended comments about 

the directive at meetings, but on the whole that probably would 

be to the good.  

With respect to the draft directive itself, it seemed to 

Mr. Swan that the statement in the first sentence that "economic 

activity is still expanding despite evidences of slackening in 

some sectors of the private economy" would be read as implying 

not a slower over-all growth rate but actual deterioration, and 

he did not think that was what the Committee would intend.  

Mr. Hayes' proposed reference to "moderating tendencies in some

-43-



11/1/66 -44

sectors of the private economy" would help meet the problem, but 

it might be best to say that ". . . domestic economic activity 

is still expanding, although growth rates are slackening in 

some sectors of the private economy and there has been substan

tial weakening in residential construction activity." Secondly, 

while he agreed that there should be some reference to the recent 

fiscal policy measures, he did not believe that it should be 

included in the sentence describing the Committee's general 

policy; the statement of the latter was appropriate apart from 

fiscal policy actions. He would include the reference with other 

statements of fact in the third sentence, which would then read, 

"Bank credit expansion has slackened, earlier strains in financial 

markets have abated, and certain fiscal policy measures have 

recently been enacted by the Congress." 

With respect to the second paragraph, Mr. Swan said, he 

also had a question about the use of the term "generally steady" 

in describing the desired money market conditions, although he 

was not as concerned as Mr. Ellis was about the proposed deletion 

of the word "firm." He would prefer calling for operations to be 

conducted with a view to "maintaining about the same conditions 

in the money market as have developed in the past two weeks." 

That would make clear that the Committee did not intend to relate 

even keel to the four-week averages; to him it would imply net



11/1/66 -45

borrowed reserve figures in the $350-$400 million range, or 

perhaps $300-$400 million, and a level of borrowings and Federal 

funds rate as in the more recent weeks. As to the proviso clause, 

he agreed with those who objected to the phrase, "any apparently 

significant deviations of bank credit from current expectations," 

because--as Mr. Hayes had pointed out--current expectations were 

for a decline, and the Committee certainly would not want to 

encourage a decline at this point. Mr. Hayes' suggestion, to 

call for modification of operations "in the light of bank credit 

developments during the month" would be satisfactory if the 

Committee's specific intentions were clearly understood; but it 

might be best to state those intentions directly. Accordingly, 

he would suggest saying that "operations shall be modified, 

insofar as Treasury financing permits, if it appears necessary 

to encourage no more than a moderate increase in bank credit." 

Mr. Galusha observed that the economic situation in the 

Ninth District appeared to be approximately what it was at the 

beginning of October and so required no extensive summarizing.  

For what it was worth, however, he would point out that District 

reserve city bankers had cautioned against interpreting their 

recent contra-seasonal decline in loans as indicating a marked 

change in loan demand. Not surprisingly, perhaps, they saw 

that decline as having been produced by an increasing shortage



11/1/66 -46

of reserves and, even more, by an essentially fortuitous bunching 

of loan repayments by borrowers with nation-wide banking connec

tions.  

Mr. Galusha reported that the Minneapolis Reserve Bank's 

discount lending had lately been almost exclusively to country 

banks, and for the traditional reasons. A few weeks ago one 

reserve city bank had borrowed for several days to finance an 

unexpectedly large corporate CD run-off, but even that bank made 

it quite clear that it would do everything possible to get along 

without continuing Reserve Bank help. In that connection, recent 

experience indicated that both keeping the ceiling on CD rates 

unchanged and the Reserve Banks' September 1 letter to member 

banks had had very decided effects on bank lending; and, happily, 

the Reserve Bank had not had to get involved in member bank 

decision-making. But when he thought about what had been happening, 

he had to confess that his feet got a little chilly, if not actually 

cold. While the members of the business establishment of the 

Ninth District with whom he had visited in the last three weeks 

had expressed views as diverse as those expressed by the staff 

today, there were significantly more on the pessimistic side than 

was the case 60 days ago, although still a distinct minority.  

Mr. Galusha noted that the forthcoming Treasury refinancing 

precluded a change in open market policy now. But he thought the



11/1/66 -47

Committee perhaps would be well-advised, in defining "even keel," 

to look only at the numbers of the past week or two and not bother 

about the slightly tighter money market conditions prevailing 

earlier in October, and to maintain from now until the Committee's 

next meeting the money market conditions of the very recent past.  

That was what he would favor.  

Mr. Galusha said he did not propose to be drawn into the 

controversy regarding the language of the directive but, given a 

choice between the wording of the staff draft and that proposed 

by Mr. Hayes, he would prefer the latter. He assumed that the 

phrase "generally steady conditions in the money market" would 

be interpreted to refer to the conditions of the last week, or 

possibly the last two weeks, and not to the average conditions 

since the preceding meeting.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that there was scattered evidence 

that pressures upon productive resources of the Seventh Federal 

Reserve District had relaxed somewhat. Fewer complaints were 

heard concerning shortages of materials and components. The 

rate of steel output had declined since mid-September, and prob

ably would be reduced further. Residential permits had fallen 

sharply. New orders for some types of machinery and equipment 

had leveled off at a high rate in the past several months, and 

orders for construction equipment had declined. Orders for



11/1/66 -48

furniture and household appliances had eased. Some general 

merchandisers had been disappointed by the rate of consumer 

purchases, and forecasters expected auto sales to continue below 

year-ago levels. Most economic forecasts now being prepared for 

managements of businesses and banks in the District visualized 

a slower rate of growth in both real and dollar terms in the 

period ahead.  

Despite those developments, Mr. Scanlon commented, no 

easing in tight labor markets had yet been noted in District 

centers. Shortages of skilled workers and "trainable" unskilled 

workers persisted. Some firms complained of reduced profit 

margins resulting from poorer quality labor, higher turnover, 

and increased absenteeism. A larger share of motor vehicles 

and business equipment reached the finish line requiring addi

tional work to correct imperfections--so-called "cripples." 

Most manufacturers of machinery and equipment, including 

railroad equipment and heavy trucks, continued to operate at 

practical capacity, Mr. Scanlon said. Producers of farm machinery 

were particularly optimistic, and had maintained production in 

months of normal seasonal let-down to assure adequate supplies 

to meet anticipated heavy demand. Farm machinery was expected to 

remain strong because of increased acreage allotments, higher 

price supports, larger farm income, and Government plans to



11/1/66 -49

encourage food exports. Many firms continued to report capital 

expenditure programs behind schedule because of shortages of 

manpower and delays in construction or in delivery of equipment.  

Reserve Bank inquiries revealed no instances of major firms 

reducing programs already in the planning stage for 1967.  

Mr. Scanlon believed that construction of single-family 

homes and smaller apartments would respond fairly promptly to 

increased availability of credit and labor, Vacancy rates were 

low in most Seventh District centers.  

Bank reports still indicated a basically strong demand 

for credit by business firms, Mr. Scanlon continued. Some bankers 

had suggested recently that business borrowing was likely to 

increase more than seasonally before the end of the year. While 

the timing of the expansion in business loans since mid-year had 

deviated somewhat from the expected pattern, the relative increase 

was only slightly less than the very strong rise in the same 

period a year ago. A relatively large proportion of the expansion 

in recent months was attributable to borrowing by manufacturers 

of durables; increases in loans to trade concerns had been well 

below the usual seasonal amount. Other types of bank lending 

had slowed and, after adjustment for Treasury financing, bank 

investments had dropped sharply--apparently reflecting reduced 

availability of funds, not reduced demand for credit.



11/1/66 -50

After reporting a very large basic deficit in mid-October, 

Mr. Scanlon said, the major Chicago banks ended the month in a 

somewhat improved position, having eliminated their borrowing at 

the discount window. They had continued to lose funds through 

CD run-offs, and gains through issuance of smaller certificates 

appeared to have ceased. The number of country banks accommodated 

at the discount window had declined since August, but some bor

rowers had appeared for the first time in many years.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that it now appeared that bank 

reserves, member bank credit, and money supply all declined in 

October, continuing a downward drift. That reflected, in part, 

at least, the reduced ability of banks to compete effectively for 

time deposits. It was likely that the growth of total credit had 

slowed also. While the easing of interest rates probably was, 

in large part, a reaction to the sharp run-up of rates in August, 

it could be reflecting also the fragmentary evidence of some 

easing of pressures on capacity in some sectors of the private 

economy. However, consumer prices probably would continue to 

rise at their recent rapid rate, at least through the year-end.  

Mr. Scanlon observed that the Treasury financing dictated 

an even keel posture in the period immediately ahead. He found 

the directive language suggested by Mr. Hayes acceptable, but 

he shared Mr. Swan's views on the clause concerning fiscal policy



11/1/66 -51

measures. With regard to the second paragraph, he believed the 

Committee should undertake to achieve moderate growth of total 

reserves.  

Mr. Clay remarked that the most striking changes that 

had taken place in the economy in recent weeks had been in the 

financial variables. While there had been declines in interest 

rates in most credit markets, perhaps the most notable changes 

had been in the commercial banking system, including bank credit, 

bank loans, and the money supply. Understandably, that raised 

questions as to the meaning of those developments for the course 

of the economy and as to the appropriate monetary policy.  

The over-all level of economic activity continued to 

advance at a rapid pace, Mr. Clay noted, although there were 

important cross-currents in the economy. While pressure on 

resources and capacity continued in the defense and business 

equipment sectors and their related industries, personal consump

tion was somewhat more relaxed and residential construction was 

declining. Aggregate labor requirements were strong enough to 

place pressure generally on labor markets and, despite variability, 

over-all price advances remained a matter of appropriate concern.  

The future pattern of economic activity was by no means 

clear, Mr. Clay remarked. In addition to the need to observe 

closely all future economic developments, particular attention



11/1/66 -52

centered on future defense expenditures and business capital 

outlays. Both the McGraw-Hill report in early November and the 

Commerce-SEC report in early December should help clarify the 

business capital outlays picture, and it was hoped that further 

indications of future defense expenditures would become available 

during that period.  

In view of the current economic and financial situation, 

Mr. Clay continued, it was obvious that further monetary restraint 

should be avoided. Whether to reduce monetary restraint, and if 

so, to what degree, was a more difficult question. The general 

state of the economy and the resource-price situation probably did 

not call for an overt move toward easing of monetary policy, 

although such developments warranted careful watching. At the same 

time, bank credit developments of recent weeks did not appear to 

be in keeping with an appropriate prescription for the economy.  

It would seem desirable for bank credit to experience some expansion.  

Perhaps the preferable course for monetary policy, under the 

circumstances, would be an extension of the program carried out 

since the last meeting of the Committee, whereby net reserve 

availability would be adjusted in accordance with bank credit 

developments. Thus, if bank credit showed further weakness, net 

reserve availability would be increased. The forthcoming Treasury 

financing operations and the need to maintain "even keel" conditions



11/1/66 -53

also would seem to argue for the avoidance of an overt change in 

monetary policy.  

The draft economic policy directive was satisfactory to 

Mr. Clay if it was understood that the proviso clause referred to 

a somewhat stronger bank credit performance in November than that 

projected in the blue book. That interpretation was in accordance 

with the last paragraph of the staff notes accompanying the policy 

directive draft.  

Mr. Wayne said that the mixed air of pessimism evident in 

recent Fifth District surveys appeared to have eased slightly, 

although textile and durable goods manufacturers continued to 

report weakness. One textileman indicated a substantial cutback 

in machine use and work force while a number of others reported 

reductions from a six- to a five-day week in the face of declining 

orders and backlogs. Other nondurable goods manufacturers, however, 

noted increased orders, employment, and prices. Insured unemploy

ment rates had declined further and were now at record lows in all 

but one Fifth District State. Retailers had expressed some concern 

about the availability of help for the Christmas rush.  

The latest data on the national economy seemed to Mr. Wayne 

to accentuate what he took to be a growing feeling of uncertainty 

in the business community. The leading indicators had been growing 

more bearish for some time and the new business intelligence of the



11/1/66 -54

past six weeks lent some support to that trend. To date, the large 

surge in private credit demands generally expected some weeks ago 

had not materialized. Defense spending now seemed to have assumed 

added importance as a mainstay of the business advance. The 

private sector appeared to be either experiencing or about to 

experience some kind of readjustment to a change in the composition 

of aggregate demand in favor of Government spending. That might 

account for the rather sluggish behavior of the business measures in 

the latest period. In any event, with defense outlays continuing to 

rise, and with higher labor costs a possibility because of larger 

wage increases, it was premature to interpret the latest data as 

suggesting the imminence of a turnaround, even though inflationary 

pressures had moderated somewhat for the present.  

Mr. Wayne commented that in the policy area the Committee 

seemed to be getting the kinds of results it had been saying were 

necessary. It might be that the squeeze on CD's had reduced the 

aggressive bidding for short-term funds, or that the demand for 

loans had not been as strong as expected. Perhaps, also, as 

Mr. Galusha had suggested, the banks were putting real effort into 

the rationing of credit. But, judged by results produced, the 

present mix of tools and techniques appeared to be effective. In any 

event, it seemed to him that the Committee's present posture was 

about right for existing circumstances and in view of the present



11/1/66 -55

operations of the Treasury. Mr. Brill's caution lest the Committee 

over-stay its posture of restraint was appropriate and timely.  

However, until sufficient reason for a change was evident, the 

Committee should be especially careful not to give any false signals 

which might occasion a disturbing turnaround of expectation patterns.  

Mr. Wayne said that Mr. Holmes' review this morning was 

especially lucid and helpful. His comments concerning the growing 

usefulness of the credit proxy and required reserves as guides to 

the Manager were encouraging and should stimulate the Committee's 

continuing search for more satisfactory measures of policy action.  

Mr. Wayne would concur in Mr. Holmes' suggested interpretation of 

the proviso clause of the draft directive. With that understanding, 

he (Mr. Wayne) would approve the first paragraph of the draft 

directive submitted by the staff. The changes Mr. Hayes had proposed 

in the second paragraph had merit, and Mr. Hayes' version of that 

paragraph appeared preferable.  

Mr. Wayne concluded by saying that he preferred to give the 

Manager a high degree of discretion, and that was reflected in the 

proviso clause. The discussion this morning emphasized the difficulty 

of writing a directive by the Committee as a whole. The staff had 

done a good job in its work on the directive, and their explanatory 

comments were helpful and should be continued.



11/1/66

Mr. Shepardson said that the description of the economic 

situation in the staff comments certainly put the problem before 

the Committee into focus. Evidence had been presented of apparent 

easing in some sectors and of downturns in some economic indicators.  

The rise in defense expenditures and the uncertainties about the 

course of developments in Vietnam also had been stressed. One point, 

however, that he thought had been given insufficient attention was 

that some clarification of the Vietnam situation might reasonably 

be expected following the President's return from his Asian trip 

and the elections next week. Accordingly, the Committee might have 

a much better idea at its next meeting of likely developments in the 

uncertain, but highly significant, area of defense spending. Both 

for that reason and because of the need for an even keel in the 

face of the Treasury financing, it seemed unwise to him to consider 

any policy change at this time. The Committee should not give any 

potentially misleading signals of easing now, particularly because 

of the uncertainties regarding Vietnam and the expectation of some 

further clarification soon. On the other hand, this certainly was 

not a time for tightening. He would maintain the recent situation 

in the money market--and by that he meant the average conditions 

over the whole period since the preceding meeting, not those that 

had developed in the last week or so.

-56-



11/1/66 -57

Mr. Shepardson said he could accept the staff's draft 

directive, but he thought the changes suggested by Mr. Hayes in the 

first paragraph were desirable. In the second paragraph he definitely 

would call for "firm but orderly" rather than "generally steady" 

market conditions. He also would eliminate the proviso clause, which 

had been introduced some months ago at a time when there was a great 

deal more uncertainty in the market than existed now.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that as he listened to the discussion 

today he became more troubled than he usually was about the role of 

monetary policy. It seemed to him that three different issues had 

been run together in the discussion thus far: what monetary policy 

could do; what monetary policy had already done, including the 

effects to come that were now in the pipeline; and what it could not 

do.  

The most basic single thing that had been accomplished, 

Mr. Mitchell continued, was to immobilize holders of existing assets 

and outstanding debt. That was most evident in the case of home

owners, but it also was evident in the case of holders of other types 

of assets--particularly municipal securities, which now could be 

liquidated only at large losses. In his judgment that had been the 

great contribution of monetary policy over the past few months, and 

it had done much to bring about the improved climate existing today.



11/1/66 -58

The Committee's second major accomplishment, Mr. Mitchell said, 

was to postpone a fair amount of actual spending, again most 

conspicuously in the area of construction. In addition, the Committee 

had chilled all efforts to secure commitments of funds for the future; 

the position of all financial intermediaries had changed drastically.  

And the stock market decline this year, which reflected the classical 

Keynesian reaction to tighter monetary policy, had had a salutory effect 

on expectations even with the recent recovery. As everyone knew, 

monetary policy had lagged effects, and there were more consequences 

to come from earlier actions.  

As to what monetary policy could or should not do, Mr. Mitchell 

continued, he did not think it could roll back wages. It could produce 

a climate in which business resistance to wage increases would reduce 

the pace of the advance, but the rise in wages that had already taken 

place was water over the dam and he did not think the Committee should 

attempt to do anything about it.  

Also, Mr. Mitchell said, the Committee should not overstay its 

policy of tightness. As he had mentioned earlier, asset holders had 

been immobilized by the rapid change in interest rates; but the new 

position was not one which the Committee should permit to become 

hardened. He did not think the new level of rates was compatible with 

continued expansion of the economy, and in his judgment the Committee 

should start pulling away from that rate level as soon as it felt it



11/1/66 -59

had accomplished its objectives. It was important to remember that 

monetary policy was a flexible tool, and that if a policy of restraint 

was maintained too long it would do more harm than good.  

On the whole, Mr. Mitchell observed, he did not think he 

differed substantially from those who had already spoken with respect 

to the appropriate policy course now. He did disagree, however, with 

much of the reasoning that had been advanced in support of that course.  

Turning to the directive, Mr. Mitchell said he would contribute 

only two points to the discussion of the first paragraph. Mr. Swan 

had criticized the opening sentence of the staff's draft as mistakenly 

implying declines elsewhere than in construction. But such an implica

tion would be consistent with the facts. Secondly, he would not refer 

to "possible future fiscal policy measures" as Mr. Hayes proposed, on 

the grounds that it was not appropriate to try to predict what Congress 

and the Administration would do. Otherwise, he had no objection to 

Mr. Hayes' version of the first paragraph.  

As to the second paragraph, Mr. Mitchell said, along with 

others he did not like the proviso clause in the staff's draft.  

Mr. Ellis had suggested the easy solution of deleting the clause entirely, 

and he (Mr. Mitchell) would rather do that than accept Mr. Hayes' 

version. The latter, he thought, involved the not unusual problem of 

inconsistent instructions, since net borrowed reserves around $350 or 

$400 million were not likely to be consistent with an increase in bank



11/1/66 -60

credit in November. As he read the staff reports, to achieve an 

increase in bank credit it would be necessary to have much shallower 

net borrowed reserves. What was needed was a little more ease, 

insofar as that was consistent with the Treasury financing, and he 

would suggest a clause calling for operations to be modified "to 

resist any falling off in the projected rate of money supply growth." 

He proposed referring to the money supply because the credit proxy 

did not strike him as a good measure to use as a standard, although 

possibly it could be improved. Using the money supply would suggest 

about the same objectives and would be understood better by the 

public.  

Mr. Daane said he found himself very much in agreement today 

with Mr. Hayes. He thought monetary policy had been doing what it 

could and should be doing, and that the Committee was achieving just 

about the results it had intended--notwithstanding the protestations 

to the contrary that he had heard last week at the meeting of the 

American Bankers Association. In response to Mr. Mitchell's useful 

caveat about the need for flexibility in policy and for not holding 

rigidly to any level of interest rates, he would submit that the 

decline in yields since the end of August indicated that the 

Committee's posture was not overly rigid. Although no one at the 

table was privy to any special information on the future course of 

defense spending, it had been rising rapidly; his own intuition was



11/1/66 -61

that it was rising much faster than publicly recognized or admitted 

and perhaps even faster than Mr. Brill had intimated.  

Mr. Daane went on to say that like Mr. Hayes and Mr. Reynolds 

he was concerned about the U.S. balance of payments situation. He 

did not think the Committee could take much comfort from the recent 

figures on the official settlements basis of calculation. However, 

since the Administration was continuing to work on the problem with 

a view to continuing and perhaps strengthening its over-all program 

in the area, he thought it would be inappropriate for the Committee 

to make an overt shift in policy now. He agreed with Mr. Hayes that 

the time had come to reappraise the problem in a more fundamental 

way, and he hoped that a System effort to do just that could be 

mounted. Despite erroneous press reports of his position, he also 

agreed with what Mr. Hayes had said today and what Chairman Martin 

was reported in the press to have said in Boston yesterday, that 

there continued to be a need for the tax increase that would have 

been most appropriately made earlier this year. He was still enough 

of a Keynesian to believe that the U.S. should finance the Vietnam 

war on a pay-as-you-go basis, so that it could be carried on to the 

extent possible without inflation.  

The Committee's policy decision today, Mr. Daane continued, 

could only be to call for an even keel. Within that framework, 

however, and in an attempt to respond to the Manager's request for



11/1/66 -62

guidance, he would refer Mr. Holmes to the opening statement of his 

own written report, which read, "System open market operations in 

the period since the last meeting of the Committee sought to maintain 

generally firm and steady conditions in the money market, though 

with some leaning on the side of less firmness as bank credit 

continued to show signs of weakness." He hoped that, within the 

framework of even keel, the Manager would continue to interpret 

the directive in exactly the manner implied by that statement .  

Mr. Daane said he would not simply accept but would strongly 

endorse Mr. Hayes' suggestions for the directive, except that he 

would retain the word "vigorously" in the statement of the first 

sentence regarding the expansion in domestic economic activity, 

Certainly there was nothing in the GNP projections contained in 

the green book 1/ to indicate that the economy was going into a 

decline. Also, he disliked the language proposed by Mr. Hayes in 

which rising defense expenditures were said to be "offsetting" 

moderating tendencies elsewhere. Accordingly, he would prefer 

language in the first sentence reading ". . . over-all domestic 

economic activity is continuing to expand vigorously, with sharply 

rising defense expenditures and some evidence of moderating 

tendencies in some sectors of the private economy." For the 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



11/1/66 -63

second paragraph, he would prefer Mr. Hayes' version, to be 

interpreted in line with the statement he had cited from Mr. Holmes' 

report.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that, as had been made clear, the present 

was a period of great uncertainty with respect to the actual economic 

outlook. That was all the more reason for the Committee to pay 

particular attention to the specific monetary variables for which it 

was responsible.  

When one looked at reserves--the item which the Committee 

primarily influenced--one noted a lack of normal growth, Mr. Maisel 

continued. Depending upon which monetary variables were examined, 

current levels were as low or lower than the levels reached in the 

first quarter of the year. It was proper to have restrained growth 

in reserves during the second and part of the third quarter in order 

to correct for their great acceleration in the first quarter. However, 

the period of stagnation for those variables should not continue.  

He particularly felt that the Committee should not at this point 

attempt to hold up interest rates if demand fell. The attempt to 

hold up rates seemed to him the thrust of several suggestions which 

indicated that the Committee had to restrict growth in reserves or 

even continue to have them decline rather than have interest rates fall 

back to their early summer levels. Given its lagged effects, policy 

should attempt to bring about a normal growth in total reserves and



11/1/66 -64

non-borrowed reserves. That meant that a further fall in required 

reserves and the bank credit proxy for this month would not be useful.  

Mr. Maisel hoped that the Manager would interpret "generally 

steady conditions" to refer to somewhat easier conditions than had 

developed. He was disappointed that the proviso clause had not had 

more influence on action during the last period. He felt that a fall 

at an annual rate of nearly 3 per cent, compared to an expected 

increase of 5 per cent, in the bank credit proxy was a significant 

deviation from expectations. He did not feel that the action taken 

was sufficient in the light of that deviation. He recognized that 

there were two weeks with somewhat lower net borrowed reserves.  

Still, if one looked at most of the monetary variables, the action 

of the latest three weeks for which there were data could be 

considered about as restrictive as that in the corresponding three

week period before the last meeting. Net borrowed reserves were 

about the same, and total reserves and the credit proxy declined.  

The major exception to that generalization was that interest 

rates receded part way from their abnormal height, Mr. Maisel said.  

That correction from the height reached as a result of the extreme 

crisis in expectations which occurred at the end of August was to 

be expected. As he had indicated before, the Committee should 

guard against allowing any changes which occurred simply from a 

sharp runup based on expectations to get built into the system. It



11/1/66 -65

must take a larger view and consider the total monetary picture, not 

simply the retreat of interest rates from their temporary levels.  

It should not be satisfied with a further decline in reserves and the 

credit proxy. The Desk should take the necessary action under the 

proviso of today's directive to try to start those variables back 

along a normal growth path. That meant that total reserves should 

expand. He would guess that it probably meant lower net borrowed 

reserves and a continuation of the return of interest rates toward the 

early August levels.  

Mr. Maisel said he did not favor retaining the word 

"vigorously" in the first sentence of the directive, as Mr. Daane had 

suggested. He preferred the directive proposed by Mr. Hayes to the 

staff draft, but he would replace the final phrase of the proviso 

clause, reading "in the light of bank credit developments during the 

month," with the phrase, "in order to aid in a moderate expansion in 

bank credit and reserves." 

Mr. Brimmer said that he had proposed to include in his 

comments today a review of some implications of the recently reduced 

liquidity of life insurance companies. In the interest of time, 

however, he would make only summary remarks on the subject and ask 

that the comments he had prepared be included in the record. He then 

summarized the following statement:



11/1/66

The tendency for gross cash flows at life 
insurance companies to fall short of company 
projections has created a serious liquidity squeeze 
on some individual companies because of the very 
large share of projected cash flows (well in excess 
of 90 per cent) which had already been allocated 
through advance loan commitments. The short-fall 
in basic cash flows has reflected a combination of 
(1) lower than estimated pre-payments on mortgages, 
(2) higher than estimated policy loans, and (3) 
larger than expected withdrawals of policy proceeds 
left on deposit with the company. Some insurance 
companies have been hit much harder by the policy 
loan increase than others--with the increase in 
several extreme cases pre-empting all or virtually 
all of the basic cash flow.  

To meet loan commitments in the face of this 
unexpected squeeze on their basic cash flows, some 
companies have had to reduce their cash balances, 
and/or liquidate security holdings and draw on bank 

credit lines. Initially, as evidence of the 

liquidity squeeze developed, life companies stretched 

out the ultimate payment dates on a large part of 

their loan commitments. But more recently, with the 

policy loan problem continuing, some companies have 
ceased making any new loan commitments altogether.  

Moreover, in the absence of a basic general easing 

of credit conditions, there is no obvious reason to 

expect these pressures on insurance companies to 

abate for some time.  

The persistence of this liquidity squeeze on 

life companies poses several logical questions for 
the Federal Reserve: 

1) Is it likely that life insurance 

companies (generally assumed to be 

good business customers at banks) 

will pre-empt a significantly larger 

share of bank credit, either by 

drawing on their own credit lines, or 

by deferring the allocation of long

term funds to mortgage companies, thereby 

necessitating an extension of construc
tion lending by banks or leading to an 

increase of mortgage warehousing?

-66-



11/1/66

2) Is it likely that security liquidations 
by life companies seeking to obtain 
funds will be large enough to create 

instability in bond markets? 
3) Is it possible that any particular 

companies, under pressure from policy 
loan increases, will run through all 

of their own sources of liquidity and 
have to renege on their advance loan 
commitments, or be bailed out by 

special loan arrangements? 

The Life Insurance Association has not indicated 
whether any particular companies are about to run through 
all of their liquidity reserves. But it seems unlikely 

that the industry in general is facing any such problem.  
Moreover, with long-term interest rates declining 
recently, the capacity of bond markets to absorb some 

portfolio liquidation has been improved.  
In these circumstances, it seems to me that it is up 

to the life insurance industry to demonstrate more fully 
a need for special liquidity assistance, if there is one.  
Without better evidence on the state of individual 

companies, it is difficult to decide whether any special 

use of Federal Reserve Bank credit (either directly or 

indirectly) would be justified for this purpose.  

At the same time, however, it should be recognized 

that life insurance commitment activity has been sub

stantially curtailed, so that credit from this source is 

much less readily available. Here, too, if the problem 

were presently acute, corporate bond yields would 

probably not be declining. But any build-up in the 

corporate calendar would clearly be more difficult to 

accommodate in the absence of active life company partici

pation. Also, it seems likely that the volume of life 

insurance credit available for commercial and multi

family residential construction will be substantially 

reduced in 1967, relative to the supply available at the 

start of 1966. Finally, it seems very possible that life 

insurance company demands for accommodation at banks 

will increase. All of these elements in the total credit 

picture, therefore, need to be kept in mind while setting 

reserve policy for banks--although at this point it is 

difficult to quantify their precise significance.

-67-



11/1/66 -68

Mr. Brimmer then said that he would report briefly on the 

progress being made by the Cabinet committee on the balance of pay

ments in formulating a program for 1967. The discussions were still 

underway and it was not possible as yet to say what recommendations 

were likely to be made to the President. It might be helpful to the 

Committee to have some of the flavor of the discussions, however, 

because they bore on the relation between monetary policy and the 

payments balance in the coming year.  

Hopefully, Mr. Brimmer continued, the program for 1967 would 

be announced within the next few weeks, perhaps around the date of 

the Committee's next meeting. The program would remain a voluntary 

one, and it now seemed likely that most if not all of the elements 

of the 1966 program would be retained. Specifically, there would be 

elements relating to direct investment abroad and to export promotion, 

under the guidance of the Secretary of Commerce. There was some hope 

that the Federal Reserve's part of the program would be continued, 

but that question was still under discussion.  

One point he would like to note particularly, Mr. Brimmer re

marked, was that there was a definite hope within the Cabinet committee 

that a balance of payments program could be developed that would permit 

greater freedom for monetary policy decisions to be made in light 

of domestic considerations. It was almost a precondition for the 

current discussions that something be done with respect to capital



11/1/66 -69

flows, so that monetary policy would not have to carry so much of the 

burden of restraining such flows. He personally doubted that the 

President would approve any recommended program that did not allow 

greater flexibility for monetary policy to be based on the needs of 

the domestic economy.  

Since balance of payments considerations had been mentioned in 

connection with monetary policy this morning, Mr. Brimmer observed, he 

thought that point was worth keeping in mind. It also had some 

bearing on the directive to be issued today. Thus, in the first 

paragraph he would prefer to specify the international payments 

objective of the Committee's policy in terms of "progress toward" 

reasonable equilibrium in the balance of payments rather than "restora

tion of" such equilibrium, as both the staff draft and Mr. Hayes' 

version specified. The Cabinet committee was actively discussing the 

question of the payments target for 1967. It was generally agreed that 

no quantitative goal should be announced, as had been done for the 1966 

program, but the question remained of what goal would be reasonable.  

One issue was whether the goal should be defined apart from the impact 

of the Vietnam war, which was estimated to have increased the annual 

deficit by roughly $1 billion. Because the matter was still under 

discussion, he hoped the Open Market Committee would not imply in the 

directive that it had set equilibrium as the target.



11/1/66

On a related point, Mr. Brimmer observed that Mr. Hayes' 

comment to the effect that the recent inflow of foreign private 

liquid funds was a means of financing the deficit implied that 

the liquidity basis of calculation was the appropriate one. He 

did not believe the Committee should accept either that basis 

or the official settlements basis as the one proper method for 

calculating the balance. The Administration's decision had been 

to calculate the balance on both bases and to reach a decision 

between them only after more experience had been accumulated.  

The matter had been discussed by the Cabinet committee as recently 

as yesterday, and it had been left open for the time being. But, 

however the balance was calculated, he shared Mr. Reynolds' sense 

of urgency about the country's international payments problem and 

he hoped that efforts to deal with it would continue.  

With respect to other parts of the directive, Mr. Brimmer 

agreed with Mr. Maisel that economic activity should not be 

described as expanding "vigorously" now. In the second paragraph 

he would prefer to call for "generally steady" rather than "firm" 

money market conditions. He shared Mr. Hayes' view that expansion 

in the bank credit proxy in November at an annual rate of about 

6 per cent would not be disappointing. The series of shortfalls 

in bank credit growth that had been experienced recently might 

well result in the Committee's feeling rather uncomfortable; the

-70-



11/1/66 -71

fact that the growth expected had not materialized was grounds for 

pause. Mr. Hayes had implied that a 4-6 per cent growth rate in 

November would be acceptable, but he (Mr. Brimmer) would prefer 

to have the Committee set such a rate as an explicit goal.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that developments since the Committee's 

last meeting provided further evidence of moderation in the private 

sector of the economy and of a continued climb in defense spending.  

Major economic series showing signs of slackened growth included 

production of consumer goods and materials, unfilled orders for 

durables, plant and equipment spending, steel output, and nonfarm 

employment. For many months, residential construction had been the 

only major economic series showing an outright decline. In the 

third quarter, however, several important series joined residential 

construction on the downside: new orders for durable goods, auto 

output, and sensitive industrial materials prices. As the Chairman 

had pointed out at the last meeting, "If it were not for defense 

spending, the economy might well be experiencing a little downturn 

right now, and . . . defense spending is (not) a very strong prop 

for an economy." 

Unfortunately, Mr. Hickman said, the evidence cumulated 

that wage-cost inflation had been built into the economy, due 

almost entirely, in his opinion, to the failure of the Administration 

to take appropriate fiscal action earlier this year. Evidence also



11/1/66 -72

cumulated that monetary policy alone had done about all that it 

could to restrain the economy, and that a further tightening could 

aggravate imbalances now present in the economy.  

As he mentioned at the last meeting, Mr. Hickman continued, 

in an economy in which defense spending was the prime mover it was 

extremely difficult to design appropriate monetary or fiscal policy 

when even the roughest estimates of defense spending were withheld 

from the U.S. Treasury and this Committee. To the extent that the 

System could bring influence to bear in appropriate places, it 

should press to have the Defense Department release data to it on 

new orders and estimated cash flows for the next two or three 

quarters. Without such information, monetary and fiscal policy 

could easily be misdirected, to the great detriment of the economy.  

He might add that his board of directors at last month's meeting 

underscored the importance of the Committee's having information 

on the flow of defense spending for a reasonable period ahead, 

and urged the System to do what it could to fill the gap in its 

knowledge.  

Lacking reliable information on defense spending and the 

economic outlook, Mr. Hickman continued, the Committee should allow 

the behavior of the credit proxy and the money supply to determine 

policy; that is, it should follow rather than lead. If the credit 

proxy and the money supply failed to come up to the weak November



11/1/66 -73

projections of the staff, then the Committee should allow net 

borrowed reserves to ease further, perhaps to $200 million. An 

important question, it seemed to him, was whether the Committee 

should attempt to redress recent shortfalls in the money supply 

and bank credit. He was afraid that that would produce a very 

easy tone in the money market, and that it might lead to a sharp 

shift in expectations and perhaps to bond market speculation. He 

would, therefore, not attempt to redress recent shortfalls but 

would let deviations of money and the credit proxy from the staff 

projections lead policy over the next three weeks. That policy 

of "no change with qualifications" also seemed appropriate in view 

of the forthcoming Treasury refinancing. For the directive he 

would favor the staff draft as submitted, with the understanding 

that it would be interpreted as the Manager had suggested.  

Mr. Bopp observed that the course of the war in Vietnam 

seemed even more unpredictable now than just a few weeks ago--if, 

indeed, that was possible--and military uncertainties were super

imposed upon question marks in inventories, capital spending, and 

housing. The future of durable goods spending also had been coming 

under closer scrutiny, with the drop in housing starts raising 

doubts about furniture and appliance sales in the coming year.  

Financial developments during the past few weeks certainly 

underlined the need for caution in determining monetary policy,



11/1/66 -74

Mr. Bopp said. With reserves, the money supply, and credit flows 

all falling significantly short of earlier projections, the 

Committee might do well to aim for somewhat easier money market 

conditions in the next few weeks. Certainly that would be the 

appropriate course for policy if those trends persisted.  

Of course, Mr. Bopp continued, it was difficult to determine 

just what proportion of the weakness in credit flows stemmed from 

slackening demand, reflecting a softening in business. No doubt 

some of the downturn in money and credit flows resulted from antic

ipatory borrowing earlier in the year. Some also came from the 

supply side. Indeed, it appeared that the squeeze in CD's--while 

not so severe as some had expected--had had an important bearing 

on lending policies. In the Third District, loss of large nego

tiable CD's since the August peak ran only about half the 10 per 

cent rate experienced in the nation as a whole. Yet the loss--or 

more precisely, the threat of loss--helped to condition thinking 

on loan policy. Earlier he had reported that several of the large 

Philadelphia banks had set themselves the goal of holding loans 

virtually stable. They had accomplished that in large measure.  

Business loans in particular had remained virtually unchanged 

from early August to the present.  

In view of the present uncertainties on the business front 

and projected decline in bank credit, Mr. Bopp felt that the recent



11/1/66 -75

modest easing in money market conditions should be continued. That 

was tolerable within an over-all policy of even keel. However, if 

flows of money and credit proved to be substantially greater than 

projected, he would recommend that the Manager restore conditions 

to where they were two weeks ago.  

With respect to the directive, Mr. Bopp said, he could accept 

any of several alternative proposals that had been made. He thought 

Mr. Swan's suggestion to move the reference to recent fiscal policy 

measures to an earlier point in the first paragraph was a partic

ularly good one.  

Mr. Patterson reported that over-all gains in the Sixth 

District in recent months had slowed down. Employment had leveled 

off in August and in September. Sales of 1967 automobiles were 

running well behind last year's introductory pace. And residential 

building contracts would be down between 6 and 8 per cent for the 

full year on the basis of present trends.  

However, Mr. Patterson said, while noting those signs of 

weakness he would not want to exaggerate their importance. Unemploy

ment remained low. Overtime work was still increasing, and personal 

income--according to the latest available data--continued to expand.  

On the whole, though, the District economy was showing less steam, 

and nowhere was that more apparent than in financial data. Business 

loans in the first three weeks of October expanded less than a year



11/1/66 -76

ago. Such moderation in pace followed vigorous business loan expan

sion in September and weakness in August, so there could be little 

doubt that the trend in business lending had slackened. Other 

categories of lending also showed signs of easing.  

In looking back, Mr. Patterson continued, it was now quite 

clear that borrowing demands of late last year and much of this year 

were clearly unsustainable. The loan expansion could not continue 

indefinitely in the face of progressive System tightening. In fact, 

his conversations with bankers, as well as the high level of member 

bank borrowing at the discount window and in the Federal funds 

market, indicated that even now many banks still felt in a tight 

position. On the other hand, the recent movement in loans could 

not be attributed entirely to deposit trends and monetary policy.  

The demand for loans seemed to be weaker than banks had anticipated 

several months ago.  

Since many of the same observations noted for the Sixth 

District could be made about the national scene, Mr. Patterson said, 

it was appropriate to ask whether the time had come for edging away 

from the Committee's policy of restraint. Considering the delayed 

impact that monetary policy had, some easing was, indeed, a tempting 

policy description. The Committee should also keep in mind criticisms 

leveled against the System in the past for being overly concerned 

with price developments when economic activity was slowing down.



11/1/66 -77

Thus, a good case could be made for a policy shift, especially since 

industrial commodity prices had shown little change in the third 

quarter.  

Having almost convinced himself of the wisdom of such a 

policy change, Mr. Patterson concluded that the time was not quite 

ripe for it, aside from "even keel" considerations. With defense 

spending strongly headed upward the economy was unlikely to turn 

down quickly. Wages were rising rapidly. Fiscal restraint was 

still in the offing. Monetary restraint was making a contribution 

to the balance of payments. And he would judge that some recent 

developments, especially those in financial markets, were in part 

a reaction to overly dramatic changes in the immediate past and, 

therefore, only in part for "real." Hence, in the final analysis 

he believed that the Committee should wait for additional evidence 

of an easing in private demands before undertaking a major policy 

shift.  

But if the growth in business loans over the next few weeks 

was as moderate as assumed in the green book, in Mr. Patterson's 

opinion the Manager could afford to be fairly liberal in providing 

reserves. And if credit demands were less intense than now antic

ipated, he might even accommodate banks to the point of permitting 

some rebuilding of their investments. By and large, though, 

Mr. Patterson suspected that the Manager would need to be guided 

in his day-to-day transactions mainly by money market rates.



11/1/66

Mr. Patterson said he favored adopting Mr. Hayes' suggestion 

with respect to the second paragraph of the directive.  

Mr. Francis commented that total spending on goods and 

services had continued to rise faster than the ability of the economy 

to produce, and upward pressures on prices were strong. The Govern

ment's fiscal situation continued to add to the excessive demands.  

Monetary developments since last spring had been restrictive, 

Mr. Francis noted. Member bank reserves had declined moderately, 

growth of bank credit had slowed markedly, and the money supply had 

changed little on balance. In view of both the excessive total 

demand for goods and services and the fiscal developments, the 

monetary restraint had been desirable, but care now had to be taken 

to avoid becoming too restrictive. Monetary actions frequently had 

their greatest impact after some time lag.  

Recently, Mr. Francis said, interest rates had declined 

and ease had developed in the money market. Those developments 

might indicate some decline in the private demand for loan funds 

or might be only a technical reaction to earlier anticipatory 

borrowing and speculative selling because of an over-estimate of 

how high rates were going to rise. In either case the net rise 

in rates since last spring had probably been a good thing, helping 

to bring planned private investment in line with planned saving 

less net Government demand for loan funds.

-78-



11/1/66

At this time, Mr. Francis remarked, the Committee could not 

be sure what rate of monetary growth was appropriate, but he believed 

that steps should be taken to avoid any sustained monetary contrac

tion, as well as to avoid a renewal of the rapid monetary expansion 

that occurred last winter and spring. If demands for credit weakened 

further, interest rates should be permitted to adjust lower, to the 

extent permissible during a Treasury refunding. Otherwise, bank 

reserves, bank credit, and money were apt to decline and the 

restraining force of monetary actions might cause a more than desired 

contraction in total spending on goods and services. On the other 

hand, if demands for credit showed renewed strength, some upward 

adjustment of interest rates might be necessary to avoid an undue 

rise in credit and spending, causing further inflationary pressures.  

In general, Mr. Francis thought that the Manager might be 

instructed during the next few weeks to take care of normal seasonal 

forces, but he should be permitted substantial latitude with regard 

to fluctuations in measures of money market pressures. If sharp 

changes occurred in interest rates or other money market pressures, 

attempts to offset them should be kept to a minimum consistent with 

the needs of the Treasury. Large demands for funds, especially when 

translated into increases in required reserves, should be permitted 

to tighten the money market. Contractions in the demands for funds 

and declines in required reserves should be allowed to ease the

-79-



11/1/66

market rather than be used as a signal for the System to contract 

reserves, credit, and money further.  

Mr. Francis said he would favor Mr. Hayes' version of the 

directive.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

As everybody around the table has acknowledged, we 
are in the midst of an "even keel" period that constrains 
our ability to make any overt change in monetary policy.  
Sometimes this kind of constraint can be a positive 
operational advantage to the Committee, because it provides 
us with a freer opportunity to look ahead and plan possible 

courses of action to be agreed upon when the even keel 
period is over. This, it seems to me, is one of those 
fortunate times.  

In the great mass of evidence coming before us, we 
see more than the usual signs of softening or easing of 
pressures. Yet none of this evidence is so persuasive 
as to make us want to ease policy aggressively at this 

moment. I believe in flexibility in monetary policy, but 
I am not much attracted to a "stop-and-go" kind of system, 
operating as if we had only two gears: full speed ahead, 

and full speed reverse. In circumstances like we face 

currently, I believe that kind of approach could generate 
substantially more harm than good.  

My preference, if easing signals continue to flash 

in increasing numbers, is for a tentative but gradual and 

progressive kind of let-up of monetary pressures, related 

closely to the kind of market and economic effects that 

seem to be resulting. This would be my prescription, 

unless and until a sharp change in the picture is introduced 

by way of Vietnam spending, additional fiscal action, or 

a marked further alteration in private spending intentions.  

Having spoken in these general terms about our over

all policy focus, let me say a few words about our operating 

instructions to the Manager, both retrospectively and 

prospectively. It seems to me that the proviso clause has 

thus far worked out well. I was glad that the Manager 

permitted a slight easing of money market conditions in 

the last half of October when it became evident that 

required reserves were showing substantially less strength

-80-



11/1/66

than anticipated. He apparently felt that there was a 
limit to the ease he could permit in money market 
interest rates, and this was quite proper given the 
sense of the Committee's previous discussion and given 
the stress on money market conditions in the directive.  

There are times when it is desirable for the 
Committee to lay greater stress on money market condi
tions than on net borrowed or free reserves as an 
immediate operating target. The recent period, when 
liquidity crises were threatening, was clearly such a 
time; perhaps the present even keel period is another.  
However, I would like to suggest that the time is 
approaching when we can and should move away from 
primary reliance on money market conditions as an 
operating guide. The trouble with too-slavish attention 
to money market conditions as a target is that our 
operations then tend to circumscribe short-term interest 
rate movements into too narrow a band, thereby stul
tifying market performance and depriving us of an 

immediate indicator of market pressures. We do not 

want to see large and erratic rate movements in the 
financial system, but we should want to see enough rate 
movements to provide us with a barometer of changing 

market demand pressures. For rates to reflect under
lying pressures, we obviously cannot have them as a 
principal target.  

What we can better use as an immediate target, I 

think, is our old friend, net borrowed or free 

reserves--or in directive language, "net reserve 
availability." For, with all its imperfections, it has 

the key advantage of cushioning market pressures while 

leaving market interest rates reasonably free to index 

changing private demand pressures. With CD run-offs 

slowing and bank reaction to the September 1 letter 

settling into a pattern, some of the influencesthat 

muddied the free reserve waters for a time this fall 

are calming down and this reserve target is once again 

becoming more dependable as a week-to-week guide. We 

have learned, I think, not to rely on net borrowed 

reserves alone, but to use that measure in conjunction 

with aggregate reserve and bank credit movements in the 

interest of fostering orderly and noninflationary 

monetary expansion.  
Our recent experience with the proviso clause has 

been very instructive in this respect. Given the

-81-



11/1/66

succession of weeks in which aggregates have fallen 
short of our expectations, I should think the time has 
arrived to give somewhat more weight to monetary 
aggregates in our operating instructions than we have 
in the past. One way to do so at this time is to state 
clearly that we would like to see bank credit show at 
least a little more strength than indicated in the blue 
book projections. This could be done in the directive 
by adopting the position outlined in the last paragraph 
of the staff note attached to the draft directive.  

This would mean that with money market conditions 
roughly in the range of the past two weeks, bank credit 
might show somewhat more strength than projected in 
November. If it did not, money market conditions could 
be permitted to gradually ease somewhat more; on the 

other hand, if bank credit showed considerably more 
strength, money market conditions could tighten 
some--all within the constraint of even keel. And 

next time--when we are beyond even keel--I hope our 
instructions to the Manager will lay less stress on 

money market conditions and more on reserve factors 
as guides to operation.  

With these interpretations, I would be prepared to 

vote in favor of either the draft directive distributed 

by the staff or that suggested by Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Robertson added that whichever version of the directive 

was adopted he would favor moving up the reference to fiscal policy 

measures, as Mr. Swan had suggested, or deleting it completely.  

He would also agree with Mr. Brimmer that the words "progress 

toward" should be substituted for "restoration of" before the phrase 

"reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments." 

Chairman Martin observed that he could add little to the 

discussion today; the comments he had made at the previous meeting 

still seemed valid. He would simply emphasize that the next meeting 

of the Committee might well be an important one. As had been pointed

-82-



11/1/66

out, the elections would then be over and more information might 

be available with respect to possible developments in Vietnam and 

the future course of defense spending. Thus, the Committee should 

be in a better position at that time to decide whether any overt 

change in policy was appropriate.  

The main problem today appeared to be that of reaching 

agreement on a directive, the Chairman continued. He noted that 

the Secretary had prepared a new draft that attempted to take 

account of various suggestions advanced in the go-around.  

The Chairman then read the following draft that had been 

developed by Mr. Holland: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity is continuing to expand with sharply rising 

defense expenditures but some evidencesof moderating 
tendencies in sectors of the private economy. While 
prices of some materials have declined recently, upward 
demand and cost pressures persist for many finished 
goods and services. Bank credit expansion has slackened.  
Earlier strains in financial markets have abated and 
certain fiscal policy measures have recently been enacted 
by the Congress. The balance of payments remains a 

serious problem. In this situation, it is the Federal 

Open Market Committee's policy to maintain money and 
credit conditions conducive to the restraint of infla

tionary pressures and progress toward reasonable 

equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of 
the current Treasury financing, System Open Market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 

be conducted with a view to maintaining generally steady 

conditions in the money market.

-83-



11/1/66 -84

Mr. Hayes noted that the proviso clause was deleted in the 

text Mr. Holland proposed. He would regret dropping the clause, 

because that would imply more emphasis on money market conditions 

as a guide to operations than he thought was intended. Certainly, 

money market conditions were not the Committee's sole concern; a 

high degree of interest had been expressed around the table today 

with regard to developments in other variables, and some recogni

tion in the directive of that interest would be useful.  

Messrs. Robertson and Wayne concurred in Mr. Hayes' 

observation.  

The Chairman then suggested that if the proviso clause 

was to be retained the version Mr. Maisel had proposed might be 

acceptable.  

Mr. Robertson commented that, while Mr. Maisel's proposed 

clause was a possibility, the wording suggested by Mr. Hayes might 

be preferable on the understanding that its intended interpretation 

would be explained in the record.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether inclusion of Mr. Hayes' proposed 

proviso clause would imply that the Committee wanted not only to 

offset the expected 2 per cent annual rate of decline in the bank 

credit proxy in November but also to attempt to attain a growth 

rate in the neighborhood of 4-6 per cent. In his opinion, if the 

staff projections were valid such a course would result in a sharp 

runup in bond prices.



11/1/66 -85

Mr. Holmes said that in his judgment such an implication 

was not necessarily warranted. Moreover, as he had indicated 

earlier he doubted the validity of the staff projections. He thought 

they probably would prove to involve an understatement of bank credit 

strength in November, perhaps as large as the overstatements of recent 

months.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that there also could be a sharper decline 

in bank credit than projected, if disintermediation continued at a 

substantial rate. He was inclined to agree with Mr. Hickman.  

Mr. Daane commented that he thought the version of the proviso 

clause proposed by Mr. Hayes would give the Manager the kind of discre

tion needed.  

Mr. Robertson remarked that he thought the members had agreed 

that even keel considerations were dominant at this time and, accord

ingly, that the Committee had to focus on money market conditions; 

but that action should be taken, insofar as feasible given the 

Treasury financing, to prevent a further decline in bank credit or 

an undesirably large increase. That was what he understood both 

the staff's draft and Mr. Hayes' version of the proviso clause to 

imply, and that was the course he would consider proper.  

A number of expressions of agreement were voiced.  

Chairman Martin observed that the discussion reflected a 

fact he had often noted: particular words meant different things



11/1/66 -86

to different people. Personally, he found Mr. Hayes' version of 

the proviso clause acceptable. He inquired of Mr. Maisel whether 

the latter also would find that version acceptable, given the 

interpretation that had been made, and the response was in the 

affirmative.  

Mr. Swan asked whether it was appropriate to state as a 

fact that defense expenditures were rising sharply in view of the 

uncertainty with respect to developments in that area.  

In response to the Chairman's request for comment, Mr. Brill 

said he thought enough was known to justify the statement in question.  

While monthly figures on defense expenditures were not available, 

preliminary GNP estimates for the third quarter indicated that defense 

spending was rising then at a $4 billion annual rate, and the 50 per 

cent increase in new defense orders from August to September indicated 

that the rapid advance was continuing.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that he was prepared to vote in favor of 

the directive on which the Committee appeared to be agreeing, but he 

wanted to note that he would have preferred to retain the original 

language of the Committee's policy statement relating to the balance 

of payments, rather than revising it to read "progress toward" 

reasonable equilibrium.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York



11/1/66

was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity is continuing to expand with sharply rising 
defense expenditures but some evidences of moderating 
tendencies in sectors of the private economy. While 
prices of some materials have declined recently, upward 
demand and cost pressures persist for many finished 
goods and services. Bank credit expansion has slackened.  
Earlier strains in financial markets have abated and 
certain fiscal policy measures have recently been enacted 
by the Congress. The balance of payments remains a 
serious problem. In this situation, it is the Federal 
Open Market Committee's policy to maintain money and 
credit conditions conducive to the restraint of infla
tionary pressures and progress toward reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of the 
current Treasury financing, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining generally steady conditions 
in the money market; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified, insofar as the Treasury financing 
permits, in the light of bank credit developments during 
the month.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, November 22, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Chairman Martin noted that a tentative schedule for meetings 

of the Committee in 1967 had been distributed with the agenda for 

today's meeting. He asked whether anyone had any comments on or

changes to suggest in the schedule.

-87-



11/1/66 -88

Mr. Daane said that while the tentative schedule was 

acceptable to him, he would reiterate the view he had expressed 

on other occasions that the Committee might ideally meet monthly, 

at dates related to the availability of monthly economic statistics, 

with interim meetings called when necessary.  

Chairman Martin commented that the tentative schedule called 

for 14 meetings in 1967, only two more than would be held if the 

Committee met monthly.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary.



CONFIDENTIAL (FR) ATTACHMENT A 

October 31, 1966.  

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on November 1, 1966 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is still 
expanding, despite evidences of slackening in some sectors of the 
private economy. While prices of some materials have declined 
recently, upward demand and cost pressures persist for many finished 
goods and services. Bank credit expansion has slackened and earlier 
strains in financial markets have abated. The balance of payments 
remains in deficit; although capital inflows increased in the third 
quarter the trade surplus declined further. In this situation, and 
in light of the fiscal policy measures recently enacted by Congress, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to maintain money 
and credit conditions conducive to the restraint of inflationary 
pressures and to the restoration of reasonable equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of the current 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintain
ing generally steady conditions in the money market; provided, 
however, that operations shall be modified, insofar as the Treasury 

financing permits, to moderate any apparently significant deviations 
of bank credit from current expectations.



ATTACHMENTS B 

Current Economic Policy Directive Proposed by Mr. Hayes 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is contin
uing to expand, with rising defense expenditures offsetting moderating 
tendencies in some sectors of the private economy. While prices of 
some materials have declined recently, upward demand and cost pressures 
persist for many finished goods and services. Bank credit expansion 
has slackened and earlier strains in financial markets have abated.  
The balance of payments remains a serious problem. In this situation, 
and in light of recent and possible future fiscal policy measures, it 
is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to maintain money and 
credit conditions conducive to the restraint of inflationary pressures 
and to the restoration of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of the current 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintain
ing generally steady conditions in the money market; provided, 
however, that operations shall be modified, insofar as the Treasury 
financing permits, in the light of bank credit developments during 
the month.


