









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 11, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balderston 

Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 

Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Maisel 

Mr. Mitchell 

Mr. Patterson 
Mr. Robertson 

Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Bopp, Hickman, Clay, and Irons, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Shuford and Swan, Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Young, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Messrs. Baughman, Garvy, Holland, and Koch, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Solomon, Adviser to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Partee, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



1/11/66

Mr. Heflin, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Eastburn, Mann, Parthemos, Brandt, Jones, 
Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. MacLaury, Assistant Vice President of the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 

by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

December 14, 1965, were approved.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 

by unanimous vote, the action taken by avail

able members of the Committee on December 28, 
1965, approving payment of 1/8 per cent com

mission in a transaction undertaken to acquire 

guilders to pay off the System's $25 million 

August 1965 drawing on the Netherlands Bank 

and to liquidate the remaining guilder/mark 

swaps with the Bank for International Settle

ments in amount of $12.5 million each for 

System and for Treasury, was ratified.  

Under date of December 27, 1965, there had been distributed 

to the members of the Federal Open Market Committee copies of the 

report of audit of the System Open Market Account and of the report 

of audit of foreign currency transactions, both made by the Board's 

Division of Examinations as at the close of business September 24, 

1965, and submitted by the Chief Federal Reserve Examiner under date



1/11/66 -3

of November 1, 1965. Copies of these reports have been placed in 

the files of the Committee.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the audit reports 
were accepted.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period December 14, 1965, through January 5, 1966, and a supplemental 

report for January 6 through 10, 1966. Copies of these reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged again this 

week. The $75 million decline announced during the last statement 

week of December more than covered the French purchase of $67 million 

in that month, and the Stabilization Fund holdings appeared to be 

in pretty good shape to withstand anticipated drains during the 

remainder of January. As the Committee would recall, the Russians 

had made a sale of $31 million in gold through the London market on 

December 28. That proved to be a timely contribution to the Pool's 

holdings in view of the continuing gradual drain resulting from 

persistent private demand combined with smaller than normal amounts 

of new gold production coming to the market. For the future, 

indications were that South Africa would continue to rebuild its



1/11/66 -4

gold reserves by withholding from the London market some part of its 

new production. As a result, supplies to the Gold Pool would be more 

than usually dependent on Russian sales, the timing of which was, of 

course, quite uncertain.  

Mr. MacLaury noted that the year-end pressures on the 

exchange markets that had come to be expected in recent years pro

duced fewer problems this year than in the past. That welcome change 

resulted from a combination of factors. One of the most important, 

of course, was the smaller deficit in the U.S. balance of payments 

in the closing months of the year. And, in marked contrast to last 

year, the covering of short positions in sterling this year offset 

to a considerable extent the usual year-end repatriation of funds 

from London, which last year was greatly exaggerated by the specu

lative pressures on sterling. On the continent there was no massive 

repatriation of funds to Germany at year-end as there had been in the 

past, partly because funds had been moving into Germany in preceding 

months in considerable volume under the stimulus of the tight money 

market conditions in Germany. (The year-end pressures in Germany 

were relieved to some extent by the Federal Bank's action in 

temporarily reducing bank reserve requirements.) As a result, the 

Federal Bank was not required to take on sizable amounts of dollars 

and, indeed, as the year-end approached funds began to move out, 

thus permitting the underlying payments deficit to be reflected in 

reserve losses for the first time. Since December 27 the Federal



1/11/66 -5

Bank had used $100 million in supporting the mark rate. The only 

instance in which the usual year-end pattern showed up was in 

Switzerland, where during December the Swiss National Bank took in 

a total of $385 million on a swap basis from Swiss commercial banks.  

Since those funds were immediately channeled back into the Euro

currency market via the Bank for International Settlements, the 

effects on exchange and money markets even of that sizable movement 

were largely neutralized.  

Reflecting the calmer atmosphere in the markets this year

end, Mr. MacLaury said, the System had not only been able to avoid 

taking on new commitments to finance over-the-year-end swings, but 

had actually been able to make substantial progress in reducing 

outstanding commitments. System drawings of Belgian francs under 

the standby arrangement with the Belgian National Bank were reduced 

during the period from $50 million to $25 million equivalent, as 

the Belgian National Bank used dollars to support the franc in its 

market. As Committee members had been informed on December 27, the 

Netherlands Bank found itself in a position to sell guilders to the 

System in sufficient amount to liquidate all outstanding commitments 

for both System and Treasury. As in the case of Belgium, the 

Netherlands Bank found that it had to provide more support for the 

guilder during the closing weeks of the year than it had anticipated 

and thus could sell the System $50 million equivalent of guilders on



1/11/66 -6

a wholesale basis--$25 million equivalent to liquidate the System's 

drawing under the swap arrangement, and $12.5 million each to reverse 

System and Treasury swaps against marks through the BIS. In addition, 

the Treasury was also able to pay off the remaining $17.5 million 

equivalent of maturing forward Swiss franc contracts, thus completely 

liquidating market commitments that had first been taken on in 

July 1963.  

As indicated in the written reports, Mr. MacLaury continued, 

there was a good demand for sterling in the early part of the period 

since the Committee's previous meeting, reflecting both covering and 

current commercial needs. Then there were a couple of days of mild 

pressure, associated primarily with the year-end demand for dollars 

which resulted in some swapping out of sterling. On December 20 and 

21, when sterling eased down from its previous level of about $2.8030 

to $2.8013 or so, the New York Bank put bids in the market for System 

Account to indicate to the market that the central bank support for 

sterling--which had made such an impression on the market on 

September 10--was still available. That had the effect of stabilizing 

the market, and only a small amount of sterling was in fact bought 

before the market turned around. Demand picked up once again in some 

volume following the Christmas holidays. During the whole period 

since December 14, the Bank of England took in a total of more than 

$200 million, and for the month of December it was able to show a



1/11/66 -7

reserve gain of $16.8 million after repayment of $75 million on 

swap drawings from the System and liquidation of further forward 

commitments. As the Committee knew, the $275 million drawing by 

the Bank of England that matured on December 30 was rolled over for 

four days and then paid off on January 3. At this point, it was 

expected that the remaining $200 million drawing, scheduled to 

mature on January 28, would be rolled over for a few days into 

early February, at which time it, too, would be liquidated--thus 

putting the entire $750 million swap arrangement back on a standby 

basis.  

The good performance of sterling in the markets during the 

past few months and over year-end, Mr. MacLaury said, should not be 

taken as an indication that Britain's problems were by any means all 

solved. The third-quarter U.K. balance of payments deficit was a 

rather disappointing performance. While there was no specific reason 

to expect trouble in the next few months, one could not write off 

the possibility that market sentiment could again turn against 

sterling, even during its period of seasonal strength. For that 

reason, he felt it was vitally important that the arrangements worked 

out for providing a defense for sterling be in full readiness.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
December 14, 1965, through January 10, 
1966, were approved, ratified, and 
confirmed.



1/11/66

Mr. MacLaury noted that two swap arrangements would mature 

during the early part of February: the $250 million, six-month 

arrangement with the German Federal Bank matured on February 9, and 

the $100 million, three-month arrangement with the Bank of France 

matured on February 10. He requested the Committee's approval of 

renewal of both arrangements, neither of which was in use at present.  

Renewal of the standby swap arrange
ments with the German Federal Bank and 

the Bank of France was approved.  

As he had mentioned earlier, Mr. MacLaury observed, the 

drawings under the arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium were 

now down to $25 million equivalent, having been reduced since the 

last meeting of the Committee by $25 million. The remaining drawing 

would come up for its second renewal on February 10. With the 

Belgian franc under some mild pressure, he would hope that at least 

part of the drawing could be off the books before maturity, but he 

requested Committee approval of renewal of the drawing for an addi

tional three months, should that prove necessary.  

Possible renewal of the $25 million 

equivalent drawing on the swap arrange

ment with the National Bank of Belgium, 
maturing on February 10, 1966, was noted 

without objection.  

Mr. MacLaury said that he would note one final technical 

point in connection with the Belgian arrangement, for information of 

the Committee. At the time that arrangement was renewed, on 

December 22, 1965, the Belgian National Bank had requested that the



1/11/66 -9

interest rates applicable to drawings be adjusted upward to take 

account of the rise in U.S. bill rates since the previous renewal.  

After checking with the Treasury, it was agreed that the rate on 

three-month drawings under the standby portion of the arrangement 

be increased to 4-1/4 per cent from 3-3/4 per cent, and that the 

rate on the fully-drawn portion, with a term of six months, be 

increased to 4-3/8 per cent from 3-7/8 per cent. As the Committee 

knew, the Belgian arrangement was unique in a number of respects, 

and it was now the only arrangement under which interest rates were 

adjusted periodically rather than being linked automatically to the 

U.S. Treasury bill rate.  

Mr. Hayes said he would like to add a footnote to 

Mr. MacLaury's remarks concerning repayment by the British of their 

drawings on the swap arrangement. As the members would recall, the 

Committee had discussed the matter at its December meeting and there 

had been general agreement that it would be desirable for the draw

ings to be cleared up as promptly as possible. He had sent a note 

to Lord Cromer of the Bank of England conveying that view of the 

the Committee. At the time of writing it had already been agreed 

to roll over for just a few days the $275 million drawing that came 

due at the end of December. With respect to the $200 million 

drawing due in late January, he had pointed out to Lord Cromer that 

the Committee placed a high value on emphasizing the short-term



1/11/66 -10

nature of swap drawings both by word and by practice, and that an 

effort to repay the drawing would be useful. He (Mr. Hayes) had 

just received a reply from Lord Cromer thanking him for the infor

mation on the views of the Committee and expressing full agreement 

with the Committee's position. Lord Cromer went on to say that the 

Bank of England might well ask for renewal of the drawing due on 

January 28, but they intended to repay it in the first few days of 

February. Mr. Hayes thought it was well that the Committee had 

taken the position it had. There was no doubt in his mind that the 

Bank of England viewed the matter in the same way as the Committee 

did.  

Chairman Martin commented that the matter evidently was 

working out in a satisfactory fashion. The Chairman then noted that 

Mr. Daane had been abroad at the time of the Committee's previous 

meeting to attend a meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten, 

and he invited Mr. Daane to comment.  

Mr. Daane remarked that the Deputies had met in Paris on 

December 14 and 15, 1965, to continue the discussion begun during 

the meeting early in November of some rather basic questions on 

various aspects of the subject of deliberate reserve creation that 

had been posed by Chairman Emminger. Those questions concerned 

(1) the need for new reserve assets, (2) who should be responsible 

for their creation and distribution, (3) what types of assets should 

be created, (4) the rules for decision making, and (5) the matter of



1/11/66 -11

multilateral surveillance. The discussions so far had been exploratory, 

involving a relatively free exchange of views and with no hard and 

fast positions taken. The general atmosphere, carried over from the 

November meeting, was one of actively seeking a basis for agreement 

that could be presented to the Ministers and Governors of the Ten 

sometime this year--perhaps as early as June, although that might be 

optimistic.  

On the first question, Mr. Daane said, he thought that to 

date no one had come up with a good, clear measure of what the 

reserve needs were or might be. Some people had attempted to make 

an analogy to a domestic economy but others had rejected that 

approach. One country took the view that the concept of "global 

reserve needs" was, after all, a "political" concept. Mr. Daane 

noted incidentally that the International Monetary Fund was engaged 

in a parallel study of the needs for international reserves and 

liquidity.  

The second question, Mr. Daane said, came down basically to 

the issue of whether responsibility for the creation and distribution 

of reserves should lie with the Group of Ten--or perhaps the Group 

plus two or three other countries--or with the IMF. Except for the 

French, the Deputies seemed to be generally agreed that reserves 

should be created "in close association" with the IMF. How individual 

members would define "close association" varied, but it seemed fair



1/11/66 -12

to say that the Group was moving closer to the view that the IMF 

definitely should be in the picture and perhaps in the central role.  

On both the questions of who should create and distribute 

reserve assets and what sort of assets were envisaged, Mr. Daane 

continued, at the November meeting the British had recommended a 

dual approach, with some support from the U.S. side. Under this 

approach reserves would be created by and for a limited group of 

countries and also more widely within the structure of the IMF. The 

former could involve a variety of techniques but would, perhaps, 

come close to the "collective reserve unit" that had been under 

discussion over the past few years. The latter could take the form 

of a "floating tranche" for all IMF members, or could involve a self

qualifying principle under which those countries that had already 

drawn their gold tranche would not be immediately eligible but would 

be potentially eligible. At the December meeting there was consider

able sympathy for this dual approach around the table, which meant 

that the possibilities of both a new reserve unit and of additional 

reserve asset creation through the IMF were still very much in the 

deliberations.  

Beyond that point, Mr. Daane said, some specific problems 

arose. One major problem was the question of whether the distribution 

or use of any new asset should be linked to gold. There was general 

agreement, except on the part of the French, that there should be no 

gold link in the creation and distribution of the new asset. The



1/11/66 -13

majority view seemed to be that there also should be no gold link 

in connection with use of the asset, except that of a gold-value 

guarantee. If the no-gold-link route was chosen, however, the 

question arose of what sort of limit should be applied; some sort 

of creditor limit would seem to be required. At that point the 

issue began to shade into some of the other more technical problems 

that were being considered, related to the acceptability of the 

asset. The French had consistently taken the position that their 

own proposals--which were unchanged from those they had made to 

the U.S. representatives at the beginning of the deliberations-

were on the table, and that they were awaiting the proposals of 

others. Related to this, the Deputies were scheduled to have a 

3-day meeting near the end of January, in which they might well come 

a bit closer to the negotiations stage. There would be another 

meeting in March, probably in Paris, and then a longer meeting in 

Washington, most likely in April.  

Mr. Hayes asked if Mr. Daane felt that enough consideration 

had been given in the discussions to the possible adverse effects of 

a new reserve asset on the use of the dollar as a reserve currency.  

Mr. Daane replied that the question of the relation to 

existing reserve assets was one of the basic questions considered in 

November and again in December. The French said at the December 

meeting that they had never recommended eliminating the dollar as a



1/11/66 -14

reserve currency. They recognized that many countries would want to 

maintain working balances in dollars and also that within a reserve 

currency "bloc" of countries there would be larger holdings of reserve 

currencies. They felt, however, that the Group of Ten countries 

should normally hold only working balances in reserve currencies and, 

at a minimum, not hold any more reserve currencies in their reserves 

than they did now. In Mr. Daane's judgment that was a somewhat milder 

position than they had taken at earlier meetings. Most of the other 

Deputies emphasized the role of the dollar in international transac

tions and its use in exchange markets. There was considerable 

sentiment on the continent for a tightening of the multilateral 

surveillance process, which now was rather loose, involving mainly 

WP-3 discussions, but the dollar's continued status as a reserve 

currency was clearly envisaged.  

Mr. Hayes said he had raised the question because he thought 

there was a real risk that the U.S. might lose some of its financing 

flexibility, not only in connection with deficits but also when its 

payments were in balance. Even with over-all balance, there would 

always be some countries with respect to which U.S. payments were in 

deficit. It would be disadvantageous if a trend should develop abroad 

toward unwillingness to accumulate dollars to deal with swings in 

payments between the U.S. and individual countries, as well as 

between third countries.



1/11/66 -15

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Daane said 

it was his personal feeling--which would not necessarily prove to 

be the official U.S. position--that it would be undesirable for any 

new reserve asset created to bear interest, particularly if the 

asset carried a gold guarantee. In his judgment any new asset 

should stand on its own feet;and without interest it would offer 

minimum competition to the dollar. On the other hand, there were 

those who felt that a newly-created reserve asset should carry some 

nominal interest in order to insure its attractiveness to potential 

holders. That would result in three types of reserve assets: gold, 

bearing no interest; the new asset with a gold guarantee, offering, 

perhaps, a 2 per cent return; and dollars, now offering about a 

4-1/2 per cent return. The question was not closed and, as he had 

noted, the view he had expressed was a personal one.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S. Gov

ernment securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

December 14, 1965, through January 5, 1966, and a supplemental 

report for January 6 through 10, 1966. Copies of both reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



1/11/66

The four weeks that have elapsed since the Committee 
last met have been turbulent ones for financial markets 
and for System open market operations. The period encom
passed the December tax date, the year-end statement 
date, a three-pronged Treasury cash financing operation, 
and a transit strike in New York City which still 
threatens the efficient operation of the financial 
markets themselves. During the period there were 
conflicting interpretations of the course of developments 
in Vietnam, concern and uncertainty over the likely 
shape of the budget, growing recognition that inflation 
was of major concern for 1966, and a potential conflict 
between the Administration and industry over steel 
prices. At the same time, banks in the money centers 
came under increased seasonal pressure and loan demands 
were heavy at a time when financial markets were still 
in the process of adjusting to the change in the discount 
rate.  

While there were conflicting movements during the 
period, the net impact of all these developments was to 
put short-term interest rates under heavy upward 
pressure, while rates for intermediate Government 
securities also rose substantially. In the long-term 
area, however, rates on Governments actually declined 
slightly, while the corporate and municipal markets, 
under the influence of a seasonally light calendar, 
were generally steady.  

Given the turbulence of the period, which, inciden
tally, made reserve projecting a more than usually 
hazardous occupation, open market operations were 
conducted with a view to moderating the pressures on 
bank reserve positions and the money market. In view 
of various alarms and excursions that occurred during 
the period, it is difficult to summarize Federal Reserve 
operations. Generally speaking, however, it can be said 

(1) that operations supplied a large volume of reserves 
to accommodate a far greater than seasonal expansion of 

required reserves, resulting from a strong rise in bank 

credit and a change in deposit mix as bank CD's ran down 

over the tax and dividend dates, and (2) they mitigated 

the upward pressure on short-term interest rates. One 

measure of this reserve supply can be seen in nonborrowed 

reserves, which rose at an annual rate of 21 per cent 

in December. Heavy use was made of repurchase 

agreements during the period, helping to moderate 

average dealer financing costs in the light of higher 

commercial bank lending rates. Measures of net reserve

-16-



1/11/66

availability, as the written reports point out, varied 
widely over the period. The net borrowed reserve figure 
of $180 million published for last week was apparently 
taken by the market in stride, without creating the 
impression of any tightening of monetary policy. The 
results were admittedly a higher net borrowed reserve 
figure than we had aimed for, but it was a week in 
which reserves consistently fell short of projected 
levels by a large margin and which was thoroughly com
plicated by the year-end statement date and by the 
impact of the transit strike.  

The transit strike in New York has brought to the 
forefront many of the technical aspects of financial 
market transactions that most of us normally take for 
granted. The dependence of these markets on bookkeepers, 
security handlers, and messengers was brought sharply 
into focus a week ago yesterday when, despite elaborate 
preparations, many of the employees of New York City 
banks and security houses were prevented from getting 
to work. The breakdown of mechanical arrangements 
resulted in a fairly large number of failures to deliver 
securities early in the week, but as a result of heroic 
efforts by banks and dealers, and individual employees, 
the flow of securities and money has been kept going.  
Early in the week the New York Reserve Bank, after 
consultation with the market, requested dealers to 
avoid trades for cash delivery while the emergency 
existed, in order to avoid the last minute transfer of 

securities and funds that such trading entails. Since 
last Thursday the market, following the lead of the 
stock exchanges, has generally been closing at 2 o'clock, 
and this has also helped. There is no doubt, however, 
that the strike has reduced the efficiency of the market 

and tended to make dealers very cautious. It has also 
limited the System's ability to operate ona normal basis.  
While the market continues to function, and we have not 
been unduly hampered in our operations, we will all 
breathe a sigh of relief when we can return to the normal 

hazards of bus and subway travel in the City.  
As mentioned in the Board staff blue book 1/, Federal 

funds, which had traded mainly at the discount rate for 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 

by the Board's staff for the Committee.

-17-



1/11/66

two weeks after the rate was raised, have again generally 
traded at a premium. This has not been due to any general 
shortage of reserves (as mentioned earlier non-borrowed 
reserves have risen substantially) but to the convergence 
of reserve pressures on money center banks, where basic 
reserve deficits more than doubled in the three weeks 
ending January 5 compared with the three weeks ending 
December 15. On Friday, New York City banks were running 
a basic reserve deficit in excess of $1.4 billion, and in 
addition were borrowing heavily from non-banks in the form 

of repurchase agreements, promissory notes, and Federal 

funds purchases. These pressures should subside as 

January progresses, but CD maturities are large and loan 

demands appear to be continuing contraseasonally. Until 

the pressures on money market banks subside, pressure 

can also be expected in the funds market (and on CD rates) 

as individual banks try to avoid excessive use of the 

discount window. I might mention that at least one large 
New York City bank went to 5 per cent on 6-month CDs 

yesterday.  
The various written reports that the Committee has 

received have commented extensively on Treasury bill and 

other short-term rate developments in recent weeks. In 

yesterday's auction, enlarged by $100 million for the 

second week, $1.3 billion in 3-month bills sold at an 

average issuing rate of 4.58-1/2 per cent, while the six

month rate went to 4.74 per cent. Bidding for the new 

three-month bill, in particular, has been quite cautious 

in recent weeks, owing to the increased size of the 

weekly offering and the return flow of shorter bills as 

investors reversed pre-year-end window dressing opera

tions. It seems also that, in the light of current 

uncertainties and wider rate movements, the market is 

exacting a larger underwriting spread from the Treasury 

in compensation for the increased risks and higher 

financing costs.  
The books were open yesterday on the final stage of 

the Treasury's cash financing operation. The offering-

of $1.5 billion 10-month certificates having a coupon of 

4-3/4 per cent and priced to yield 4.85 per cent--has 

been very well received by the potential subscribers.  

With the tax and loan account privilege estimated to be 

worth an additional 20 basis points to the banks, a 

heavy oversubscription is expected, with the market 

estimating allotments of no more than 10-15 per cent.

-18-



1/11/66

As far as the outlook is concerned, I can merely 
echo the Board staff in saying that it is difficult 
to assess the potential degree of money market and rate 
pressures and the likely inter-relationships among money 
variables in the immediate future. The weeks ahead will 
provide a further testing period for the interest rate 
adjustments that have already been made. While basic 
market expectations at the moment appear to lean towards 
a further upward drift in interest rates, the present 
level of interest rates could prove quite attractive to 
investors, particularly if seasonal pressures show some 
signs of abating, and if other unsettling developments 
do not occur. At the higher rate levels, dealers have 
had considerable success in selling Government securities 
out of their portfolios. Since December 29 they have 
sold nearly $240 million coupon issues maturing in over 
one year, moving into a net short position of about $50 
million by last Friday. Some of the corporate funds 
going into Governments appear to represent proceeds of 
bank loans that will not be needed for operational 
purposes until later in 1966.  

Whether or not the rally that started in the Gov
ernment bond market last week can be sustained is as 
yet unclear, although the market appears to be in a 
better technical position than it has been in for some 
time and the success of yesterday's Treasury financing 

is heartening. With its January cash needs now arranged 
for, the Treasury will be turning its attention to the 

refunding of $4.8 billion notes maturing on February 15th, 

of which $2.5 billion are held by the public. The 

Treasury will have hard decisions to make as to coupon 

and maturity for the new issue or issues to be offered, 
and much will depend on the circumstances prevailing at 

the time terms have to be set. A successful refunding 
operation could help restore a greater measure of 
stability in the market.  

The System should, of course, give the Treasury as 

much support as it can in the refunding. But a definition 

of "even keel" at a time when the market is more susceptible 
to general economic, military, and budgetary developments 

than to small changes in monetary variables is not easily 

come by. Perhaps the most we can do is to be a moderating 
influence in what now appears to be a highly uncertain 

situation, but one which may settle down as the month 

goes on.

-19-



1/11/66 -20

Mr. Mitchell asked Mr. Holmes if he thought that the Desk 

had given any leadership to the money market in the recent period.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the Account Management had made a 

substantial volume of repurchase agreements on almost every trading 

day of the last 2 weeks. In his judgment the market understood 

that the System would act, and act promptly, to provide needed 

reserves, although it did not expect reserves to be supplied to 

finance any rate of credit expansion, however high.  

In response to further questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Holmes 

said he did not believe the market assumed the Committee had any 

specific interest rate target in view, and he doubted that a new 

increase in the discount rate was widely anticipated. The market 

was impressed by the strength of the business situation and the 

fact that the Administration now seemed more cognizant of the 

possibility of inflationary developments than it had earlier; and 

banks were impressed by the strength of loan demand in January and 

by the outlook for a substantial increase in loans in the first 

quarter.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that at its last meeting the Committee 

had chosen not to give the Manager very much in the way of detailed 

instructions while waiting for conditions to settle down, and he 

gathered that the Manager thought some progress had been made in 

the latter respect. Was there anything the Committee could do now 

to tranquilize the present state of expectations?



1/11/66

Mr. Holmes commented that in his judgment announcement of 

a rather restrictive Federal budget would be more reassuring to the 

market than any action the System might reasonably take.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open 
market transactions in Government securities 
and bankers' acceptances during the period 
December 14, 1965, through January 10, 1966, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

New information on past economic developments and 
on prospective spending plans serves to confirm the 
existence of a strong expansion currently and its likely 
continuance. As a matter of fact, both developments in 
the recent past and future prospects suggest a rate of 
economic expansion that could be creating problems of a 
destabilizing nature--first inflation and subsequently 
readjustment.  

The significant upward revision in GNP in the first 
three quarters of 1965 that the Commerce Department has 
just announced has already led to marked upward revisions 
in GNP forecasts, not only in level but also in rate of 
increase. Prior to last summer, a common forecast for 
GNP in 1966 was $700 billion. After a worsening of 
conditions in Vietnam in mid-summer, forecasts were 
generally raised to the vicinity of $710 billion. Now 
they range from $720 to $730 billion. A $725 billion 
GNP this year would mean a rate of increase similar to 
that last year--about 7-1/2 per cent in current dollars 
and 5-1/2 per cent in real terms. And this is to be 
achieved with fewer unused resources available to draw 
upon than there were a year ago.

-21-



1/11/66

The two critical elements in one's prediction of 
likely economic things to come remain developments in 
Viet Nam and business investment--and their repercussions 
on the economy generally.  

As for the likely impact of Viet Nam on fiscal policy, 
the Administration has dropped specific hints over the 
last week or so as to the prospective size of the admin
istrative budget in both the current and the next fiscal 
year. The total expenditure figures on an administrative 
budget basis most frequently mentioned are around $105 
billion for fiscal 1966 and up to $115 billion for fiscal 
1967. Even with no tax rate increase, the rise in revenues 
resulting from further growth in the economy will be large.  
But it is not likely to quite match the jump in spending.  

It is difficult to translate these fragmentary clues 
on the budget into national income and full employment 
terms, which are more meaningful for economic analysis.  
Nevertheless, they suggest some increase in the net 
stimulative nature of fiscal developments this year. With 
a booming private economy and with the full employment 
budget likely to be in deficit under current tax rates 
and prospective Federal spending, even a modest increase 
in net fiscal stimulation this year might prove excessive.  

One major uncertainty in this area is the possibility 
of peace in Viet Nam. In event of such a happy development, 
private expectations and spending plans would no doubt be 
deflated, but Federal fiscal policy might well remain 
stimulative. Defense spending would likely continue 
higher than in the recent past and expenditures on the 
Great Society programs would increase. However, there 
is every indication that, with current and prospective 
military spending as large as it is, every effort is being 
made to limit other Federal spending programs. A sharp 
worsening of the situation in Viet Nam, on the other hand, 
could lead to speculative buying on the part of consumers 
as well as businesses.  

As for business investment, the recent GNP revisions 
raised earlier figures sharply for both fixed outlays and 
inventory accumulation. According to the revised figures, 
business fixed investment in the third quarter of 1965 
was 15 per cent higher than a year earlier. It amounted 
to about 10-1/2 per cent of the GNP. In the current 
quarter, this percentage may edge up further. Such per
centages are similar to those that prevailed during the 
investment boom of 1956 and 1957.  

The relationship of these fiscal and capital spending

-22-



1/11/66

developments to monetary policy lies mainly in their 
likely effects on expectations, resource utilization, 
and prices. Here the situation looks better from the 
point of view of current employment and output levels 
but more troublesome from the point of view of longer
run economic stabilization. We have been achieving 
our goals of an increased standard of living and reduced 
idle resources. But the closer we get to full utiliza
tion of resources, the more we have to watch out that 
the pace of economic expansion remains sustainable and 
its character balanced and the more we may have to 
worry about the trade-off between reduced unemployment 
and price stability.  

Assuming a rate of increase in dollar and real 
GNP this year roughly comparable to that last year, 
capital utilization rates are likely to edge up further, 
employment should continue to advance rapidly, and the 
unemployment rate should decline significantly more.  
To illustrate, total manufacturing capacity might well 
increase 7 per cent or more this year if current 
spending plans are realized. This would not likely 
be quite as large as the projected rate of increase 
in manufacturing output, assuming the specified rise 
in GNP. Moreover, pressures would be more acute in 
some specific manufacturing lines where utilization 
rates already exceed 90 per cent of capacity.  

In the labor field, the armed services and the 
anti-poverty programs alone could push the unemploy
ment rate down 2 or 3 tenths of a percentage point 
and a rapidly increasing employment should contribute 
3 to 4 more tenths to the decline, depending on the 
rate of labor force growth. Thus, the overall 
unemployment rate might well drop to, say, 3.5 per 
cent by summer from the 4.1 per cent rate in December.  

These likely developments in resource use would no 
doubt put additional pressure on wages and prices.  
Recent wage increases in some nonmanufacturing lines 
have already been exceeding the Administration's 
guideposts. Moreover, the rate of rise in productivity 
in the total private economy appears to have slowed 
somewhat. The average increase in the years 1961 through 
1964 was 3.8 per cent, but the rate last year fell to 
3 per cent or lower.  

Although the rise in prices in general continues 
to be moderate and selective, it is persistent. The 
increase in the wholesale price index for industrial

-23-



1/11/66

commodities, for example, amounts to 2 per cent now 
since the upcreep began about 15 months ago. Continuing 
shortages of supplies of copper and other materials, and 
the most recent steel price flare-up, suggest growing 
pressure on the guideposts.  

From the point of view of the domestic economy, the 
actions increasing discount rates and Regulation Q 
ceilings last month look to have been more and more 
appropriate and timely with each passing day and each 
available new statistic. As for the policy over the 
next three weeks, current Treasury financing suggests, 
although it probably does not dictate, one of an even 
keel nature. Even in the absence of Treasury financing, 
however, such a policy would seem to me appropriate.  
First, we need to know more about the lagged effects 
of last month's actions in dampening the growth in 
reserves, deposits, credit, and spending over the 
longer run. Second, and even more importantly, we 
need to know more about the course of nearby develop

ments in Viet Nam, and whether, if inflationary forces 
appear strong, the Administration will attempt to seek 
some fiscal restraint through a tax increase and/or 
expenditure limitations.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

In the tightening money market of recent weeks, 
one contributing factor of key importance has been the 
powerful groundswell of credit demands. Statistics are 
gradually becoming available to reveal just how strong 

and pervasive those demands have been.  
By way of perspective, newly available figures for 

the fourth quarter show total net funds raised by the 

nonfinancial sector mounting above an $80 billion annual 
rate. This is sharply higher than the reduced third
quarter rate, and reflects the fourth-quarter concentra

tion of Treasury financings that helped to aggravate the 

money market pressures. Private borrowing also climbed 
back up in the fourth quarter to a $67 billion annual 

rate, matching the peak of last spring that was swollen 

by borrowing to stockpile steel. At this level, private 

borrowing equaled 11 per cent of private GNP, extending 

theslowly rising trend in this ratio that has prevailed

-24-



1/11/66

since 1962. The chief reason for this uptrend in 
private borrowing is not hard to pinpoint: it 
parallels very closely the vigorous rise that also 
has been taking place in the total of net private 
physical investment. Viewed against the perspective 
of the new GNP figures, these latest borrowing and 
investment figures do not suggest a sudden new out
burst of activity so much as a fairly steady, 
substantial, almost inexorable-appearing rise in 
private investment and its financing to places of 
importance in the over-all economic picture that have 
not previously been touched except near the peaks of 
cyclical surges in the earlier postwar years.  

It is trite to say that bank credit expansion has 
contributed importantly to this over-all credit expansion.  
It is not as trite to point out that bank credit growth 
in the fourth quarter does not appear to count for any 
greatly different share of total credit flows than would 
be true for the preceding nine months of 1965 taken as 
a whole. While this comparison implies a continuing 
very vigorous bank credit expansion, I daresay it 
sounds less imposing than the recent flow of bank 
reports might have led one to expect. On reflection, 
I think three elements have been at work enhancing our 
sense of a very expansive banking performance.  

To begin with, detailed weekly figures suggest that 
the increases in bank balance sheets are being concentrated 
particularly in two items that are accorded special 
cyclical significance: business loans, and the money 
supply. Business loans were up by a seasonally adjusted 
$1.4 billion in December, and the first January week 
also looks strong. Meanwhile, the demand deposit 
category also started to expand more sharply during 
December. Both of these are magnitudes that might be 
expected to be moderated a bit, I think, by higher interest 
rates being paid. Their brisker growth, in the face of 
such added rate disincentives, therefore, is probably a 
tribute to short-term customer desires for cash for trans
actions purposes--and perhaps indirectly reflective of 
the vigor of current spending intentions.  

A third special development affecting appraisals 
has been the sharp step-up in the ratio of reserve use 
by the banking system. On average, banks needed con
siderably more in the way of required reserves to support 
each dollar of deposit expansion in December and early

-25-



1/11/66

January than was true in previous months. This resulted 
partly from the slowdown of time deposit growth and the 
pickup in demand deposit expansion. In addition, within 
the demand deposit total, there was a deposit shift that 
favored higher-requirement reserve city banks more than 
low-reserve-requirement country banks. As can be judged, 
therefore, such an increased "consumption ratio" for 
reserves has both some purely technical overtones and 
also some underlying policy implications.  

The combination of these influences on reserve use 
added up to a striking total, and the Desk responded by 
injecting nonborrowed reserves at an annual rate above 
20 per cent during December. Nearly as high a rate of 
reserve rise seems to be persisting into January. Our 
standard reserve projection and estimation procedures 
fall short of allowing for so great a reserve appetite 
on the part of the banking system, and consequently the 
Manager, as he has already indicated, repeatedly found 
himself faced with after-the-fact downward revisions in 
net reserve availability. Time after time during this 
interval the market ended up with less reserves than 
either it wanted or we intended. The result was to 
compound the prevailing degree of market tightness.  

In the event, given the strength of money and loan 
demands that were contributing to the increase in reserves 
demanded, I would argue that the more or less automatic 
additional degree of reserve restraint resulting from 
the misses in reserve projections was a constructive 
outcome--and one that might work to similar advantage 
in the weeks immediately ahead. However, whether or 
not individual members of the Committee might agree that 
these reserve shortfalls can be constructive, it seems 
to me and to some others of the more embattled members 
of the staff that it would be helpful if the Committee 
could take a more explicit stand as to whether the 
tendency for reserve misses to be more or less automatic, 
and approximately countercyclical, should be acquiesced 
in, or perhaps even welcomed; or, alternatively, whether 
the Committee would prefer an adjustment of reserve 
projection procedure that would try to minimize such 
misses by "aiming ahead of the banking system," so to 

speak, whenever we sensed that its demand for reserves 
was beginning to rise or fall by more than seasonal 
proportions.  

I would not presume to attempt to crowd all the pros

-26-



1/11/66

and cons regarding such a proposal into a briefing such 
as this. If this suggestion finds favor, however, perhaps 
some kind of staff or Committee study of the matter could 
be undertaken.  

Mr. Galusha commented he did not understand the proposal 

Mr. Holland had advanced. Was he suggesting that the Committee 

should encourage imperfection in the projections of reserve 

figures? 

Mr. Hickman said that, as he understood it, Mr. Holland 

would like to attempt to reduce the rate of growth of nonborrowed 

reserves by encouraging misses of deeper net borrowed reserves.  

Mr. Holland replied that that was in fact what had 

happened recently. He was suggesting that the Committee might 

want, not to encourage such misses, but to acquiesce in them.  

The result would be symmetrical; if reserve needs turned down 

suddenly, the misses would be in the opposite direction and 

policy would in effect be eased more rapidly than if there were 

no misses.  

Mr. Ellis said he gathered that what Mr. Holland actually 

would like was some guidance as to how the Committee felt on the 

matter, and Mr. Holland agreed.  

Mr. Holland also concurred in Mr. Mitchell's observation 

that one burden of his (Mr. Holland's) comments was that the 

Committee's posture was tighter than it would have been if there

-27-



had not been a relative shift of deposits from country to reserve 

city banks.  

Mr. Reynolds presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

Along with the news that the domestic economy has 
been expanding more rapidly than earlier supposed has 
come news that U.S. foreign trade was also expanding 
surprisingly rapidly during the second half of 1965.  
This news has both favorable and unfavorable aspects for 
the balance of payments; merchandise exports as well as 
imports have shown unexpected buoyancy.  

Acceleration in the growth of exports last fall 
fits with other information suggesting that the pace of 
economic expansion in the rest of the world as a whole 
was still rapid and may have been accelerating after an 
earlier slowdown. If this expansive world economic 
situation persists into 1966, as now seems likely, it 
will present the United States with new opportunities 
for balance-of-payments improvement.  

But, at the same time, the gathering boom at home 
and the consequent buoyancy of imports emphasize the 
standard caveat of recent years: that fundamental 
improvement in our international transactions depends 
heavily upon the avoidance or containment of domestic 
inflationary pressures. In my view, the main link 
between monetary policy and the balance of payments now 
runs more clearly than ever through costs, prices, and 
the current account, rather than through interest rates 
and capital movements. Domestic expansion seems to have 
removed whatever conflict there was earlier between 
domestic and international goals of economic policy.  

From the third quarter to October-November, U.S.  
merchandise exports increased at a 15 per cent annual 
rate, and in the latest 5 months for which we have data-
probably a more representative period--exports were up 
8 per cent from a year earlier. Thus, annual reviews that 
dwell on the increase of only 4 per cent from the full 
year 1964 to the year 1965 tell us mainly about the set
back in the first half of last year rather than about the 
recent trend.

1/11/66 -28-



1/11/66

Agricultural exports--about one-fourth of total 
exports--were at near-record levels in October-November, 
having rebounded in the summer. The rapid advance in 
October-November came in exports of nonagricultural goods.  

Data on the geographical destination of exports 
through October show that shipments to Canada were 
expanding particularly rapidly, and a renewed expansion 
of exports to continental Europe seemed to be getting 
under way, no doubt related to recent upturns in French 
and Italian imports and continued strong demand from 
Germany. Exports to Britain, like total U.K. imports, 
remained at about year-earlier levels. And U.S. exports 
to Japan also showed no significant recent increase, 
although total Japanese imports began to expand again 
last summer.  

U.S. imports did not rise as rapidly as exports in 
October-November. But they rose pretty fast nonetheless-
at an annual rate of more than 10 per cent--thus dis
appointing hopes of a marked slowdown after the steel 
settlement. Total imports in the latest months were up 
one-sixth from a year earlier. Steel imports, though 
down a little from the second-quarter peak, were up by 
about 50 per cent from a year earlier, or by about 
$1/2 billion at an annual rate. Machinery imports were 

up by more than 40 per cent, and imports of non-ferrous 

metals and of consumer goods were each up about one-fourth.  
What is the range of possible developments for 

exports and imports in the months ahead? On the most 

optimistic assumption, that further intensification of 

domestic inflationary pressures can be avoided, I think 

we could expect to see an appreciable slowing down in 

the rate of import expansion. Steel imports might fall 

back half-way toward their year ago level, and even if 

other imports continued to rise somewhat faster than GNP, 

the total might not go up at an annual rate of more than 

about 7 per cent. In that setting, exports would probably 

rise somewhat faster than imports in percentage terms, 

and even more in dollar terms. Acceleration of expansion 

in Japan, Italy, and France might about offset possible 

slowdowns in Britain and in such important peripheral 

countries as Australia and South Africa, to keep our 

total exports rising fairly steadily, though probably 

not at the very rapid rate of last fall.  

This cheerful combination of events could improve 

the trade balance by $1 billion or so over the year from

-29-



1/11/66

last October-November, and produce an even larger improve
ment between the full year 1965 and the full year 1966.  

The more pessimistic possibility is that there will 
be little if any improvement in the trade balance. If 
boomy conditions should be accentuated in this country, 
both our exports and imports would do less well. Even 
if price changes were not markedly adverse, lengthening 
of delivery dates and reduced eagerness of U.S. producers 
to cultivate foreign and domestic markets could have 
important adverse effects.  

Evidently, the Administration's target of a further 
substantial reduction in the U.S. payments deficit in 
1966 implies a foreign trade performance near the 
optimistic end of the range I have given--an improvement 
much nearer to $1 billion than zero. This is so because 
no substantial improvement on capital account is to be 
expected, and there may instead be some net deterioration 

from recent levels, as explained in the green book.1/ 
Despite the stress in official statements on the benefi
cial effects to be expected from voluntary programs, 
they represent a holding operation this year--an effort 
to hold net capital outflows down to roughly last year's 
reduced rate, rather than to achieve further net 

improvement in this area.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that it seemed to him from the statements 

of Messrs. Koch and Reynolds that there was a real conflict between 

the country's domestic and balance of payments goals. Wouldn't an 

increase in exports be inflationary? Where would the real resources 

needed to improve the trade surplus come from if the domestic 

economy would be in a state of over-full utilization of resources? 

Mr. Reynolds replied that the importance one attached to 

that problem would depend on how one weighed an improvement of, 

say, $1 billion in the trade surplus. The effect obviously would 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-30-



1/11/66 -31

be in the inflationary direction, but an export increase that 

would result in a large improvement in the balance of payments 

would involve a very small part of total domestic activity.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that if the economy was really 

struggling to meet domestic demands and the demands related to 

Viet Nam he thought there would be little room left for an increase 

in exports. He was somewhat surprised by the fact that exports 

had been expanding recently, but in any case the country was now 

in a new situation.  

Mr. Reynolds remarked that if the point was reached where 

exports could not rise because of the pressure of domestic demands, 

the inflationary environment that would exist would be unfortunate 

wholly apart from balance of payments considerations.  

Mr. Daane asked whether, on the whole, Mr. Reynolds expected 

the U.S. balance of payments in 1966 to be improved over 1965, and 

if so whether he thought a position within $250 million of equilib

rium would be attained.  

Mr. Reynolds replied that he was optimistic about the 

balance of payments in 1966 in the sense that he expected some 

improvement in the trade surplus, but he was not prepared to say 

how much improvement there was likely to be. Given the changed 

situation abroad, and assuming there would not be inflation in this 

country, he certainly was not worrying much about deterioration in 

the trade surplus, as he had been a year ago.



1/11/66

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Mr. Hayes, 

who began the go-around, made the following statement: 

In a few days the President's Economic and Budget 
messages should shed some light on the way in which 
the Administration proposes to handle the demands of 
the Great Society programs and the war in Viet Nam.  
This does not necessarily mean an end to the 
uncertainty and sensitivity that have characterized 
financial markets since the discount rate action was 
taken. Budget estimates for fiscal 1967 will clearly 
be predicated on uncertain judgments as to the future 
course of events in Viet Nam. They will, in any case, 
for some time be exposed to critical scrutiny pending 
Congressional action. It is not unlikely that 
explorations of a possible Viet Nam settlement will 
drag on for some time, giving rise to divergent and 
shifting expectations and judgments. Moreover, the 
impressively strong note on which the economy comes 
into the new year and the exuberant outlook are bound 
to raise questions about the possibilities for 
continued orderly expansion in 1966.  

I will not try to add to the staff's penetrating 
review of the closing phase of the past year. This 
makes it easier to focus on the problems and possible 
perils of the future. Clearly, we are entering a new 
phase in which economic balance is likely to be 
endangered by converging demand pressures more than 
at any time since this expansion started almost five 
years ago. I am encouraged by the new evidence 
suggesting that productivity has in 1965 increased 
somewhat more than originally estimated, and I am 
hopeful that this favorable development will continue.  
The cumulative effect of the recent flow of fixed 
investment, supported by substantial expenditures 
for research and development, promises to continue 
increasing the capacity of our industry and of the 
economy as a whole. But right now there remains little 
slack in plant capacity and in the labor force. The 
easy absorption of excessive steel inventories, the 
continuous rise in the backlog of unfilled orders, and 
the further decline of inventory-sales ratios all testify

-32-



1/11/66

to the fact that the economy is avidly absorbing the 
ever-rising output of final products.  

In the current economic climate of an unexpectedly 
favorable profit experience and strong consumer demand 
without any significant problem areas, businessmen and 
market participants tend to become exuberant. Add to 
this the near-certainty of a substantial Treasury deficit, 
and you have a situation in which inflationary expec
tations are almost bound to win the upper hand. Recent 
stock market performance reflects this atmosphere.  

Prices of goods and services are now clearly 
reflecting the pressures of demand, the existence of 
supply limitations, and the search for opportunities to 
improve or protect profit margins. Consumer and whole
sale prices, and prices of industrial raw materials, 
have risen in 1965 more rapidly than in the immediately 
preceding years. Wage guideposts have served a useful 
purpose in helping to preserve price stability, but 
experience, here and abroad, shows that a taut labor 
market is conducive both to over-generous wage 

settlements and to less publicized wage advances-
what the British call "wage drift." 

Yet, preservation of cost stability is essential 

both for sustained growth and for further progress in 

moving toward international balance. In 1966 we will 

have to work harder to protect, and, indeed, expand 
our trade surplus. But the over-all outlook for the 
balance of payments is not good, even though the 

December performance looks encouraging on the basis of 

fragmentary data. In the immediate future we shall be 

living with theeffects of postponed Canadian issues 
held over from the fourth quarter; and this factor, 

together with larger imports and larger military 

spending abroad, will probably offset gains painfully 

made in reducing direct investment outflows and in 

keeping other capital movements tending in the right 

direction.  

All the economic data that have become available 

since the discount rate action add to its justification.  

Indeed, public criticism of it has ebbed considerably, 

with increased public and Administration recognition of 

the problems of maintaining a balanced expansion in 

1966. But the adjustments in the financial markets 

have been turbulent, prolonged, and complex. It is 

always difficult to disentangle the different influences

-33-



1/11/66

affecting market psychology and expectations. Certainly 
our action came at a time when business expectations 
were in the process of widespread upward revisions, as 
exemplified by the successive escalations of the 
"consensus estimates" of 1966 GNP. The implications 
of a prolonged conflict in Viet Nam for the economy and 
for the budget are now more broadly recognized. Credit 
demands continue strong even at the higher costs that 
have been established in all sectors of the market and 
for all maturities and instruments. Something of a 
scramble has developed among financial institutions in 
various parts of the country to hold and to attract 
funds, thus compounding pressures and causing chain 
reactions. Banks continue to bid aggressively for 
time deposits, apparently in the belief that credit 

demand will continue to expand strongly. In recent 
days, the chaos created by the New York transportation 
strike has added to difficulties in estimating reserve 
positions and needs, and has threatened the technical 
ability of securities markets to perform in the 

efficient manner which we normally take for granted.  

I believe that in these difficult and confusing 
circumstances the Desk has done the right thing in 

deemphasizing marginal reserve measures and by focusing 

on market performance. Rates have risen more rapidly 
than some of us expected, but no useful purpose would 
have been served by trying to block the kind of market 

pressures that actually developed.  

We must look forward to a trying period immediately 

ahead. The Treasury is now engaged in a series of 

refunding and new money operations. Even aside from 

the usual even-keel considerations, the proper policy 

appears to be one of "steady in the boat on a rough sea." 

The Manager will need again to have more than usual 

latitude in conducting operations in a period when 

official pronouncements, actual Treasury operations, 

and the ups and downs of peace explorations in Viet Nam 

buffet the market. At the same time, market participants 

will try to assess the longer-run outlook for the supply 
of and demand for funds at a time when bank loan demands 

normally decline. This will be a difficult period and 

we will have to tread a narrow path between resisting 

market pressures that might tend to drive rates up 

further and providing reserves in such a way as to 

reduce, rather than to stimulate, the rate of bank 

credit expansion. The continuing objective should be 

to maintain net borrowed reserves, but given the

-34-



1/11/66 -35

uncertainties of demand and of technical factors we 
should be prepared to see larger swings in weekly 
reserve figures.  

The draft of the directive proposed by the 
staff 1 / seems entirely satisfactory.  

Mr. Hayes added that he was not sure he understood all the 

nuances of Mr. Holland's suggestion, but he believed the Committee 

had been doing the right thing in tending to cushion some of the 

effects of the exuberant credit demand, given the recent discount 

rate and Regulation Q actions and the various uncertainties 

existing in the market. A certain amount of cushioning also 

would be appropriate in the period immediately ahead. For the 

longer term, he would question the desirability of letting 

reserves go up as rapidly as they had recently, but for the time 

being the Committee was locked in.  

Mr. Hayes then reported briefly on the effects of the 

present New York City transit strike on the operations of the 

New York Reserve Bank. He indicated that the Bank had been 

successful in performing all essential operations but at the cost 

of a great deal of staff inconvenience and fatigue.  

Chairman Martin said he thought everyone was proud of the 

manner in which the New York Reserve Bank was performing during 

the present difficult period.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



1/11/66 -36

Mr. Ellis remarked that the accelerated pace in 

manufacturing activity appeared to color the New England economic 

picture more and more. As expected, rising defense expenditures 

were showing up in subcontracting and research and development as 

well as in direct procurement contracts. The factory workweek 

increased contraseasonally in November to register a 5.3 per cent 

year-to-year gain and the manufacturing index chalked up an 8 per 

cent corresponding gain. By far the largest gains had been 

registered by aircraft manufacturers. With the exception of 

apparel factories, each of the compiled industry groups showed 

substantial year-to-year increases.  

Looking to non-manufacturing activities in the region, 

Mr. Ellis said, the overriding impression was of prosperity-

perhaps even expectant prosperity in the sense that it was here 

to stay. Construction contracts, paced by both public works and 

residential awards, posted a 10 per cent year-to-year gain in the 

average for the three month periods ending in November. Total 

employment was up contraseasonally, and unemployment declined 

more than seasonally. Department store sales over the four 

weeks including Christmas registered a 6 per cent gain.  

In the banking sector, Mr. Ellis continued, the dominant 

theme had been adjustment to higher rates and the year-end 

financial turbulence. During the first half of December the four



1/11/66 -37

Boston money market banks made fewer short-term business loans 

than in the first half of September, but a substantial increase in 

average loan size brought a 40 per cent gain in new loan volume 

compared with a 17 per cent gain by their New York City counterparts.  

Their average interest rates rose 9 per cent compared with the 

7 per cent rise in New York in the same period.  

Of the banks responding in the First District rate survey, 

Mr. Ellis said, 24 per cent had increased or planned to increase 

their interest rates on deposits. Even after such changes, 

however, only a handful of banks--mostly the larger ones--paid more 

than 4.75 per cent on negotiable CDs and only a handful--mostly 

small--paid more than 4.5 per cent on non-negotiable CDs. Three 

banks had announced rates of 5 per cent or higher, one non-member 

going to 5.375 per cent on 5-year CDs with $5,000 minimum deposit 

size.  

Savings bankers, for their part, had been raising their 

rates reluctantly and with loud complaints, Mr. Ellis remarked.  

The Massachusetts Banking Commissioner had requested the Federal 

Reserve Board to limit CDs to a minimum amount of $30,000. The 

manager of the savings bank pool for investing in mortgages 

outside of New England reported that his normal placement of 

$10-$20 million in an average week had been reduced to almost zero.  

He blamed that reduced outflow on slower deposit growth due to



1/11/66 -38

competition from commercial banks. So far, only three of 80 

reporting savings banks paid 4-1/2 per cent. The great bulk paid 

4-1/4 or 4 per cent.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis remarked that 

conventional wisdom over the past few months had progressively 

matured into a view that virtually all major segments of the 

economy would be expanding in the next several months. In the 

absence of data on total credit flows--and he was grateful to 

Mr. Holland for beginning with that subject in his remarks today-

it appeared safe to judge that demands for credit would be 

swelling to a point where the banking system would be under 

pressure to secure expanding reserves to support continued rapid 

credit expansion. In that context it was refreshing to be able 

to agree with those who concluded that further efforts to reduce 

unemployment by monetary policy would incur a serious risk of 

a faster upcreep in prices. From that viewpoint, the realistic 

alternatives were to hold policy unchanged or to seek some 

lessening of reserve availability. The realities of present 

Treasury financing and prospective refunding counseled an effort 

to maintain a facilitating even keel. As he read the market 

reports, however, the even harder reality was that it was difficult 

to define the component parts of an even keel policy.



1/11/66 -39

To the extent that the reserve projections were reliable, 

Mr. Ellis continued, failure to take any action to offset currency 

return flow would result in net free reserves for the next several 

weeks. Such an outcome would by itself be both confusing and 

misleading to the market. The meaningful question, therefore, 

concerned the volume of reserves the Account Management should seek 

to absorb by sale of securities into a market where short-term rates 

already were substantially bolstered by expanded Treasury offerings.  

Once more, Mr. Ellis said, the answer had to emerge from 

judgments based on imperfect information and comprehension. For 

his part, he liked Mr. Holland's concept of "constructive 

shortfalls." Bank needs for reserves were met in December, as 

indicated by the rise in nonborrowed reserves at an annual rate of 

over 20 per cent. But, except for the last statement week, those 

needs were met against an objective of not showing a sharp drop 

in net reserve availability. In his judgment the Manager should 

not work solely with a rate objective in mind. The historic 

pattern of a seasonal weakness in bill rates in January might be 

overridden by the expanded Treasury bill action and by the current 

increases in other rates. Although the present rate level 

exceeded earlier expectations, he saw no reason to attempt a roll 

back in rates. Secondly, during the current Treasury financing 

action the Manager should strive not to lose too much ground, and 

should hold as a target net borrowed reserves averaging near



1/11/66 -40

$150 million. Finally, for the immediate future, the principal 

objective of operations should be to preserve orderly conditions 

in the money market by moving to resist sharp movements of rates 

in either direction.  

Mr. Ellis added that he had enjoyed Mr. Holland's analysis 

today and hoped that similar analyses would be included in future 

green books. Also, he would like to see a study of the type 

Mr. Holland had suggested the staff might undertake in connection 

with his proposal.  

Mr. Irons reported strong optimism in the Eleventh District 

on the part of businessmen and bankers. All of the main economic 

indicators were at high levels and tending to inch up. Economists 

were upgrading their forecasts for the coming year for sectors 

ranging from industrial production through trade into agriculture, 

where the returns were coming out very favorably.  

Bankers generally reported heavy demands for loans in all 

categories, Mr. Irons said, and they expected loan demands to 

continue strong. Banks had reduced their holdings of Governments 

but had increased holdings of other securities. Last month there 

was a slight decline in negotiable CDs, but demand deposits 

continued up.  

The demand for Federal funds was very strong in the District, 

Mr, Irons continued, with banks tending to relieve their liquidity



1/11/66 -41

bind by purchasing Federal funds rather than by borrowing at the 

discount window. Last week purchases of funds amounted to about 

$1 billion and sales to about half that sum. Borrowings from the 

Reserve Bank were small; the larger banks, which tend to have 

most need for borrowing, were meeting their requirements 

primarily through the Federal funds market. In his judgment it 

would be desirable to have more borrowing at the discount window 

as an alternative to purchases of funds. It seemed to him there 

had been a change in the banks' concept of appropriate use of the 

Federal funds market. A short time ago banks would enter that 

market to make an adjustment for one day--or perhaps a few days-

and then they would move out. But now, with banks operating with 

a built-in deficit, they needed funds on a continuing basis and 

used the Federal funds market to obtain them. That situation 

might be leading to problems. He would not want to have the 

current practice changed suddenly, but he would like to see some 

move taken with respect to the administration of the discount 

window that would result in greater reliance on borrowing from the 

Federal Reserve.  

With respect to the consequences in the District of the 

recent change in Regulation Q, Mr. Irons said, there had not been 

much disturbance in the attitudes of savings and loan associations 

or banks. Only one bank had moved its time deposit rate up to 

5-1/2 per cent, and that rate applied to deposits with some



1/11/66 -42

contractual limitations. A few small banks had gone to a 5 per 

cent rate. On the whole, the situation seemed to be quieting a 

bit, although the adjustments had not all been made. Over the 

past several weeks there had been very few direct or indirect 

contacts on the subject made with the Reserve Bank.  

On the national situation, Mr. Irons remarked that it was 

unnecessary to review in detail the elements of strength in the 

economy, which were outlined in the green book. In general, there 

was virtually full employment and production, and further demands 

were being and probably would continue to be placed on the economic 

system. From the standpoint of economic factors alone, one might 

conclude that a slightly firmer policy and some additional restraint 

were warranted. However, if one looked to financial developments, 

and also took account of the fact that Administration policies 

would be set forth in a number of messages over the next few weeks, 

it would seem that the System's policy should be one of moderating 

changes in financial markets. Interest rates had risen sharply 

recently, and more than he had wished at the time of the last 

meeting. He had expressed the hope then that the discount rate 

would serve as a ceiling for other short-term rates, but the other 

rates had broken through that ceiling.  

For the next three weeks, Mr. Irons continued, an even 

keel policy was called for by the Treasury financing schedule.



1/11/66 -43

He was inclined to gear policy largely to rates, trying to moderate 

any further strong upward movements. He recognized that with the 

Treasury adding to bill supplies there might be difficulties in 

achieving that objective, and he would be satisfied for the time 

being with smaller net borrowed reserve figures than had occurred 

last week; he would not be disturbed by marginal reserve figures 

in a range of $50 million around zero, if that was necessary to 

moderate rate movements and to help maintain orderly conditions 

in the market.  

In concluding, Mr. Irons said that the Manager should be 

given a considerable amount of leeway with respect to his operations.  

The draft directive submitted by the staff was acceptable to him.  

Mr. Swan commented that in the Twelfth District, as in the 

rest of the country, business seemed to be expanding strongly even 

though the District unemployment rate continued to be one percentage 

point or so above the national level. Despite the still high, 

although declining, unemployment rate, there were reports of 

increasing difficulty in obtaining skilled workers--including not 

only scientists, engineers, and the like, but production-line 

workers as well. That situation might present some problems to 

the aerospace industry in realizing the employment increases it 

hoped to make in 1966. One Seattle company had announced that it 

would like to add some 1,500 workers a month in 1966 because of



1/11/66 -44

its backlog of non-Government orders, but there was some question 

as to whether that could be accomplished, given the labor situation 

in the Seattle area.  

Mr. Swan noted that there was considerable interest on 

the West Coast in the adjustments of product prices recently 

announced by the U.S. Steel Company--not so much in the price 

increases, but in the decreases that were announced in prices of 

cold rolled sheets, amounting to $9 per ton or about six per cent.  

That reduction was particularly interesting because imports of 

cold rolled sheets and strip had amounted to about one-fourth 

of West Coast consumption in 1964. Figures for 1965 were not yet 

available but the import proportion probably was still higher in 

that year. The price reductions should improve the competitive 

position of domestic production in the western market relative 

to Japanese imports.  

District banks entered the new year under considerable 

pressure, Mr. Swan said. As Mr. Irons had indicated was the case 

in the Eleventh District, Twelfth District banks were net buyers 

of Federal funds on quite a consistent basis. Loan demands were 

strong and there were no signs as yet of the seasonal decline that 

usually occurred early in the year. The response to the increase 

in Regulation Q ceilings had been quite widespread. A few banks 

raised their CD rates to 5-1/2 or 5-1/4 per cent, and more went 

to 5 per cent.



1/11/66 -45

By and large, however, those were smaller banks. So far, the 

larger banks had not increased CD rates to that extent, nor were 

they pushing savings certificates in one form or another very 

vigorously.  

As to policy, Mr. Swan agreed in general with the views 

already expressed. It seemed to him the Treasury financing schedule 

required an even keel posture. With the Budget Message just ahead 

and with the possibility that some of the existing uncertainties 

might soon be resolved, the best course for the Committee to follow 

in the next few weeks would seem to be to seek again to moderate 

any of the changes that might develop in financial market conditions.  

He agreed with Mr. Irons that in the coming period some attention 

had to be paid to interest rates. He thought that a posture of 

even keel, however defined, would not necessarily call for a roll 

back of rates from their present levels, but it would seem to call 

for doing what could be done to prevent further rate increases.  

He hoped that could be accomplished with net borrowed reserves in 

the area of $50 million--or, more broadly, in a zero to $100 million 

range. But if it became necessary to introduce a little more ease 

in marginal reserves in order to keep the bill rate in the upper 

4.50s, or somewhat below that level, he would not be disturbed.  

Mr. Swan was not sure whether or not Mr. Holland's 

prescription for a "constructive shortfall" involved a contradiction



1/11/66

in terms, except for the isolated case. In other words, although 

the Committee might happen to feel that the consequences of an 

individual miss were desirable, he did not see how it could 

utilize possible shortfalls in the reserve estimates systematically, 

as an operating device. He saw no objection to further attempts 

to improve the estimates if it was thought that something could be 

accomplished in that direction. Such improvements would, of course, 

reduce rather than increase the possibility of shortfalls.  

Mr. Galusha observed that the response of Ninth District 

commercial banks to the December change in Regulation Q had of 

necessity been uneven. Some District banks--those in South Dakota 

and those with Minnesota charters--were at the moment precluded 

from paying more than 4 per cent on time and savings deposits. He 

understood that many Minnesota chartered banks were quite anxious 

to have their ceilings raised, but the South Dakota banks, feeling 

themselves to be at sufficient remove from Twin Cities competition, 

evidently were urging that their ceilings remain unchanged.  

Among District banks legally able to respond to the change 

in Regulation Q, many had already done so, Mr. Galusha said. Nearly 

all Twin Cities area banks were offering 4-1/2 per cent on 90-day 

(non-negotiable) time deposits and 4 per cent on savings deposits.  

One of the smaller banks in the area had gone to 4-3/4 per cent 

on 90-day time deposits. Also, the Twin Cities banks were

-46-



1/11/66 -47

aggressively seeking, by major advertising campaigns, very small 

denomination time deposits.  

Twin Cities area savings and loan associations, Mr. Galusha 

continued, had generally responded to bank deposit rate changes 

by increasing their share rates to 4-1/2 per cent. The one mutual 

savings bank in the District, which had over $400 million in 

deposits, had increased its rate for six-month time deposits to 

4-1/2 per cent and reported a much greater than normal year-end 

loss of funds. That report--highly impressionistic, he suspected-

was among the few thus far received. Most banks had indicated that 

it was much too early to tell how their deposit totals were 

changing under the new rate structure. One bank reported consid

erable gains, particularly in large time deposit accounts.  

As yet, Mr. Galusha said, not all District country banks 

that were legally able to respond to the Regulation Q change had 

done so. Many had, of course, and he thought many of those that 

had not would before very long. Casual evidence suggested that 

country banks would be bothered more by competition this time 

than they had been following the changes of mid-1963 and late 1964.  

There was an indication that structural changes in the District 

banking industry were being accelerated. Mr. Galusha's impression 

was that, to hold deposits, country banks as a group would have to 

increase deposit rates relatively more than they had last November



1/11/66 -48

and December. Then, too, those banks were apparently not in as 

good a position to increase gross earnings as they were late last 

year. The once-over shift to longer-term, higher-yielding assets 

was largely an adjustment of the past. And excess cash had, to a 

considerable extent, already disappeared. Seemingly, therefore, 

the profits of District country banks would be squeezed more 

relatively than those of city banks in the year immediately ahead.  

Not that there was any longer anything the Federal Reserve could 

do about that. But he thought it would, perhaps, be well to keep 

in mind the possibility of increased resentment among banks which, 

even before the revision of the Regulation Q ceilings, weren't 

altogether happy with System membership.  

Among all the innovations being seen for the first time in 

the Ninth District, Mr. Galusha said, the guaranteed time deposit 

rate appeared to be the most serious. One large bank presently 

was advertising a five-year guarantee of 4-1/2 per cent on time 

deposits which could, at the owners' option, be liquidated any time 

after 90 days. The advertisements were hasty and ill-considered, 

with innocent but unfortunate conflicts between the claims made in 

them and the instruments involved; the Minneapolis Reserve Bank 

had called those conflicts to the attention of the bank, and they 

had been corrected. Were that practice of long-term rate guarantees 

to spread now, while interest rates were very high by historical



1/11/66 -49

standards, the Federal Reserve could find itself in something of 

a dilemma the next time the economy sagged and the need for monetary 

ease became apparent. Giving consideration to precluding long-term 

rate guarantees on short-term borrowings might therefore be worth

while.  

About open market policy, Mr. Galusha said, it was possible 

to be very brief this morning, reiterating what had been said 

already. He was impressed by the fact that the Committee's policy 

would be only one influence, and a relatively minor one, on 

developments ahead, and that its posture would be a reactive one 

in the period to come. So it would appear that the Desk would 

have to have a considerable degree of latitude. That was how he 

would define "no change" in policy; and with that interpretation 

in mind he was agreeable to the staff's draft directive.  

Mr. Scanlon said that recent weeks had produced further 

evidence that Seventh District business activity had moved very 

close to practical capacity. Labor turnover had increased and 

hiring standards had been lowered. Delivery lead-times on new 

orders had lengthened, particularly in the machinery and equipment 

industries. Since early December, there had been a pronounced 

revival in steel orders--much earlier than had been generally 

expected--from virtually all steel-using industries. Allowing 

for the holiday let-down, there had been an upswing in steel output



1/11/66 -50

since mid-November. Even in the week ending January 1, output of 

steel ingots was at a 114 million ton annual rate despite continued 

inventory liquidation by some steel users. Production of autos in 

January was scheduled at 830,000 units, slightly above the number 

for the year-ago month when strike-depleted inventories were being 

replenished.  

New claims for unemployment compensation in the District 

were far below the previous year's low level in December, 

Mr. Scanlon reported. The usual year-end rise in the proportion 

of covered workers receiving unemployment payments was much less 

than usual. In the week ending December 18, insured unemployment 

in the District ranged from 1.3 per cent in Indiana and Iowa to 

2.0 per cent in Wisconsin, compared with 2.8 per cent for the U.S.  

Those totals were far below other recent years. In the comparable 

week of 1955, the previous record low, the range for District 

States was 1.9 to 2.6 per cent, compared with 3.1 per cent for 

the U.S.  

Labor market classifications for November, recently released 

by the Department of Labor, showed that Milwaukee was raised to 

the "B" category--"relatively low unemployment" of 1.5 to 3.0 per 

cent, Mr. Scanlon continued. Of 23 District centers only Chicago, 

Detroit, South Bend, Terre Haute, and Muskegon were placed in the 

"C" category--"moderate unemployment" of 3.0 to 6.0 per cent.



1/11/66 -51

Classifications for Chicago, Detroit, and South Bend appeared 

inaccurate; in each of those centers local agencies rated unemploy

ment at less than 3 per cent. A careful review of all the 

available evidence lead to the conclusion that District labor 

markets probably were the tightest since World War II.  

Mr. Scanlon went on to say that evidence of continued 

strong demand for credit, especially by businesses, was contained 

not only in the loan figures but also in banker comments about 

full loan portfolios, tight money, and--in some cases--rejections 

of loans that would have been made a few months ago. However, 

apparently there was little inclination to cut back on term 

lendings, and a substantial part of the demand seemed to be for 

term loans.  

Despite the fact that money market conditions had generally 

been described as tight, Mr. Scanlon remarked, borrowing at the 

discount window had not been very heavy or very general. The 

large banks in the District appeared to have been generally 

unaggressive in selling CDs.  

Nationally, Mr. Scanlon continued, monetary and credit 

expansion had occurred at a rapid pace even though interest rates 

had been increased, indicating a strong demand for credit, probably 

a strengthening demand. In light of the anticipated continuation 

of heavy credit demands in the near future and the threat of



1/11/66 -52

accelerated price increases, it appeared desirable in the long run 

to moderate the rate of monetary expansion. However, the Treasury's 

January cash financing program was yet to be completed, financial 

markets were still in process of adjusting to the discount rate 

change, and announcements on important Government decisions were 

forthcoming. All of those factors seemed to dictate an even keel 

posture for the next three weeks.  

Mr. Scanlon said that while he would prefer to have the 

directive call for "maintaining current conditions in the money 

market," he could accept the staff's draft if it was clear to the 

Manager that its wording did not suggest a forced roll-back. He 

agreed that the Manager should continue to have more than the 

usual amount of latitude in moderating any pressures that might 

develop in financial markets.  

Mr. Clay said that in the months ahead the formulation of 

monetary policy, and public policy more generally, would be based 

on an economic situation markedly different from that prevailing 

during the previous years of the current business upswing. The 

military developments and expenditures imposed upon an economy 

already operating with relatively small margins of unutilized 

resources had brought about a pronounced change. The exact outline 

and proportions of those economic developments could not be fore

seen, quite apart from the possibilities of the military situation



1/11/66 -53

changing in either direction. On the basis of present indications, 

it was reasonable to assume that the processes of orderly economic 

growth would be much more difficult to maintain than earlier, and 

the risk of price inflation would be distinctly greater.  

Monetary policy in the period immediately ahead would be 

conditioned substantially by Treasury financing already under way 

and forthcoming, Mr. Clay remarked, and that would point to main

tenance of "even keel" conditions over the period. Apart from that 

fact, it would appear logical to maintain money market conditions 

compatible with the recent discount rate action. Significant 

easing in the money market from seasonal forces appeared doubtful, 

and there was a possibility that market forces pushing rates 

upward might prove to be more powerful. Under those circumstances, 

it was difficult to state policy targets. A range of 4.45 to 4.60 

per cent would appear appropriate for the Treasury bill rate. The 

draft economic policy directive appeared satisfactory to Mr. Clay.  

Mr. Heflin reported that Fifth District business remained 

strong through the final weeks of 1965. In the Richmond Bank's 

latest survey, manufacturers on balance reported further small 

gains in orders, shipments, employment, wages, and prices, and 

declines in finished-goods inventories. The panel, however, 

displayed somewhat less optimism than in previous surveys. The 

Defense Department recently announced intentions to purchase



1/11/66 -54

120 million linear yards of textiles in the first quarter of this 

year, instead of the 6.6 million yards announced in September.  

Military needs would amount to only about 3 per cent of the total 

first-quarter output of broad woven cottons, but apparently would 

take from one-third to three-fourths of the normal output of a few 

specified fabrics. Since virtually all of the industry's antic

ipated output of such goods had already been sold, producers 

undoubtedly would be forced to ration available supplies of those 

fabrics, and the upward pressure on prices would probably increase 

significantly.  

There was little he could add to what had already been 

said about the national economy, Mr. Heflin commented. Activity 

continued brisk and the over-all business environment appeared 

even more buoyant than it had before the discount rate was raised.  

Despite sharp upward rate adjustments, bank credit had continued 

to climb rapidly in response to strong loan demand. It also was 

reasonably clear that market expectations had shifted more in the 

direction of rising rates, and that might be encouraging some 

anticipatory financing. Over the past few weeks the market had 

been subjected to a number of random and extraordinary influences, 

including the New York transit strike, which complicated the 

problem of evaluating the market relationships that would emerge 

from the System's recent rate action.



1/11/66 -55

Mr. Heflin thought that for the coming period the Treasury 

financing was clearly the controlling factor in the policy area.  

In the light of recent market conditions the important question 

now appeared to be what constituted "even keel." It seemed to him 

that a policy of "no change" for the period should be interpreted 

primarily in terms of feel and tone of the market, although he 

would expect that bill rates would not be allowed to rise above 

their recent highs. Over a longer period, however, it seemed 

important to bear in mind that if the recent restraining moves 

were to be effective, they had to be reflected in reduced rates of 

expansion in bank credit and the money supply.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

I, for one, have been much impressed by the signs 
of a stronger and stronger business situation that have 
reached us in the last few weeks. Both the contents of 
the green book and the briefing this morning reinforce 
my feeling on this score. GNP has been marked up 
sharply, both in terms of current dollar levels and 
past and prospective rates of advance. Employment is 
up significantly further, and the long-hoped-for 
breakthrough to an unemployment rate below 4 per cent 
is finally said to be "just around the corner" of the 
next month or two's reports. Thus far, our price 
performance has continued on the moderate side, despite 
our narrowing margins of unused resources, but I note 
that in looking ahead (in the green book) the staff has 
now come to say flatly, "...upward pressures on prices 
appear likely to be strong." 

My own judgment is similarly shifting in this 
direction. Accordingly, I am prepared to have monetary 
policy make a substantial and positive contribution to 
damping such inflationary pressures as they emerge.



1/11/66

Precisely how much--or perhaps I should say, how 
much more--monetary policy might need to be tightened 
to serve this purpose depends importantly on two issues 
that are still up in the air at this moment: 

(1) how much counter-inflationary help we will 
get from the Federal budget, and 

(2) how much restraint is resulting from the 
monetary tightening that has already taken 
place.  

We now have accomplished a significant second round 
of money market tightening, at least from a "rate" point 
of view, layered on top of the earlier firming of condi

tions that began last summer. Regardless of whether the 
System was right or wrong in its policy actions, and in 
the timing thereof, the wise thing to do now is to try 

to gain all the positive benefits we can by holding 

firmly to this posture of restraint for the time being.  
Consequently, I would favor the adoption of a policy 

designed to hold money market conditions at about their 
current degree of firmness until the next meeting of the 

Committee. This kind of policy should serve three 

immediate objectives: (1) preserving an "even keel" 
posture in connection with the Treasury financing; (2) 
permitting a careful judgment of the content of the new 

Federal budget and of public reaction thereto; and (3) 
allowing time to appraise the effects of the current 

degree of monetary tightness.  
By perhaps two meetings from now, these immediate 

objectives should be fulfilled and a hard look at the 
future course of policy should be possible. While I 
favor a pattern of interest rates as low as possible, 
compatible with sustainable growth in the economy and 
price stability, if credit demand prospects at that 

time still appear excessive, we may have to tighten 

even further. With interest rates already near historic 
highs, such further tightening should not be undertaken 

lightly. We shall have to be especially watchful for 

signs that our restrictive actions might be having 

cumulative effects that could give rise to a credit 

crisis and even an eventual recession. These consid

erations ought to make us careful, but not timid or 

inactive when the proper time for action arrives.  

With these thoughts in mind, I would favor a 

directive that called simply for maintaining about the 

current degree of firmness in money market conditions 

until the next meeting of the Committee.

-56-



1/11/66

Mr. Robertson added that he would prefer language such as 

he had suggested to that contained in the second paragraph of the 

staff's draft directive. In his judgment it would be desirable to 

place emphasis primarily on net borrowed reserves rather than on 

short-term interest rates. The current Treasury financing was a 

relatively minor operation and he would not be disturbed if short

term rates moved higher. As he had indicated, it seemed to him 

that the Committee should be holding firmly to the degree of 

restraint that had developed.  

Mr. Shepardson said he had little to add to the discussion 

of the general economic situation. He thought the staff reviews 

of that situation in the green book and in this morning's presen

tation were excellent. They pointed clearly to a strongly expanding 

economy at near-capacity levels with increasing possibilities of 

price advances. In that light the Committee certainly should be 

looking not toward maintaining but to further restraining the rate 

of credit expansion. He recognized, however, that with the 

Treasury financing situation no active change in policy could be 

made at the moment, and the directive proposed by the staff seemed 

appropriate.  

If he understood Mr. Holland correctly, Mr. Shepardson 

continued, as a result of market pressures rather than deliberate 

action the situation in the money market was a little tighter 

than might have been envisioned at the last meeting; and the

-57-



1/11/66 -58

proposal was that the Committee should contemplate accepting the 

same kind of tightening in the future if the pressures of demands 

were strong. In other words, while the Committee would not act 

to create firmer conditions, if the market firmed by itself the 

Committee would expect to moderate the change but not to roll 

conditions back. Similarly, in a situation in which demand 

pressures eased significantly, the reaction would be moderated.  

If an alternative interpretation was put on the proposal--namely, 

of asking the Desk deliberately to overshoot when the market 

tightened--he would not favor it. He did favor what had been 

done in the recent period--working to moderate expansion when 

demands outran the projections.  

Mr. Mitchell said that the country was in a period of 

inflamed expectations and it was that fact that had made it so 

difficult for the Desk to deal with the problems facing it recently.  

Current expectations ranged from a belief that the economy was 

heading for a Korean-war type of inflation, involving increases in 

wholesale prices of about 15 per cent over a six-month period, to 

a belief that there would be some acceleration from the recent 

rate of price change but no increases as spectacular as those 

during the Korean period. Whether or not either of those expecta

tions were valid no one could say at the moment. The Manager had 

implied that monetary policy could do little to tranquilize such ex

pectations, and he (Mr. Mitchell) also saw little that could be done,



1/11/66 -59

so perhaps the Committee had to lay the problem aside for the 

moment.  

The real economy was performing well, Mr. Mitchell continued, 

and perhaps too well, when judged against the standard of moving 

on to a full-employment path. The present climate of expectations 

was vulnerable to change as a result of the President's Budget 

Message. He agreed with Mr. Hayes that an absolute reading on 

fiscal policy would not be obtainable from the Message, because the 

budget proposed would have to be considered by Congress. Neverthe

less, he did expect a tough budget, and he thought that it would 

have a substantial effect on psychology and expectations.  

Under those conditions, Mr. Mitchell said, he was willing 

to go along with the staff's draft directive. However, he would 

be inclined to advise the Manager to expect that marginal reserves 

would have to be positive rather than negative to implement the 

directive. He would favor bill rates under the discount rate--in 

the 4.35-4.45 per cent range--rather than in a 4.50-4.60 per cent 

range. He thought the former was likely to prove a better operating 

range, and that rates in that area would be easily arrived at if 

the budget was as restrictive as he expected. If the budget was 

not restrictive, the Committee would be faced with a serious problem 

and might find it necessary to reconvene to adopt a somewhat dif

ferent policy. He agreed with Mr. Robertson on the possible need 

for restraint on credit growth.



1/11/66 -60

Mr. Mitchell indicated that he was somewhat dubious about 

Mr. Holland's suggestion. But Mr. Holland had alluded to a very 

real problem in commenting on the reasons for the recent market 

firming. An environmental change had developed gradually over 

the past few years, involving progressive reductions in the 

liquidity of banks and businesses. The staff analyses tended to 

be short-run in nature, implying no change in the general envir

onment. What troubled him was that if the Committee made decisions 

on the basis of such analyses when the environment had in fact 

changed, it might take actions that were extremely damaging to the 

economy. It was necessary to be careful, for example, in using 

growth rates in bank credit and the money supply as criteria for 

policy actions. When banks were extremely illiquid the alternatives 

before the Committee might be to act to ease that illiquidity or 

to face a financial crisis, and the first was obviously the better 

choice.  

Mr. Daane said he had little to add to what had been said.  

It seemed to him in the light of the Treasury financing schedule 

and the uncertainties as to the shape of the Administration's 

projected fiscal policy--whether it was achievable or not--the 

Committee should follow an even keel policy at this time. He had 

a great deal of sympathy for Mr. Robertson's statement and like 

Mr. Robertson he, too, was somewhat unhappy with the staff's draft 

directive.



1/11/66

From time to time, Mr. Daane continued, at least some 

members of the Committee had expressed dissatisfaction with the 

final clause of the first paragraph, which read "while accommodat

ing moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the 

money supply." He was particularly unhappy about that clause in 

the current context; it should read "by moderating growth in the 

reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply" if the Committee 

was trying to ward off incipient inflation. In the second paragraph 

he would prefer to use the customary language, calling for "main

taining about the current conditions in the money market," rather 

than language calling for resisting further firming and possibly 

implying some rollback in market conditions. The danger of 

incipient inflation was clear, and the Committee's main task was 

to keep monetary policy sufficiently flexible to do what it could 

to contain inflationary pressures.  

Mr. Maisel commented that the monetary picture since the 

Committee's last meeting seemed most disheartening. Interest rates 

on most money market instruments rose by nearly the full amount of 

the discount rate change. On the other hand, the expansions of 

reserves, of the money supply, and of bank credit were far larger 

than in most recent months and far above the average for the prior 

policy period. Thus, it seemed, the worst of both possible worlds 

had been experienced, with higher rates and an increased money and 

credit availability.

-61-



1/11/66

The Committee was now pausing temporarily in a period of 

even keel. It was important that it look ahead and consider what 

sort of policy made sense for the next quarter or six months.  

Since the final fiscal picture was lacking, the Committee could 

only make tentative plans. Contrary to Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Maisel 

would expect that there would be a tendency to look to the Federal 

Reserve System for maximum constraint, since the Committee had 

made it evident that it preferred to take the lead in that matter.  

It offered the choice of a high interest rate-higher deficit 

economy. If that policy was picked, he did not think the Committee 

should be too concerned with the height of the interest rate 

necessary to support such a policy.  

Mr. Maisel felt, therefore, that the Committee ought 

immediately to start to consider, looking toward the next meeting, 

the question of how large a cutback in the level of credit expansion 

was feasible. Mr. Holland's report was particularly worrisome.  

In the light of that type of credit movement, the Committee ought 

to determine what types of quantitative goals it thought were 

necessary for monetary policy in the period. He would hope that 

in choosing its policy the Committee would put more stress on the 

indexes of nonborrowed reserves, money supply, bank credit, and 

total deposits of all financial institutions. It seemed to him 

necessary that the rate of expansion in those series be cut back

-62-



1/11/66 -63

sharply from that of 1965 and particularly its last month toward 

or below the rates that had prevailed in the policy period prior 

to December 3. The present seemed to be a period of overly high 

expectations. The Committee should ask what attitude or action it 

could take to cut back on expenditures based on those expectations.  

While it was thinking about credit flows, Mr. Maisel 

continued, it might be proper for the Committee to consider the 

required reserve ratios. He recognized that was the ultimate 

responsibility of the Board, not the Committee. However, in order 

to curtail the rate of expansion in credit while at the same time 

getting the best possible distribution between small and large 

users, the Committee ought seriously to consider the advantages of 

moving as far as legally possible to a graduated reserve system.  

Mr. Galusha had alluded to a problem that might be ameliorated by 

such a change. In addition, the monetary advantages of moving to 

such a system in the next month or two were likely to be so clear 

that many fewer complaints would be encountered than if the move 

was made at other times.  

Mr. Maisel noted that his remarks had been aimed primarily 

at planning for the period immediately following that of "even keel." 

For this meeting he agreed generally with the directive as submitted, 

but he would judge that more stress should be placed on the quantity 

of reserves created than on interest rates, particularly in the



1/11/66 -64

period ahead before the impact on the next Treasury financing 

became critical. If Mr. Daane's suggestions did that, he would 

go along with his proposed wording.  

Mr. Hickman said it was now clear that the economy was 

moving forward at an accelerated pace and was rapidly approaching 

the limits of its capacity. The forward momentum of recent months, 

coupled with new higher estimates for GNP for 1965, had caused 

most analysts to make almost daily revisions in their projections 

for 1966. The Cleveland Reserve Bank's latest reading (already 

out of date) showed that most GNP forecasts for 1966 clustered 

around $720 billion, with the more sophisticated forecasts usually 

well above that, including Walter Heller's, which was announced in 

advance of the revised GNP figures for 1965. Since last year's 

rise in GNP brought forth some upward price pressure, and since 

there was now less slack in the labor force, any rise on the order 

of last year's increase of $47 billion (i.e., to a GNP of about 

$723 billion) would imply a risk of serious price inflation, on 

the basis of information now available.  

While prices were relatively stable during the summer 

months of 1965, Mr. Hickman continued, there were renewed signs 

of rise in the autumn, as reflected in all of the major price indexes.  

In the most recent three months, consumer prices had risen six-tenths 

of an index point, wholesale prices about one index point, and the



1/11/66 -65

industrial component of wholesale prices about one-half of an index 

point. Spot prices of raw industrial materials had moved up at a 

very rapid pace since early December, with the index in early 

January at a 14-year high. The latest diffusion indexes for spot 

prices and manufacturers' prices also showed sharp increases.  

In addition to the recent record of price advances, 

Mr. Hickman said, expectations regarding future prices had clearly 

been on the rise. For example, Dun and Bradstreet's most recent 

quarterly survey showed that the percentage of businessmen expecting 

price increases was the highest since early 1957. Steel magazine's 

fall survey of metal-working industries indicated that selling 

prices were expected to rise by a larger amount in 1966 than in 

any year since 1959. Walter Heller, in his GNP forecast, assumed 

that the price deflator would increase by 2.1 per cent, which was 

high by recent standards except possibly for 1965. Incidentally, 

Paul Samuelson's forecast, published yesterday, stated that the 

country would be lucky if prices rose by no more than 2-1/2 per cent.  

Against that background of rising output and price pressures, 

the accelerated pace of monetary expansion that had characterized 

the past month or so seemed clearly inappropriate to Mr. Hickman.  

As a matter of fact, most major monetary variables--bank credit, 

money supply, and nonborrowed reserves--showed larger gains in the 

month following the latest change in the discount rate than in



1/11/66 -66

comparable periods following other recent discount rate advances.  

Moreover, the annual rates of increase of those variables over the 

past month had equalled or exceeded the annual rates of increase 

since World War II. He deduced from all of that that the current 

thrust of monetary policy--as distinct from the intent of the 

Committee--was inflationary.  

Admittedly, Mr. Hickman said, it was difficult to determine 

the appropriate course for public policy in the weeks ahead. With 

an apparent administrative budget of $110-$115 billion, it now 

seemed fairly evident that the burden of restraint had to fall 

either on increased taxes, on tighter monetary policy, or on some 

judicious combination of the two. Because of the range of alter

native choices involved in a major policy move at this time, and 

because of the errors that were inherent in the basic economic 

information, it would be extremely helpful if the Committee had 

before it a continuing review of the Administration's position on 

the economic outlook and the appropriate mix of fiscal and monetary 

policy. Perhaps brief statements on that subject could be included 

in the green book from time to time; it was difficult for those 

outside of Washington to obtain such information directly.  

In the weeks immediately ahead, Mr. Hickman remarked, the 

Treasury financing schedule suggested "even keel" as the appropriate 

policy guide. Nevertheless, the perils of further overheating of



1/11/66 -67

the economy seemed to him to be so great as to outweigh the short

run objectives of the Treasury. If the Committee did nothing until 

the Treasury was out of the market, in, say, mid-February--which 

implied that it continue to pump up bank credit and the money supply 

at current inflationary rates--the Committee might find itself in 

the position of being able to do too little, too late. He, therefore, 

recommended some moderate tightening, with an immediate objective 

until the next meeting of the Committee of moving toward net 

borrowed reserves of $200-$250 million.  

The staff's policy directive implied to Mr. Hickman that 

market rates would be pegged around current levels, with the result 

that credit availability might expand excessively. He would prefer 

to reduce the current rate of expansion of the credit base even 

if it meant higher interest rates and deeper net borrowed reserves.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that it seemed only a few months since 

forecasters were predicting a gross national product in 1966 of 

not much more than $700 billion. Now expectations had changed 

dramatically. The recent revision of the figures on last year's 

performance, coupled with the swelling of expenditures in Viet Nam 

and expectations of a rapid forge ahead in capital spending, made 

the staff prediction of a $707 billion GNP (annual rate) for the 

first quarter seem quite reasonable.  

The rapidly changing business environment also was evident 

from the summary of forecasts compiled and published by the



1/11/66 -68

Philadelphia Reserve Bank, Mr. Bopp said. A median figure drawn 

from that Bank's collection of forecasts produced a GNP in 1966 

of $710 billion. Considering only the more recent of those 

forecasts, a GNP of around $713 billion emerged. Now even that 

figure appeared too low, perhaps in the order of $10 billion.  

With such a rapidly changing business environment, Mr. Bopp 

observed, the question arose of how quickly monetary policy should 

respond, particularly during a period like the present, when a 

strong economic advance seemed likely to be accompanied by pressures 

on labor markets and prices. For the next few weeks, however, 

prospective economic messages and Treasury financing called for a 

policy of even keel. The draft directive seemed appropriate to 

Mr. Bopp with the modifications suggested by Mr. Daane.  

Mr. Patterson reported that by almost any measure business 

activity in the Sixth District was booming. In fact, it topped 

the national performance where it counted the most. Not only was 

the District's insured unemployment less than the nation's, but 

every category of manufacturing employment had shown a larger 

increase than nationally.  

For reasons cited around the table, Mr. Patterson said, 

the national business picture had taken on boom proportions. Nor 

could the universal prediction that another substantial rise of 

GNP lay ahead be ignored. The Committee members were all aware



1/11/66 -69

that such an advance, however desirable, might also harbor serious 

problems. As others had noted today, price pressures had been 

increasing. And they would become even more intense as the economy 

got closer to the limit of productive capacity.  

The role the Federal Reserve should play in the broader 

public effort directed against inflation had, to Mr. Patterson's 

way of thinking, been made a matter of public record. The System 

committed itself on that score when the Board, in taking action on 

the discount rate, indicated that the move was intended to back 

the Government's efforts to prevent inflationary excesses. In his 

opinion, those efforts had received a considerable setback in 

recent weeks. First, it seemed clear that Federal spending and 

credit needs would be very much higher than the Committee was made 

aware at the last meeting. Secondly, the failure to achieve a 

complete rollback on the price increase of structural steel under

scored the difficulty of using direct pressure to hold down prices.  

Under those circumstances, the System would bear greater respon

sibility in coping with inflationary pressures than one might have 

concluded a few short weeks ago.  

Short-term rates had increased more than many of the 

Committee members had expected, Mr. Patterson continued, especially 

when viewed against the liberal supply of reserves provided by the 

System. Therefore, strong credit demands rather than System action



1/11/66 -70

seemed to account for the rate adjustments. In that context, the 

Desk had allowed interest rates to go higher without trying to 

curtail the growth rate of bank credit. Since most people chose 

to pay a higher rate rather than do without the funds, that would 

not restrict credit very much. And yet, if his interpretation of 

the economy and credit climate was correct, the growth in total 

credit had to be held down. How should the Committee go about 

accomplishing that? If bills were sold, short-term rates would 

be pushed up further and the System might eventually feel obligated 

to raise the discount rate again. If reserve requirements were 

raised, in meeting the higher requirements banks would be compelled 

to sell off coupon issues. Yields on such securities currently 

were about 5 per cent and under those conditions would go even 

higher. As interest rates increased, banks would be compelled to 

bid for CDs at increasingly higher rates, unless the banks were 

prepared to curtail their lending or to see their corporate customers 

put CDs into other money-market instruments. On the other hand, 

interest rates might not push upward at all, if the relaxation of 

seasonal pressures at this time of year could be counted on.  

Since the dust had not yet settled from the two December 

actions and the Treasury's financing calendar permitted little, 

if any, overt action today, Mr. Patterson favored maintaining the 

"status quo," with the idea that the Desk should absorb reserves



1/11/66 -71

quickly and to a greater degree than was usual for this time of year, 

unless that disturbed the Treasury financing and pushed up rates unduly.  

Mr. Shuford commented that as noted by the staff and others 

at the table, national economic activity had continued to expand at 

a rapid pace. The current rise in activity appeared to be on a broad 

front, with significant gains occurring in most major lines of busi

ness. In view of the strong upward momentum and the great optimism, 

it appeared that total spending would continue to rise in early 1966.  

Economic activity in the Eighth District had continued to 

expand since summer, Mr. Shuford said, with significant gains in 

manufacturing. Since August, employment by manufacturing firms had 

risen at a 4.8 per cent annual rate, and manufacturing output had 

risen at a 6 per cent rate. Total deposits at District banks had 

risen at a 6 per cent rate in the same period. Demand deposits, 

which had remained on a plateau during early 1965, had risen at a 

4 per cent rate since late summer, and time deposits had increased 

at a 9 per cent rate.  

Nationally, demands for goods and services appeared to 

Mr. Shuford to be excessive, as evidenced by price developments.  

In recent months, prices had been rising at an accelerated rate.  

Consumer prices rose at a 2.2 per cent rate from October to November, 

despite no change in the food price index. That was the third 

consecutive monthly increase at the advanced rate of 2.2 per cent.  

Wholesale prices rose at a 4.8 per cent rate from October to



1/11/66 -72

November, with increases occurring in most of the major components.  

Preliminary data for December indicated a further increase in 

wholesale prices.  

Rising prices, in conjunction with a high level of resource 

utilization, indicated that expansion in total demand for goods and 

services was outrunning the nation's capacity to meet such an 

expansion, Mr. Shuford continued. When prices rose moderately, a 

case might be made that the increases were a calculated cost of 

encouraging fuller employment of the economy's resources. However, 

when spending was rising so rapidly that price increases began to 

accelerate, there was little doubt that the country was experiencing 

undesirable inflation, and that steps should be taken to curb the 

excessive demands.  

Fiscal and monetary actions were contributing significantly 

to increase the total demand, Mr. Shuford said. The Federal budget, 

as measured by the full-employment surplus, turned more stimulative 

in the last half of 1965 and was expected to be still more expan

sionary in early 1966. The nation's money supply had continued to 

rise sharply since the increase in the discount rate. Money rose 

at a 7 per cent annual rate from June to December, the highest rate 

for any six-month period since 1952. Such a rapid expansion of 

money operated with a lag and its main effect might yet be felt.  

In view of the exuberant economic situation and the expan

sionary Governmental actions, Mr. Shuford believed that some further



1/11/66 -73

monetary tightening would be desirable. More restraint also 

would be beneficial to the U.S. balance of payments, both because 

of interest rate effects and restraint on the price level. How

ever, because of the factors others had mentioned--the Treasury 

financing, conditions in financial markets, and forthcoming 

economic messages--it was clear that a change in policy would not 

be appropriate at the present time. In his judgment, however, 

unless the rates of reserve injection and money growth slowed, the 

Committee would have to take another tightening action soon. As 

far as the directive was concerned, he thought that either the 

staff's draft or the revised version proposed by Mr. Daane would 

be satisfactory.  

Mr. Balderston commented that the Committee had had the 

task, following the discount rate action of December 3, of easing 

the economy over the year-end seasonal bulge. But actual events 

at the turn of the year differed markedly from what either the 

Committee or the Desk had reason to anticipate; history did not 

repeat itself. The chart of Federal Reserve credit (weekly 

averages of daily figures) from 1957 to date revealed a sharp 

decline starting either at the beginning of each year or just prior 

to that time. Moreover, Federal Reserve float exhibited a peak at 

the end of each year, followed by a rapid decline immediately 

thereafter. The Committee and the Desk had reason to expect that 

such a seasonal pattern would be repeated.



1/11/66

But the demand for bank credit apparently overwhelmed and 

distorted the usual seasonal behavior, Mr. Balderston continued.  

On December 14, 1965, the Committee had directed the Desk to 

moderate "any further adjustments in money and credit markets that 

may develop." He would interpret "adjustments" to include not only 

rates of interest but the volume of credit. Rates had increased 

considerably, with bill rates some 20 basis points higher, but 

what had really got out of hand was the flow of reserves, bank 

credit, and money. Nonborrowed reserves increased at an annual 

rate of 20.7 per cent in December, total reserves at 18.8 per cent, 

bank credit at 10.9 per cent, and money supply at 12.3 per cent.  

Those rates were clearly unsustainable and prompt correction was 

indicated even though the Treasury was in the midst of a financing.  

With payment scheduled for January 19, there were just a few days 

to get those percentages back on the beam again before the important 

Treasury refunding to be announced January 26. In short, he hoped 

the Committee would not feel it necessary to hold the keel even 

for the current financing, which was modest in size and involved a 

rich offering. He would prefer to see such action as was indicated 

taken despite the financing, and then anticipate achieving stability 

for the February refunding.  

The year-end escalation of reserves, bank credit, and 

money supply, Mr. Balderston said, reflected the increase in the

-74-



1/11/66 -75

System's portfolio between December 15 and January 5 of about 

$2 billion of repurchase agreements in addition to the acquisition 

of some bills. On a net basis, the portfolio grew during the 

period by $3/4 billion, whereas in the comparable year-ago period 

it had shrunk by $1/4 billion. In the light of those actions, 

the Committee needed to restrict bank credit to the amount required 

for growth in output without adding to inflationary pressures.  

With mounting war demands superimposed on private demand, it would 

appear that current market forces would continue to press interest 

rates upward. Should the level of interest rates be prevented 

from rising? Even if the System could succeed in keeping such 

rates stable in the present climate, the effort would tend to 

induce inflation. On the other hand, monetary policy needed the 

support of higher taxes if the current war-supported demand was to 

be curbed. However, the System should not shirk its part of the 

task, which was to assist the forces of the market to determine 

new rate levels in an orderly fashion.  

The data now coming to light seemed to confirm that the 

discount rate action was in the nick of time, Mr. Balderston 

commented. That event drove home once again that the System's 

success turned on its luck in doing the right thing at the right 

time and often before all the facts were available. Now that the 

economy had passed the Christmas hump, it would seem appropriate



1/11/66 -76

to rediscover what level of reserves would keep the economy strong 

without overheating, without relying on the Administration to curb 

spending or to increase taxes sufficiently. In wartime actual 

spending tended to outrun budgets, and tax increases--if made in 

an election year--were tardy in both adoption and effect.  

Mr. Balderston would, therefore, permit any further increase 

in demands for reserves to firm money market conditions. By the 

word "conditions" he meant not only short-term interest rates but 

also excess reserves and bank borrowing. Hopefully, a return flow 

of funds in late January and in February would be of assistance, 

but even with such aid the System needed to act.  

As to the directive, Mr. Balderston said that Mr. Daane's 

proposed change in the first paragraph was acceptable to him, but 

that he would like to submit for the Committee's consideration 

the following substitute wording for the second paragraph: 

"System open market operations until the next meeting of the 

Committee shall be conducted with a view to permitting any further 

increase in demand pressures to firm money market conditions." 

Chairman Martin asked Mr. Holmes what implications he 

thought Mr. Balderston's proposed language would have for operations.  

In reply, Mr. Holmes said that one problem was that it was 

not easy to sort out demand pressures from other forces that might 

be tending to firm money market conditions, particularly over short



1/11/66 -77

periods; over longer periods it could be done more accurately. He 

would be willing to try, but he could not guarantee the results.  

The underlying principle--letting net borrowed reserves deepen and 

money market conditions firm in a period of strong credit demands-

certainly could be a useful one, and was similar, he thought, to 

the objective of Mr. Holland's proposal.  

Mr. Daane said that as much as he sympathized with 

Mr. Balderston's view, and with the view Mr. Robertson had expressed 

earlier on the desirability of deriving all possible advantages 

from the System's recent rate action, he did not think the Committee 

could ignore a Treasury financing even though it was a modest one.  

He asked Mr. Holmes whether a deviation from even keel at present 

would lead to difficulties for the Treasury.  

Mr. Holmes replied that any operations that were interpreted 

by the market as signifying an overt change in policy would tend to 

confirm the extreme view in the present range of expectations regard

ing future interest rate levels, and might make things quite 

difficult for the Treasury in connection with the February refunding.  

The refunding could be important in bringing greater stability to 

the interest rate structure, if the issue was realistically priced.  

At the same time, if overriding forces were pushing interest rates 

up efforts by the System to offset those pressures would not be 

helpful to the Treasury in pricing the new issue.



1/11/66

In response to a question by Mr. Daane, Mr. Holmes said 

that on the basis of the discussion today he would not interpret 

an "even keel" decision as calling either for rolling back rates 

from their present levels or for preventing them from rising 

further if market conditions worked in that direction.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that the Committee lacked the facts 

necessary to define the circumstances that were likely to prevail 

in the coming period. There would be no great problem with respect 

to bill rates if market psychology changed because a restrictive 

budget was announced, and it might be difficult to hold bill rates 

up at a reasonable level if developments suggested that the peace 

offensive was likely to be successful. It seemed desirable to him 

to give the Manager more leeway than usual until some of the present 

uncertainties were resolved.  

Mr. Balderston noted that the second paragraph of the 

staff's draft directive called for "moderating any further firming 

of money market conditions that may develop." At the same time 

the blue book cited the unusually large percentage increases in 

financial aggregates in December that he had quoted in his earlier 

comments. Future historians might well ask what firming the 

Committee had in mind today when they noted that nonborrowed 

reserves, for example, had increased at an annual rate of over 

20 per cent in December.

-78-



1/11/66

Mr. Robertson then suggested calling for operations "with 

a view to maintaining about the current conditions in the money 

market." He noted that at least some members had indicated a 

preference for placing primary emphasis on net borrowed reserves 

rather than on interest rates as such, if it proved necessary to 

make a choice.  

Mr. Balderston indicated that he was agreeable to 

Mr. Robertson's suggestion.  

Chairman Martin said he thought the wording Mr. Robertson 

had proposed for the second paragraph was appropriate. He continued 

to be impressed by the difficulties posed for the Committee by the 

fact that particular words meant different things to different 

people. The longer he worked in the area the more perplexing he 

found the problem of specifying the Committee's intentions.  

On the whole, Chairman Martin believed that monetary policy 

had performed well during the past year. As he had indicated in 

his memorandum to the President that he had read to the Committee 

on October 12, the flow of funds was being constricted in an 

undesirable way. The role of interest rates was being viewed 

wholly out of perspective, and unwarranted claims about the power 

of interest rates were being made by people on both sides of the 

policy debate.  

There had been real progress in freeing the flow of funds 

during the last six weeks or so, Chairman Martin continued. No

-79-



1/11/66 -80

one had expected the December rate actions to work miracles; but 

it was clear that there had been factors constricting the flow of 

funds, and that the rate actions had alleviated the problem.  

Fiscal policy, debt management policy, incomes policy, and 

monetary policy all were in play all of the time, the Chairman 

said, and all four were fluid. Developments could not necessarily 

be attributed to any one of the four, and judgments might differ 

on their interrelations at any one time. Business outlays on 

plant and equipment were moving up rapidly and if Federal expen

ditures rose substantially further there would be a sizable full 

employment budget deficit about which something would have to be 

done. Certainly monetary policy alone could not cope with that 

problem; at some point action might be called for on all four 

fronts. He agreed with Mr. Hayes that the proper course for 

monetary policy now was "steady in the boat"; the best the Committee 

could do at the moment was to maintain conditions as steady as it 

could, and contribute as much as possible to the maintenance of 

reasonable flows of funds through the markets.  

It was not the Committee's job to tell the Administration 

what policies it should follow, the Chairman continued, but debt 

management was in a knot at present. Because of the 4-1/4 per cent 

interest rate ceiling on Treasury bond issues, any new Government 

financing had to involve maturities of five years or less.



1/11/66 -81

Chairman Martin observed that he felt more and more humble 

as time went on about what really could be accomplished in the area 

of monetary policy. He often had remarked that he did not fully 

understand the role of the money supply in the economy, and he had 

to say now that after having been concerned with the subject for 

many years he understood it less than he had twenty years ago.  

One was dealing with human choices and value judgments, and that 

required the ability to change one's conclusions from day to day 

and month to month. He did not mean that one should not have 

convictions on the subject, but that there should be flexibility 

in views. In his judgment one ought to worry most about the man 

who was sure he knew the answers; the nature of the policy problem 

was such as to preclude fixed positions. He, for one, did not 

think he had the answers, any more than anyone else. It was 

necessary to maintain an open mind and to probe constantly for 

new approaches, new devices, and new instruments.  

Chairman Martin thought the Committee was more or less in 

agreement on policy today. The members might best concentrate on 

what policy would be appropriate in the future, in light of the 

new factors in the situation and considering the contents of the 

coming Budget Message. The System now would be operating in an 

entirely new environment--one that had not been contemplated a 

year ago--of full employment generally and over-full employment of



1/11/66 -82

skilled workers. He personally would favor a little inflation if 

he thought it would benefit the unemployables, but he did not 

think it would; rather, it would do them harm. He had debated 

that issue for years with academicians, some of whom, he believed, 

had an emotional bias on the subject. In his opinion there was 

some justification for their view in the short run but not in the 

longer run.  

The Chairman then suggested that the Committee vote on a 

directive consisting of the staff's draft with amendments along 

the lines of those proposed by Messrs. Robertson and Daane.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and 
directed, until otherwise directed by the 
Committee, to execute transactions in the 
System Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that domestic economic expansion 
has strengthened further in a climate of optimistic 
business sentiment and with some further upward creep in 
prices. Interest rates are higher in most markets in 
response to strong credit demands and recent official 
rate actions. Our international payments position 
improved considerably during 1965 but further progress 
is needed to attain effective balance. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist 
the emergence of inflationary pressures and to help restore 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, 
by moderating the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, 
and the money supply.  

In light of the Treasury financing schedule, System 
open market operations until the next meeting of the



1/11/66 -83

Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
about the current conditions in the money market.  

Mr. Swan said that it would be useful if the staff could 

provide some indication of the effects on seasonal factors for 

financial series as the economy approached full utilization of 

resources. In particular, he would like to know whether seasonal 

fluctuations tended to be damped under those circumstances.  

Mr. Holland replied that the staff would develop information on 

that subject.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, February 1, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) January 10, 1966 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on January 11, 1966 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that domestic economic expansion has strengthened 
further in a climate of optimistic business sentiment and with some 
further upward creep in prices. Interest rates are higher in most 
markets in response to strong credit demands and recent official 
rate actions. Our international payments position improved con
siderably during 1965 but further progress is needed to attain 
effective balance. In this situation, it remains the Federal Open 
Market Committee's policy to resist the emergence of inflationary 
pressures and to help restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments, while accommodating moderate growth in the 
reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

In light of the Treasury financing schedule, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to moderating any further firming of money 
market conditions that may develop.  

Note: The second paragraph of this draft directive is intended 
as one possible interpretation of an "even keel" policy stance under 
the conditions existing at present. Alternative possible interpreta
tions might involve instructions to maintain "about the current 
conditions in the money market" or "about the same conditions in the 
money market as have prevailed on average since the preceding meeting" 
with guidance given to the Manager as to whether emphasis should be 
placed primarily on net borrowed reserves or on short-term interest 
rates if the current or recent relations prove inconsistent.


