









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 28, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 

Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 

Messrs. Treiber, Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Ellis and Galusha, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis, 

respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Axilrod and Gramley, Associate Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, Senior Atorney, Legal Division, 
Board of Governors



6/28/66 -2

Mr. Kimbrel, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Willis, Ratchford, Taylor, Baughman, 
Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. MacLaury and Scheld, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Nelson, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on June 7, 1966 were 

approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period June 7 through 22, 1966, and a supplemental report for June 23 

through 27, 1966. Copies of these reports have been placed in the 

files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

reported that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this 

week following the decline of $100 million last week. Reserve gains 

by France this month appeared to be more than $100 million, so that 

another purchase, at least equal to the $75 million taken in June,



6/28/66 -3

could almost certainly be counted on in July, and consequently 

another drop in the gold stock at approximately the same time. In the 

London market, the price of gold moved up from $35.13 earlier in June 

to $35.17-1/2 in the last few days. Supplies coming on the market 

from new production had been substantially diminished by the rebuild

ing of South Africa's gold reserves, and in the face of sustained 

demand the pool had gone $64 million further into deficit in this 

month alone. That acceleration in the amount of gold supplied by the 

pool was cause for real concern; the pool began the year with a sur

plus of some $40 million and was now nearly $120 million in deficit, 

so that official losses through the pool totaled approximately $160 

million for the year to date.  

Without doubt, Mr. MacLaury said, the pressures on sterling 

during the past month had contributed to the uneasiness in the gold 

market, and there were rumors last week that China might again be a 

buyer, although there was no confirmation of that. The sizable 

Russian purchase of wheat from Canada announced last week led to some 

hope that Russia might at last come into the market with its long

anticipated sales of gold. As yet there had been no evidence of such 

sales, however; and he understood that, contrary to initial impres

sions, the rate of Russian wheat purchases from Canada during the 

next three years would be only about half that of previous years.



6/28/66 -4

Altogether, the outlook in the gold market was not encouraging, as 

Mr. Coombs had been stressing at recent meetings of the Committee.  

Sterling had had a very rocky time this month, Mr. MacLaury 

continued. At the beginning of the month--between June 3 and June 7-

the Bank of England had to provide some $350 million of support in 

the spot and forward markets as holders of sterling first reacted to 

the announcement of the $100 million U.K. reserve decline for May, 

and then to the prolongation of the British maritime strike and to 

the devaluation of the Indian rupee. The actual cost to the reserves 

during that four-day period was limited to about $200 million by 

shifting part of the original spot losses into the forward market.  

Another brief burst of selling occurred on Friday, June 10, 

when the losses amounted to about $60 million, Mr. MacLaury observed.  

In the following week, however, there was a sharp turnaround in the 

market as those who had sold sterling short the previous week rushed 

to cover their positions on the announcement of renewed international 

assistance for the pound. The Committee would recall that on Monday, 

June 13, the Bank of England announced that the international credit 

facilities first extended in September 1965 by seven European central 

banks, Japan, Canada, and the Bank for International Settlements had 

been renewed, that related facilities with the United States were 

still in force, and that the Bank of France this time was participat

ing in the arrangements. The renewal was initially reported in the



6/28/66 -5

press as a completely new package, and on the strength of those 

somewhat exaggerated press stories, substantial buying of sterling 

carried through most of that week. The Bank of England was able to 

recoup most of the previous week's spot losses, regaining about $220 

million of the earlier $260 million loss.  

Since in fact that recovery was not based on any fundamental 

change in the British situation itself, and particularly in the 

strike, one could not expect the buying to be long sustained, Mr.  

MacLaury noted. It was perhaps only natural that sterling should 

again come under pressure last week, when another weekend had passed 

with no news of a strike settlement and when the market had had more 

time to assess closely the implications of the renewal of the Septem

ber arrangements. But, on that occasion, the pressure was compounded 

by an extreme squeeze for funds that developed in the Euro-dollar 

market as mid-year approached; quotations for short maturities rose 

more than 1/4 per cent to 6 per cent or higher. The pull of the 

Euro-dollar market drew funds out of sterling, and on Monday, June 20, 

the Bank of England had to provide some $140 million to hold the 

spot rate at $2.7890. Since much of the selling that day reflected 

covered movements of funds out of sterling, forward sterling rates 

strengthened sharply; for example, one-month sterling rose to a 

premium for the first time since late 1963. With U.S. Treasury bill 

yields also slipping, the covered incentive on three-month bills



6/28/66

jumped from less than .40 per cent to .70 per cent per annum in favor 

of London, while London's incentive on one-month bills advanced to 

approximately 1-1/4 per cent per annum, Despite the generally tight 

money market conditions in this country, there was a distinct possi

bility that covered incentives of that magnitude could pull private 

funds from the U.S. To reduce the potential for such an outflow, 

and at the same time to relieve exchange market pressures resulting 

from the dollar squeeze and to provide support for spot sterling, 

in the afternoon of June 20 the New York Bank began to engage in 

market swaps--purchasing sterling spot against one-month forward sale, 

thereby widening the discounts for forward delivery. By the close of 

business that day, a total of almost $50 million equivalent of swaps 

had been undertaken, half for System account and half for Treasury 

account. As a result of that intervention the net incentive on one

month bills was reduced to about 0.90 per cent per annum. The 

operation had, of course, been discussed in advance with the Bank of 

England and it was welcomed by them in the full knowledge that the 

market would have to reabsorb the sterling purchases when the forwards 

came due in July. On Tuesday, June 20, the Bank of England again had 

to provide sizable support--$55 million--to counter brief but heavy 

selling just after the opening in London. With the forwards still 

narrow and the incentive in favor of London on one-month bills still 

nearly one per cent, the New York Bank continued to engage in swaps



6/28/66 -7-

on Tuesday and Thursday, though on a much smaller scale. Altogether,

during the three days of such operations, a total of $67 million of

sterling was purchased on a covered basis, half for System account.

Mr. MacLaury went on to say that although the operations

indirectly helped to offset part of the pressures on U.K. reserves

arising from the technical dollar squeeze--without the adverse effects

on the U.S. balance of payments that would have accompanied interest-

induced private outflows from this country--the British authorities

nevertheless were facing a pretty bleak picture on reserves this

month. The net result of the Bank of England's very sizable inter-

vention, its repayment of the $100 million credit from the U.S.

Treasury over last month-end, and the maturing of a sizable amount

of previous forward contracts left U.K. reserves down nearly $550

million. At the New York Bank's suggestion, the Bank of England had

arranged for a $150 million credit from the Bank for International

Settlements, outside of the sterling balance arrangements announced

two weeks ago. Because the market was aware of the heavy pressures

on sterling during the past month, generated in large part by the pro-

longed maritime strike, and was therefore expecting a large reserve

decline, the New York Bank was urging that they show a sizable loss,

thus emphasizing the cost to the reserves of the strike and at the

same time conserving their credit lines for later use. A published

loss approximately double last month's figures--i.e., about $200



6/28/66 -8

million--seemed reasonable under the difficult circumstances, even 

though a decline of that magnitude clearly involved a calculated risk 

of speculative repercussions. If that reasoning was accepted by the 

U.K. authorities, the U.S. would have to be prepared to put up the 

remaining $200 million necessary to cover the $550 reserve decline.  

Half probably would be provided by the Treasury and half through a 

drawing under the swap line with the Federal Reserve.  

Mr. MacLaury remarked that there had been considerable 

activity in other currencies during the month, with France and Italy 

continuing to take in dollars as a result of payments surpluses, 

Switzerland and Germany experiencing sizable repatriations of funds 

in connection with tight domestic money markets and mid-year position

ing, and the Canadian dollar benefiting from the announcement of 

Russian wheat purchases. He would not go into detail on those 

developments, however, because they had not involved any System 

operations. Sterling remained the real focus of concern. In that 

connection, he noted that there had been no substantive changes in 

the sterling balance arrangements finally agreed upon at the last 

Basle meeting from the draft agreement circulated to the Committee by 

Mr. Coombs.  

Mr. Daane asked about the dates on which the British would 

publish figures for June on their reserves and on their trade balance.  

He suspected that the first-quarter payments figures to be announced



6/28/66 -9-

soon would not be good, and he was concerned about the possible effect

on the sterling market of the conjuncture of poor payments figures and

data showing large reserve losses.

Mr. MacLaury replied that the reserve figures for a month

customarily were published two business days after the end of the

month, and the June trade figures could be expected about the middle

of July. The staff of the New York Bank recognized that the British

would have to bear the consequences of any steps they took on the

advice of the Bank. It appeared to the Bank's staff, however, that

in a month in which the British could point to the maritime strike

as a reason for a significant reserve loss it would be desirable for

them not to use their available credit lines more fully to cover the

loss.

In response to another question by Mr. Daane, Mr. MacLaury

said that the British preferred not to draw on the new credit package

because they were not certain they could prove there had been a net

decline in foreign sterling balances since the end-of-February base

period specified under the formula contained in the agreement.

Although foreign balances had been run down in June, they had increased

in April and May.

Mr. Brimmer asked what reason the British would have for not

showing a June reserve loss larger than the $200 million recommended

by the New York Bank.



6/28/66 -10-

Mr. MacLaury responded that they would be concerned about the

risk of setting off a cycle of speculation against sterling. A loss

of $200 million was large for a single month; in the three preceding

months the British had shown losses of about $75 million, $50 million,

and $100 million, respectively.

In reply to questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. MacLaury said that

the three figures he had just mentioned reflected the actual reserve

declines the British had experienced but, of course, a $200 million

figure for June would not. In the past the British had always

announced the fact of recourse to their U.S. credit facilities, but

had not made known the amounts involved.

Mr. Hayes commented that at the latest Basle meeting, when

Britain's reserve losses for June were less than at present, he had

discussed with Deputy Governor O'Brien of the Bank of England the

question of the amount of decline that should be shown. Mr. O'Brien's

attitude clearly was a cautious one; he was concerned about the pos-

sible undesirable consequences of showing too large a loss, and was

seeking the best compromise.

Mr. Mitchell said that he, for one, felt the British would

achieve the results they sought faster if they reported their reserve

position accurately than if they attempted to conceal their true

position.

Mr. MacLaury remarked that while the New York Bank had not

recommended that the British reveal their full reserve loss in June,



6/28/66 -11-

the rationale underlying their advice to show a decline of $200 million

was similar to that underlying Mr. Mitchell's position; namely, that

an indication of the magnitude of the cost to Britain of the maritime

strike would increase the pressure for an early settlement.

Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the System open market transactions in
foreign currencies during the period
June 7 through 27, 1966, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.

Mr. MacLaury then recommended renewal of six standby swap

arrangements that would mature soon. They were a $50 million arrange-

ment with the Bank of Sweden, having a term of 12 months, and maturing

on July 19; a $150 million arrangement with the Swiss National Bank,

having a term of 6 months, and maturing on July 20; two $150 million

arrangements with the BIS--one for System drawings in Swiss francs and

one for System drawings in other European currencies--having terms of

6 months and maturing on July 20; a $50 million arrangement with the

Austrian National Bank, having a twelve-month term, and maturing on

July 26; and a $250 million arrangement with the Bank of Japan, also

with a twelve-month term, and maturing on July 29.

Renewals of the six standby swap
arrangements, as recommended by Mr.
MacLaury, were approved unanimously.

Mr. MacLaury then noted that he had one remaining matter to

report for the information of the Committee. At the preceding meeting

the Committee had noted without objection the renewal of the $50



6/28/66 -12

million drawing on the National Bank of Belgium that represented the 

portion of the swap arrangement with that Bank that was always fully 

drawn. As in the past, the Belgians had asked that the interest rate 

on the drawing be adjusted to current market levels and, with the 

concurrence of the U.S. Treasury, the rate was increased from 4-3/8 

per cent to 4-1/2 per cent. The rate on the standby portion of the 

arrangement remained unchanged at 4-1/4 per cent, and no use was being 

made currently of either portion of the arrangement.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to report on the 

meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten he had recently attended.  

Mr. Daane said that the Deupties meeting was held in Frankfurt, 

Germany, on Wednesday through Friday of last week (June 22-24). His 

own assessment was that it represented a significant setback in the 

negotiations of the Ten. As a backdrop to the meeting there had been 

increasingly serious concern abroad with the U.S. balance of payments 

position, as Chairman Martin and he had reported at the previous meet

ing of the Committee. Skepticism was growing about the real objective 

of the U.S. in the negotiations, with the question raised as to 

whether the U.S. was seeking some additional financing that would 

enable it to avoid the monetary discipline the members of the Group 

of Ten felt it should observe.  

A more specific backdrop to the meeting, Mr. Daane continued, 

was the discussion at an immediately preceding meeting of the Minis

ters and Governors of the European Economic Community. In that



6/28/66 -13

discussion apparently the French Finance Minister had capitalized on 

the concern about the U.S. payments balance, and had persuaded his 

colleagues to adopt a considerably firmer position on three points.  

The first, and most important, was that the six members of the EEC 

were now solidly of the view that the decision-making process on any 

new asset creation should rest with the Group of Ten, even if the 

assets were created through the IMF. Moreover, some of the Deputies 

made it perfectly clear that that position had been taken at the 

cabinet level. Thus, they had definitely hardened their positions 

on the matter of decision-making. Secondly, they had firmed even 

further their positions with regard to preconditions for asset crea

tion, most significantly in setting as a precondition the restoration 

of equilibrium in both the U.S. and U.K. balance of payments. They 

also called for stronger rules on the adjustment process and for 

strengthened multilateral surveillance. Third, they had coalesced 

around the idea of a simple unit plan.  

Those apparent developments at the EEC meeting, Mr. Daane 

continued, filtered through to the subsequent deliberations in 

Frankfurt of the Group of Ten Deputies, where some of the previously 

discussed substantive matters relating to reserve asset creation, 

such as the question of a gold link, were submerged. The discussion 

focused almost entirely on the question of the decision-making 

process, particularly as it related to moving into a second stage.



6/28/66 -14

The questions were: Was there now to be a second stage? If so, how 

should it be entered, and how organized? As a further backdrop to 

what was an unsuccessful and incomplete discussion among the Ten, the 

International Monetary Fund Executive Board had held extended discus

sions of a U.S. proposal for creation of an Advisory Committee of 

Governors to carry on second-stage discussions. The Fund Executive 

Board had reacted negatively, and quite strongly. It had concluded 

by endorsing a proposal of the Managing Director for a compromise 

involving second-stage deliberations by the Executive Board and the 

Group of Ten Deputies sitting together. There had been discussions 

between Messrs. Schweitzer and Emminger and a cross-fertilization of 

the ideas of the Fund and the Group of Ten. As he understood the out

come, the proposal was for separate, parallel efforts by both the 

Fund Board and the Ten, with regularly-scheduled combined meetings, 

perhaps four times a year.  

Those, Mr. Daane thought, were the key points at the meeting 

last week. The Deputies did consider parts of the draft of their 

report itself, but such discussion was secondary to the issue of 

decision-making. A substantial degree of agreement was reached on 

the language of the introduction and of the second chapter concerning 

improvements in the international payments system. Consideration of 

the third chapter, dealing with elements of various proposals for 

the creation of reserve assets, was postponed to the next meeting,



6/28/66 -15

and the discussion bogged down when Chapter 4, involving a vertical 

analysis of the various proposals, was considered. The current 

thinking was that the substance of Chapter 4 should be included in 

an appendix. As far as the draft report was concerned, the focus 

was mainly on the fifth chapter, Conclusions and Recommendations.  

The French position, while basically unchanged, had hardened; they 

were now willing to say very early in the concluding chapter that 

they had abstained even from participating in the discussion and 

drafting of all those passages of the report relating to the elements 

of contingency planning. They indicated that they would hold firmly 

to their position until the U.S. achieved equilibrium in its balance 

of payments. It was possible to get agreement among the other nine 

members of the Group on the desirability of contingency planning, 

but the French would certainly stand strongly on their position.  

The Deputies would meet in Paris on July 6 to put their 

report in final form, Mr. Daane said. The report would then be con

sidered by the Ministers and Governors of the Ten at The Hague on 

July 25-26.  

Mr. Daane concluded by noting that Mr. Solomon, in addition 

to attending recent meetings of the Deputies, had been a member of 

a four-man drafting group that had held sessions between the Paris 

and Frankfurt meetings. He thus had been extensively exposed to the 

thinking of the Europeans and might have some comments.



6/28/66 -16

Mr. Solomon said he would make two points. First, he thought 

the hardening of views by the Europeans on the question of decision

making reflected what was close to a suspicion on their part that, if 

a scheme for creating reserve assets through the Fund were adopted, 

the U.S. would team up with the rest of the world to force creation 

of new assets that would end up in their own reserves. At the moment 

they felt strongly enough on the point to insist on conditions that 

would prevent that from happening. Secondly, the present confusion 

regarding alternative proposals for procedures in the second stage 

also reflected the hardening of the Europeans' position and their 

reluctance to move into that stage. They would prefer procedures 

that were less than clear-cut, and that in general would involve 

continuing work in the area by the Group of Ten while paying some 

lip service to the idea of a second stage.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he subscribed fully to Mr. Solomon's 

observations.  

Mr. Galusha asked whether Mr. Schweitzer's recent strongly 

worded criticism of the limitation of the current dialogue to the 

Ten had resulted in any significant strain.  

Mr. Daane replied that, as far as the U.S. view was concerned, 

there would inevitably be a second stage whether or not the Ten were 

willing to accept it. While the Group had fended off the participa

tion of other countries thus far, they were aware of the need to



6/28/66 -17

bring in the rest of the world at some point and in his view 

Mr. Schweitzer's statement was overly critical of the Ten. The 

Group probably would not be able to resist for any length of time 

the strong feeling in the Fund and in the countries that were not 

participating, and in due course there was likely to be parallel 

consideration by the Fund and the Group, and perhaps some form of 

merger. The question would then arise whether that would consti

tute a real second stage of negotiation.  

Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Hayes recently had spent 

some time in Europe. He invited Mr. Hayes to report any observa

tions of interest to the Committee.  

Mr. Hayes said that he had met with the Governors of a 

number of European central banks, and while the discussions were 

lengthy and intimate they did not involve any specific business.  

He would report a few of his general conclusions. First, one 

pattern of thinking that seemed common to many countries was an 

acute fear of inflation, a feeling that monetary policy was able 

to do something in that regard but not everything, and a feeling 

of frustration with respect to fiscal policy. That pattern was 

clearly evident, for example, at the Bundesbank and the Netherlands 

Bank. Of course, recent experience in those countries was parallel 

in some respects to that of the U.S.



6/28/66 -18

Secondly, Mr. Hayes said, he fully agreed with Mr. Daane 

about the growing concern and worry in Europe with respect to the 

U.S. balance of payments. That concern had not yet taken the form 

of an acute distrust of the dollar but the seeds of such distrust 

were being sown and were finding fertile ground. That, in turn, 

was a cause for real concern on the part of the Committee. The 

Europeans were skeptical about the will of the U.S. to do what had 

to be done to bring its payments into balance. He was not sure of 

the extent to which the effects of the Vietnam hostilities were 

recognized. They probably were not fully recognized, but even to 

the extent they were the matter was clouded by the lack of sympathy 

in Europe with respect to U.S. objectives in Vietnam. In his talks 

with people concerned with financial matters he had not found any 

widespread sympathy with the U.S. position on Vietnam nor any 

particular feeling that the hostilities were an acceptable reason 

for the failure of the U.S. to achieve the balance of payments 

goal it had announced earlier.  

Mr. Hayes thought that U.S. balance of payments developments 

were beginning to affect the thinking of some of the nation's best 

friends in Europe on the subject of gold and dollar holdings.  

Specifically, in his discussions with Governor Carli of the Bank 

of Italy he had found a greater preoccupation with the gold ratio 

than ever before, which Governor Carli attributed to pressures from



6/28/66 -19-

his own Parliament and from the European Economic Community. That

did not bode well for the System's defensive efforts; the swap

arrangements provided an exchange guarantee but not a gold guarantee.

Even in Germany, which had been a strong friend of the U.S., there

was a good deal of worry. From time to time the Bundesbank had con-

sidered the desirability of enlarging its swap arrangement with the

System. However, there were divided views at the Bundesbank and in

some views the arrangement with the System was regarded with a

certain degree of suspicion in the absence of any visible trend

toward improvement in the U.S. payments balance.

As to the sterling question, Mr. Hayes said, he could not

recall a time at which there was as much profound worry as now--

not only on the continent but also in the London financial community.

The maritime strike was a bitter blow at a time when it had been

thought that Britain was making a reasonable degree of progress in

recovering from the crisis. The general feeling was that the strike

should not have occurred and no one seemed to know what could be done

about it.

Mr. Hayes remarked that the way in which the succession at

the Bank of England had been worked out was widely approved in the

London financial community. Nevertheless, there were some views to

the effect that the change inevitably meant a weakening of the posi-

tion of the central bank in relation to the Government.



6/28/66 -20

In concluding, Mr. Hayes noted that he had joined 

Mr. Shepardson, and Mr. David Hayes of the Board's staff, at the 

recent 150th anniversary celebration of the Bank of Norway in 

Oslo. Their reception had been a cordial one and the affair on 

the whole was a pleasant experience.  

Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Bopp recently had attended 

the International Monetary Conference in Madrid and the Annual 

Meeting of the Bank for International Settlements, and had visited 

the Bundesbank, the Bank of France, and the Bank of England. The 

Chairman invited Mr. Bopp to comment.  

Mr. Bopp said he had nothing new or encouraging to report 

but that he was able to confirm on the basis of personal contacts 

the reports that System members had been bringing to the Committee 

for some time.  

There was widespread agreement that inflationary pressures 

existed throughout the Western World, Mr. Bopp observed. In 

Europe and particularly on the continent construction was rampant.  

There was a widespread view on the continent that the United States 

and the United Kingdom were primarily responsible for those devel

opments. Mr. Holtrop, Chairman of the Bank for International 

Settlements, was particularly emphatic that the inflation had been 

exported from the United States to the continent. He (Mr. Bopp) 

had responded to that line of argument by saying that until just



6/28/66 -21-

recently the United States had had relatively large unutilized

resources and stable prices. In short, the U.S. had not until

recently had inflation and it was not convincing to blame a

country which did not have inflation for exporting it elsewhere.

He had acquired a real and genuine sympathy for the U.S. represent-

atives who had to listen to the monthly lecture from Mr. Holtrop.

There was also widespread feeling, Mr. Bopp continued,

that too much of the burden of restraining inflation was being

placed on monetary policy and that no central bank was receiving

adequate support from fiscal policy. He had indicated that credit

conditions in the United States were significantly tighter than

was evidenced by looking merely at the discount rate. The scarcity

of funds was reflected more in the Federal funds rate which at

times was as much as one per cent above the discount rate.

Mr. Bopp had found the greatest sympathy and understanding

of the American position in the United Kingdom which historically

had assisted other parts of the world and, therefore, appreciated

the American efforts to reconstruct Europe after the War.

Mr. Blessing had commented to Mr. Bopp that Germany now

had about 1,300,000 foreign workers, mostly from Spain and Italy

and some from Turkey and North Africa. Recently there were seven

to eight vacancies for each unemployed person. Mr. Blessing



6/28/66

had indicated that he had no fear at all that tight credit would

create unemployment of German workers.

Mr. Bopp concluded by noting that the wide gap between the

poor peasant in Spain and the wealth of a few was obvious, as was

the use of limited resources for vast public projects such as the

Franco Mausoleum in the Valley of the Fallen. The vast power,

extent, and organization of the Romans was still evident and

squeezed itself into the very marrow of one's bones.

Chairman Martin then noted that Mr. Young recently had

participated in a mission to Vietnam to help that country deal

with its financial problems, and he asked Mr. Young to tell the

Committee about the negotiations.

Mr. Young said the mission was for the purpose of working

with the Vietnamese Government in developing a reasonable stabiliza-

tion program. The mission consisted of a team from the International

Monetary Fund going at the request of the Vietnamese Government; a

group of three persons from the White House, State Department, and

the Treasury to work on the problem from the U.S. point of view;

and finally, himself, participating in the capacity of adviser to

the Governor of the central bank. As matters turned out, his own

role was largely that of mediator between the IMF and U.S. Govern-

ment groups.

-22-



6/28/66 -23

The mission could hardly have been launched under less 

promising circumstances, Mr. Young continued. Vietnam was on the 

brink of civil war, the army had been withdrawn from active combat 

to deal with the internal situation, and military developments were 

not going well. There was extreme discouragement among U.S. person

nel in the field and in Washington; the Vietnamese inflation appeared 

to have gotten out of hand, and there was no agreement among the 

various agencies as to what kind of approach to a solution of the 

problem would make sense.  

The Vietnamese inflation was being propelled by rapid 

monetary expansion, Mr. Young said, and was rendered more acute by 

inadequate port facilities and harbor congestion, interdiction of 

major highways by the Viet Cong--so that cargoes moving by truck 

were either confiscated or subject to high tribute--and disorganiza

tion of agricultural production. The rapid monetary creation 

resulted partly from the deficits of the Vietnamese Government, 

primarily in connection with military outlays, and partly from 

expenditures by the U.S. embassy for various activities, including 

military and civilian construction. Expenditures by U.S. personnel 

in Vietnamese currency, on the order of $100-$150 million a year, 

added to the problem. All told, the pace of monetary expansion 

last year was about 74 per cent and the best estimate he was able 

to obtain for this year was something over 100 per cent. Prices



6/28/66 -24

were rising at an accelerating pace in Saigon, and probably even 

more rapidly in the rest of the country although price indexes were 

available only for the capital.  

In sum, Mr. Young continued, the situation was one of 

inadequate supply and extreme excess liquidity, with additional 

liquidity being pumped in at a rapid rate. At the outset the 

situation appeared virtually hopeless, but the mission was able to 

move forward when the Government was found to be interested in con

sidering a program for financial stability and capable of reaching 

decisions on the subject. Three alternative proposals were advanced, 

of which one was a scheme for extinguishing money by financing 

capital flight. That alternative appealed to some members of the 

cabinet but was rejected by Premier Ky on the ground that it was 

morally wrong. The second proposal, which involved a partial 

devaluation, was the one finally accepted. It introduced simplifi

cation of the exchange system, improvement in import tax procedures, 

some fiscal measures that would add to the Government revenues but 

would not cover the inflationary gap entirely, and, finally, action 

to limit the expansion of private bank credit. In addition, the 

Vietnamese proposed to extinguish some liquidity by sales of gold 

from their own stock. The third alternative, which the Government 

thought too difficult, would have involved a more severe devaluation,



6/28/66 -25

the establishment of a single rate throughout the exchange system, 

and a rigorous control of the creation of money through Government 

borrowing.  

At one stage in the discussions, Mr. Young said, the Viet

namese appeared prepared to accept the second alternative, but the 

situation was not completely clear because there was a strong 

division in the cabinet and Premier Ky had not made up his mind.  

He finally did so in the mission's last week. Mr. Young was impres

sed by the fact that the Premier found time to consider the problem 

in view of the many other pressing problems facing him. In the end 

it was pointed out to Premier Ky that the operation was likely to be 

a painful one; that the partial devaluation proposed would increase 

prices by some uncertain amount in the range from 5 to 25 per cent, 

and that the additional inflationary jolt might be severe enough 

to result in overthrow of the Government. The Premier responded 

that if his Government was not strong enough to carry out a program 

of value to the people his cabinet should be overthrown. Members 

of the mission were quite impressed by his decision.  

Mr. Young concluded by noting that the program had been 

announced about a week ago and it had not had quite as drastic 

effects as some had predicted. Some prices had advanced sharply 

but others only a little, so that the average increase might well 

turn out to be reasonably moderate. The mission was hopeful that



6/28/66 -26

the program would go forward as proposed. If carried out as planned, 

some further upward price adjustments would occur for about three 

months. Money creation then would be stopped for about twelve months, 

with accompanying restraint on further price pressure from the mone

tary side, after which it would again resume. If the monetary 

program was reasonably successful, if port facilities were expanded 

and imports increased, and if highway traffic was opened to the north, 

it should prove possible to stabilize prices in Vietnam for most of 

next year. Another look at the program would then be in order.  

Chairman Martin commented that Mr. Young's report was hopeful, 

indicating as it did that the U.S. might not lose the war behind the 

lines.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period June 7 through 22, 1966, and 

a supplemental report for June 23 through 27, 1966. Copies of both 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

The financial markets exhibited a great deal of 

strength and resiliency over much of the period since the 

Committee last met with a generally confident tone pre

dominating. The corporate and municipal markets handled



6/28/66

an exceptionally large volume of new issues at high though 
generally stable rates, while an unprecedented volume of 
Federal agency financing was distributed at the higher 
interest rates that had emerged. In the Government secu
rities market, where there was no pressure of new supply, 
prices of notes and bonds rose appreciably while Treasury 
bill rates moved sharply lower. By late last week, how
ever, market sentiment appeared to be again shifting.  
And although the demand in the capital markets is expected 
to be less in July than June, considerable uncertainty is 
developing about the future course of both long- and 
short-term interest rat s.  

Commercial banks remained under pressure throughout 
the period, with Federal funds and dealer loan rates 
pushing into new high ground and with some prime banks 
offering as much as 5-1/2 per cent for 30-day CD money.  
The high cost of money has brought about considerable 
discussion of a possible increase in the prime rate. At 
the close of business last night dealers raised bankers' 
acceptance rates by 1/8 per cent to 5-5/8 per cent bid on 
90-day acceptances and to 5-3/4 per cent on longer 
maturities. The markets are now awaiting the outcome of 
the midyear interest and dividend payment period of the 
thrift institutions and the implications of that outcome 
for the mortgage market. Rate developments at some 
savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks 

just before and after the weekend have also raised 

questions of a new round of rate competition among the 

savings institutions. Against this background the markets 

had become quite cautious and are currently in process of 

assessing the implications of the Board's actions announced 

late yesterday.  
Developments in the market for Treasury bills led to a 

further sharp rate decline, bringing quotations to the lowest 

levels for the year and extending further the already wide 

gap between bills and other money market instruments. Con

tributing to this unusual degree of strength were various 

special demand factors, coupled with the reduction in 

supply associated with the redemption of $4.5 billion June 

tax anticipation bills. As a result of these developments 

dealers' inventories were picked bare, with scarcities 

evident throughout the whole maturity range. In fact, 

total dealer positions in Treasury bills due in three-months 

dropped to less than $100 million by last Friday, and the 

latest outstanding 91-day issue closed last night at 4.33

-27-



6/28/66

per cent. To be sure, a degree of caution has emerged in 
recent days as market participants questioned the tenability 
of current rate levels, and despite the scarcities of supply 
dealers, in particular, have approached recent Treasury bill 
auctions with mixed emotions. In last Thursday's auction of 
new one-year bills, for example, tenders were spread over a 
very wide price range, with the average issuing rate just 
under 4.70 per cent and some awards at rates as high as 4.79 
per cent. Market rates, particularly for long bills, tempo
rarily adjusted higher by about 10 basis points in the wake 
of that auction, and a cautious atmosphere was again in 
evidence yesterday as the regular weekly bill auction 
approached. Average issuing rates for the three- and six
month bills were set at about 4.44 and 4.60 per cent, 
respectively, with the weight of demand on the three-month 
issue as banks bid to build up positions in advance of the 
June 30 statement publishing date. It is generally expected 
that the available supply of bills will increase in the 
period ahead as banks reverse their midyear window dressing 
operations.  

As far as the aggregate reserve measures are concerned, 
bank credit expansion appeared to be lagging behind expecta
tions during the first part of the period, but then 
accelerated in the statement week ended June 22 in the light 
of loan demand related to the tax date and to the speedup of 

Treasury collection of withheld income taxes from business 

firms. Thus, on June 16, both the Board and the New York 
Bank staff projections of average bank credit expansion in 
June were only about 3-1/2 per cent. By last Thursday, 

however, the projections had been raised to a 5-6 per cent 

range, but were still below the 6-1/2 per cent estimate 

made at the time of the last Committee meeting.  

The rise in net borrowed reserves to $417 million in the 

statement week ended June 22 was partly related to the stronger 

than anticipated expansion in required reserves and bank credit.  

However, country banks ran down their excess reserves in the 

second week of their settlement period so that member bank 

borrowing from the Reserve Banks actually fell. Moreover, 

the sharp downward movement of Treasury bill rates and the 

strong sentiment then existing in the securities markets 

generally permitted a somewhat greater swing in the net bor

rowed reserve figures with little risk of signaling any change 
in monetary policy. I believe it would be desirable to 

condition the market to wider swings in the net borrowed 

reserve figures in response to changing patterns of credit

-28-



6/28/66

expansion or reserve distribution, but given the tender state 
of expectations in recent weeks there have been obvious risks 
of market misinterpretations of the implication of such swings 
for the discount rate or Regulation Q ceilings. I should note, 
in this respect, that there is normally an unusually wide 
swing in country bank excess reserve positions between the 
second and third week in July. In the past two years country 
banks have built up their excess reserves to about $500 million 
in the second week of July (the first week of their settlement 
period), and then let them run down to $200 million or less in 
the third week. We believe that this pattern is related to 
unusually heavy calls by the Treasury on tax and loan account 
balances at small- and medium-sized banks at that time of the 
year. In any event, assuming the pattern is repeated this 
year and other things being equal, it would seem desirable to 
let net borrowed reserves run lower than usual as reserves 
become immobilized in excess reserves at country banks, and 
then run higher as these excesses come into the reserve stream 
at the end of the country bank settlement period. The market 
should not find it difficult to understand this sort of vari
ation of net borrowed reserves.  

Between now and the July 4 weekend the System will have 
to supply around $1 billion in reserves, reflecting the cash 
needs of the public over the holiday, in order to keep net 
borrowed reserves near current levels. Given the market 
scarcity of Treasury bills, we have been giving a good deal 

of thought at the Trading Desk to how these reserves might 
be supplied. At the present moment, with at least some 
improvement in the availability of Treasury bills likely, 
and with the prices of Treasury coupon issues declining--in 

sharp contrast to the situation a week ago--the prospect of 

supplying reserves through normal channels does not appear 
as difficult as it did earlier. A combination of outright 

purchases of Treasury bills and other Treasury issues in the 

market and from foreign accounts, repurchase agreements on 

both Government securities and acceptances, and some decline 

in Treasury balances at the Reserve Banks may be enough to 

do the job. Given all the uncertainties, however, in face 
of the large reserve need, I would like to outline to the 

Committee an alternative approach which we might follow if 

market scarcities of Treasury issues persist in the weeks 
just ahead.  

As the Committee knows, repurchase agreements against 

Government securities are based on dealer financing needs 

at the moment. Dealer financing needs lately have been

-29-



6/28/66

minimal because of the heavy demand for Treasury bills and 
high dealer financing costs, and the repurchase agreement 
has not therefore been a feasible means of reserve supply.  
However, we are quite certain if dealers were told in advance 
that repurchase agreements were available, they would be 
able to find the necessary collateral by arranging back-to
back repurchase agreements with either banks or other holders 
of Government securities who were looking for cash over a 
period of expected money stringency. This approach would 
not involve any change in the repurchase instrument. It 
would involve a change from our usual practice of relating 
repurchase agreements to dealer inventories to a use of the 
dealers as a channel to those holders of Government securities 
who have temporary cash needs and who would prefer not to 
sell Treasury bills or other Government securities outright.  
In order to give maximum flexibility to such a repurchase 
agreement approach, I recommend that the Committee waive the 
requirement that repurchase agreements be limited to Govern
ment securities maturing in 24 months or less for any 
agreements entered into until the next meeting of the 
Committee. Let me reiterate that such a departure from 
normal practices may well not be needed, but in light of 
recent market scarcities of Treasury bills I believe we 
should do our contingency planning now.  

As you know, the Treasury will end the fiscal year in 
a strong cash position and will not actually need new money 
until some time in August. Although no decisions have been 
made, some sentiment exists for selling tax bills in July.  
If this should be decided on, the announcement would probably 
have to come before the middle of the month in order to get 
the auction out of the way before the regular one-year bill 
auction. Towards the end of July the Treasury will meet with 
its ABA and IBA borrowing committees to consider the terms of 
its August refunding, with an announcement likely on July 27.  

Chairman Martin called for discussion of Mr. Holmes' proposal 

that the Committee temporarily waive the requirement that repurchase 

agreements be limited to Government securities maturing in 24 months

or less, first asking for Mr. Hackley's views.

-30-



6/28/66 -31

Mr. Hackley noted that the requirement in question was 

contained in paragraph 1(c) of the Committee's continuing authority 

directive. If the Committee acted on the subject he would recommend 

that it do so by amending the directive rather than by waiving the 

requirement. The substantive effect would be the same but in his 

opinion an amendment would be the more appropriate form of action.  

In response to Mr. Brimmer's question about the specific 

time period in which he might use the proposed authority, Mr. Holmes 

said that if used at all it would be in the period of reserve need 

immediately ahead; thus, an authorization that remained in effect 

until the next meeting of the Committee would be satisfactory. The 

authorization would be used only in an emergency situation, and it 

was unlikely that the need for it would arise. In his judgment, 

however, there was enough uncertainty on the question to warrant 

advance preparation.  

Mr. Daane thought that granting the additional authority for 

the period until the next meeting of the Committee would be appro

priate in light of the many uncertainties ahead, including those 

related to the reactions to the Board's reserve requirement action 

of yesterday.  

Mr. Galusha asked what differential would be available to 

the dealers in the "back-to-back" repurchase agreements in which 

they would engage.



6/28/66 -32

Mr. Holmes replied that he would contemplate making the RP's 

with dealers at the customary rate--the discount rate--and let market 

competition set the rates at which dealers made RP's with others.  

Mr. Galusha then inquired if Mr. Holmes thought there was 

any possibility of criticism to the effect that the System was 

offering dealers the opportunity to make windfall profits, and 

Mr. Holmes said that such a possibility did exist.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether the proposed arrangements would be 

restricted to nonbank dealers.  

Mr. Holmes replied affirmatively, adding that there might 

well be some criticism from bank dealers, who had expressed a desire 

for the Deak to make RP's with them in the past. He would not be 

overly concerned with such criticism, however, because the arrange

ments would be made only if an emergency situation arose. Presumably 

banks would be among those that the nonbank dealers would get in 

touch with immediately regarding their RP's, so that the funds would 

be available to the bank dealers indirectly.  

Mr. Brimmer then commented that he had recently attended one 

of the discussions being held currently with dealers as part of the 

Federal Reserve-Treasury dealer-market study. The dealer involved in 

the discussion had made the point strongly that the Desk did not 

engage in a sufficiently broad go-around when it traded in coupon 

issues; some dealers were left out and others appeared to have



6/28/66 -33

special access to the Desk. He assumed the Manager would not exclude 

any nonbank dealers in the operation now under discussion.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the Desk would contact all nonbank 

dealers, and would distribute the RP's among them about in proportion 

to the amount of business the Desk had done with each in the past six 

months, both in outright transactions and through repurchase agree

ments.  

Chairman Martin noted that he thought granting the proposed 

authority would be appropriate. He suggested that the Committee 

amend the continuing authority directive today and plan on rescinding 

the action at its next meeting.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, paragraph 
1(c) of the continuing authority directive 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was amended to read as follows: 

1. (c) To buy U.S. Government securities, and prime 
bankers' acceptances with maturities of 6 months or less at 
the time of purchase, from nonbank dealers for the account 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for 
repurchase of such securities or acceptances in 15 calendar 
days or less, at rates not less than (1) the discount rate 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time such 
agreement is entered into, or (2) the average issuing rate 
on the most recent issue of 3-month Treasury bills, which
ever is the lower; provided that in the event Government 
securities covered by any such agreement are not repurchased 
by the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, 
they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the System 
Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event 
bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement are not 
repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be held by 

the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.



6/28/66 -34

Mr. Mitchell asked what level of net borrowed reserves the 

Manager thought would be consistent with the increase in reserve 

requirements of $400 million, assuming that the change in require

ments was a monetary policy action intended to result in tightening.  

In other words, what level of net borrowed reserves would be 

appropriate when the increase in requirements became effective? 

Mr. Holmes replied that the answer would depend on the 

Committee's own policy decision. If the Committee chose not to 

offset any part of the increase in requirements, as a matter of 

mechanical calculation net borrowed reserves should be increased 

by $400 million.  

Mr. Maisel commented that the question appeared to be one 

of timing. He assumed that the Committee would not want the full 

adjustment of $400 million to take place during the next four weeks.  

Mr. Daane remarked that the Manager's reply made sense to 

him; whatever change occurred in net borrowed reserves should reflect 

the decision of the Committee. There were many other factors to be 

taken into account in deciding on operations, and he did not think 

one could or should say that net borrowed reserves should be deepened 

by any precise figure, such as $400 million.  

Mr. Scanlon asked what level of net borrowed reserves the 

Manager thought the Committee should call for if it was to implement 

the Board's objective in raising reserve requirements as described



6/28/66 -35

in yesterday's press statement--namely, that it "would serve to 

apply a moderate additional measure of restraint upon the expansion 

of banks' loanable funds." 

Mr. Daane said that Mr. Scanlon's question might be sharpened 

if "a moderate additional measure of restraint" was defined as the 

amount of further reduction in net reserve availability possible 

without creating pressures that would require an increase in the 

discount rate.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the answer would depend on the nature 

of other developments. For example, the answer would be different 

if there were a change in the prime rate at banks.  

Mr. Hayes asked whether the psychological effect of the 

reserve requirement increase might not in itself exert some moderate 

restraint, even if there were no change in net borrowed reserves.  

Mr. Holmes replied he thought that would be the case but, 

again, it was necessary to wait to see how the market reacted.  

Mr. Daane commented that the Board's action in fact had had 

an immediate announcement effect, but that effect might or might not 

taper off quickly.  

Chairman Martin remarked that it was generally recognized 

that time deposit funds would now cost more to the larger banks.



6/28/66 -36

Mr. Ellis commented that he found some difficulty in accepting 

the notion that net borrowed reserves should be held at $400 million.  

Required reserves had been increasing more or less steadily and if 

that level of net borrowed reserves was maintained the Committee would 

continue to supply all of the reserves demanded. At the other extreme, 

to deepen net borrowed reserves to $800 million would represent a 

large change that would exert substantial pressure on the aggregates.  

Mr. Swan observed that the fact remained that reserve require

ments would increase by $400 million on the effective date of the 

action. The Committee's choice was between offsetting some or all of 

that increase or having the aggregates fully reflect the increased 

requirements.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period June 7 through 27, 1966, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

The staff economic and financial report at this meeting was 

in the form of a visual-auditory presentation. (Copies of the charts 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Brill, 

was as follows: 

This has been a rough year for forecasters; the economy 
has come up with a number of surprises. The first-quarter 
pace was more rapid than any of the forecasting profession 
expected at the beginning of the year. And just when sights



6/28/66

were being revised upward, the economy stumbled a bit and 
produced a slower second quarter than expected.  

These jerky movements in the pace of economic activity 
make life interesting--and hazardous--for forecasters. At 
the same time, they underscore the necessity of looking for 
longer-term underlying trends, rather than at shorter-term 
oscillations. Undaunted by the prospect that the economy 
in the months ahead will continue to move less evenly than 
forecasters' smooth lines, we have once more girded our 
loins and faced up to the necessity of exploring prospective 
economic and financial developments and their possible inter
actions with policy decisions. Our analysis this morning 
will focus on the basic trends in activity and finance 
likely to emerge over the remainder of this year and into 
1967. But first we will begin with a review of developments 
thus far in 1966.  

Mr. Gramley then commented on economic and financial 

developments through the first half of 1966, as follows: 

Economic activity since mid-1965 has been stimulated 

vigorously by increased defense spending. Outlays for 
defense have risen $8 billion--or 16 per cent--in the past 

year. The backlog of defense orders is up 26 per cent, and 

production of defense equipment 27 per cent. The current 
annual rate of defense spending already exceeds the amount 

budgeted for fiscal 1967, and further expansion seems 

clearly in prospect.  

The defense build-up, occurring at a time of high 

resource use, heightened pressures on capacity and 

encouraged further expansion in business fixed investment.  

On a GNP basis, business fixed investment has increased 13 

per cent over the past year, and now accounts for more than 

10-1/2 per cent of GNP. Business inventory demands also 

have been strong, as firms have sought to maintain adequate 

stocks to meet rapidly advancing demands.  

GNP in current dollars increased between $16 and $17 

billion in both the fourth and first quarters, but growth 

then slackened in the second quarter of this year. The 

fast pace of GNP during the winter months reflected a sharp 

upsurge in consumption expenditures adding to the thrust of 

rising defense and business investment outlays. In 1958 

dollars, the first-quarter rise in GNP was at nearly a 6 per 

cent annual rate, exceeding the large 5-1/2 per cent advance 

for all of 1965.

-37-



6/28/66

The rise in consumption slackened in the second quarter, 
as auto sales fell from record first-quarter levels. Larger 
tax payments retarded the growth of disposable income, and 
helped to moderate consumer purchases in the period.  

Responding to strong demands, nonagricultural employment 
rose very rapidly from October through March. Employment 
gains substantially exceeded growth in the labor force, and 
the unemployment rate fell below 4 per cent this spring.  
With experienced workers in short supply and labor turnover 
rising, employers lengthened the workweek further, hired 
younger workers, and accelerated in-plant training programs.  
Employment gains moderated in the second quarter, partly 
because of strikes, and cutbacks in auto production. The 
total unemployment rate rose to 4 per cent in May, as teen
agers entered the labor market early for summer jobs. But 
the unemployment rate for adult men fell to 2.1 per cent in 
April and May--about as low as during the Korean conflict.  

A tighter labor market has led to wage increases above 
the guidepost in both high- and low-wage nonmanufacturing 
industries, especially those engaged in local area bargain
ing. Wage gains in these industries have been about 4-1/2 
per cent or more per year--considerably higher than the 
increases in manufacturing. With wages rising faster than 
productivity, higher labor costs, along with demand pressures, 
have been reflected in rising prices for construction and 

services.  
In manufacturing, wage gains last year were still in 

line with increased productivity, and unit labor costs 
remained stable. Average hourly compensation has begun to 

rise somewhat faster, however, and unit labor costs in 
manufacturing have increased moderately since last fall.  

With demands intensifying and labor costs firming, the 
rise in prices of industrial commodities accelerated to an 

annual rate of 3-1/2 per cent in the first half of this 

year--up from the 1-1/2 per cent of last year. Despite 

this acceleration, the total wholesale index has been 

stable since February, when the earlier sharp rise in food

stuffs was reversed.  
Sensitive materials have made a larger contribution to 

the rise in industrial commodities this year than last-

reflecting heightened demands for copper and aluminum, and 

supply problems in hides and lumber.  

For other, less sensitive, materials, price increases 

have become more numerous, though not yet large. One reason 

is that steel prices--under the influence of foreign

-38-



6/28/66

competition and public pressures--have increased little.  
The three-year labor contract in steel signed last September 
called for wage increases about in line with the guidepost.  

The price rise for producers' equipment picked up speed 
early this year, as electrical equipment turned up and non
electrical machinery continued to rise. For consumer goods, 
the rise in wholesale prices has remained relatively slow-
despite increases for shoes and apparel, tires, cigarettes, 
whiskey, and furniture. Consumer durables, apart from 
furniture, generally have been stable.  

The rise in consumer prices accelerated early this year, 
mainly because of a further sharp increase in foods, and a 
faster rise in services, especially medical care. Among 
other consumer goods, prices of clothing and other nondur
ables have increased, while durables, on the average, have 
been stable.  

The substantial growth of GNP in the first half was 
accompanied by large demands for credit. Total funds raised 
over the first six months of this year, estimated at $83 
billion, annual rate, were 15 per cent above the full year 

1965. Federal borrowing (including sales of participation 
certificates) rose appreciably. Private borrowing was 12 

per cent above the rate for all of last year, with large 

security flotations accounting for most of the increase.  
Foreign borrowing remained below the high levels of 

previous years, reflecting both the effects of the voluntary 

restraint program and tightening in domestic credit markets.  

Expansion of bank loans excluding mortgages continued 

at the high 1965 pace, and banks added to their mortgage 

holdings in volume. The increase in total bank credit 
declined, however, to not far above the 1964 rate of advance.  

To meet these large loan demands, banks liquidated 

investments. Federal securities, measured here to include 

agency issues, declined at nearly a $7 billion annual rate.  

Net acquisitions of municipals remained close to the 1965 

pace.  
The impact of monetary policy has moderated the growth 

of money and time deposits. Growth of money and time 

deposits together has receded appreciably from the unusually 

high rates late last year, and recently has been running 

between 7 and 8 per cent, annual rates, on a three-month 

moving average basis.  

The slowdown has been especially evident in time deposits, 
which on average have been growing at about an 11 per cent 

annual rate recently, compared with much higher rates early

-39-



6/28/66

and late last year. This slackened pace has occurred despite 
marked increases in interest rates on time deposits paid by 
banks.  

Growth in money, on a moving average basis, also has 
declined from the high rates sustained through late 1965.  
Nonetheless, with the money stock increasing sharply in 
April, and also in June, the effect of monetary restraint 
on banks has been reflected principally in time deposits.  

The effects of monetary restraint, together with 
regulatory actions, have influenced greatly the inflows of 
savings to nonbank intermediaries, as well as to banks.  
Banks, over the first five months of this year, recorded 
gains in total time and savings deposits equal to a 10 per 
cent annual rate, down from 15 per cent a year earlier.  
Seasonally adjusted inflows to savings and loan associations 
fell sharply further, to less than a 4 per cent annual rate.  

At mutual savings banks, the inflow fell to about a 
2 per cent annual rate, well below accretions from the 
crediting of interest to existing deposit accounts.  

With deposit inflows moderated, while total funds 
supplied increased, the share of the total supplied by 
financial institutions declined appreciably. For banks, 
the drop was to 28 per cent of the total; the share for 
nonbank intermediaries also fell to 28 per cent. On the 
other hand, funds supplied directly to credit markets by 
the nonfinancial public--that is, by individuals, busi
nesses, and State and local governments--increased 
substantially, in response to sharply higher rates of 
interest on market securities.  

Yields on long-term corporate new issues rose abruptly 
in the first quarter when the supply of new securities was 
unusually large. The market rally that developed in mid
March lost steam within a few weeks, and new issue rates 
have since moved up to around the early March peaks.  

In the short-term area, the bill market has been 
sheltered from the full impact of rate pressures, as bill 

rates have receded from earlier highs. By contrast, other 

short-term rates have continued to rise. For example, 
rates on finance company paper are now a full percentage 
point above early December levels, and far above earlier 
postwar peaks.

-40-



Mr. Koch continued the presentation, focusing on prospects 

for economic activity and prices over the next year. He commented 

as follows: 

Looking ahead, there appears to be little prospect for 
relief of pressures on resources and prices. Our current 
projection anticipates a $14 billion growth in GNP in each 
of the third and fourth quarters, with continuing rapid 
expansion through the middle of 1967. In current dollars, 
GNP in the next year is projected to increase 7.5 per cent, 
nearly as much as in the previous 12 months. But with 
prices increasing somewhat faster, growth in GNP in constant 
dollars would be about 4.5 per cent.  

Defense expenditures are a dominant factor in the 
outlook. We have no official basis for projecting these 
outlays, but recent statements by the Administration, 
together with rising order backlogs for defense goods, 
continuing high draft calls, and a military pay raise, all 
point to a large further expansion. Our projection assumes 
a $7.5 billion increase by mid-1967, with the largest part 
of the rise coming before the end of 1966.  

Continued gains in business fixed investment will also 
contribute to growth in total spending. Major determinants 
of investment--high profits and intensive utilization of 
industrial capacity--remain expansive. Our projection calls 
for an increase consistent with the 17 per cent rise for 
1966 anticipated in the Commerce-SEC survey. With the pace 
of business fixed investment exceeding the growth in GNP, 
the share in GNP would rise still further, to over 11 per 
cent by the middle of 1967.  

While defense and business investment provide the 
underlying strength, resumption of large gains in consumer 
spending accounts for the more rapid growth of GNP after 
midyear. Consumer outlays are scheduled to increase on the 
average about $9 billion a quarter over the next year, even 
though the saving rate is projected to rise from the low 
second-quarter level. Disposable income is expected to 
advance substantially, especially in the third quarter, with 
faster growth in private wages and salaries, a Federal pay 
increase, and a large rise in "transfer payments" arising 
from Medicare and other Federal programs.

6/28/66 -41-



6/28/66

The projected level of consumer demand would likely be 
realized only if auto sales rise from the May level. Recent 
consumer surveys do suggest strong underlying demand, and 
early-June figures already show some recovery. We are 
projecting a moderate rise in new car sales to an annual 
rate of 8.5 million units for the new model year. In the 
third quarter, part of the stimulating effect of higher auto 
sales on GNP will be tempered by a large runoff in auto 
stocks.  

The weak factor in the over-all economic outlook is 
residential construction. In line with recent developments, 
housing starts are projected to decline to about 1.2 million 
units by the fourth quarter, and to fall somewhat further 
early next year. Limitations on funds for home financing is 
the primary factor, and single-family starts may be reduced 
somewhat more than for multi-family units.  

Although sharp, the expected drop in housing starts is 
not unprecedented. Declines about as steep occurred between 
1955 and early 1957, and also from 1959 to 1960.  

Despite the weakness in residential construction, growth 

in GNP is sufficient to keep the capacity utilization rate 
high. The projection calls for substantial expansion in 
manufacturing capacity--on the order of 8 per cent over the 

coming year. But with industrial output and sales expanding 

rapidly, the utilization rate would remain close to 92 per 

cent, declining only slightly in the first half of 1967.  

Manpower demands would also continue very strong, with 

nonfarm employment and the armed forces projected to increase 

further. Unemployment is projected to decline to 3.5 per 

cent, and experienced workers will continue in short supply.  
The unemployment rate for adult men is not likely to rise 

above the low frictional level of 2 per cent.  

With profits high and gains in real earnings reduced by 

rising prices, unions have been pressing for wage increases 

well above the guidepost. Their demands may largely be 

realized in major negotiations over the next year. Increases 

in hourly compensation in manufacturing, at an annual rate of 

3.6 per cent in the first half of 1966, could accelerate to 

more than 4.5 per cent in the first half of 1967.  

In nonmanufacturing, wage gains have already been 

averaging about 4.5 per cent and could rise even faster.  

Early next year, the minimum wage will be increased and 

coverage will be extended substantially, especially in the 

trade and service areas. With productivity gains slowing, 

unit labor costs are projected to rise, putting pressure on 

consumer as well as industrial prices.

-42-



6/28/66

For many industrial materials and also for finished 
products, higher costs and rising demands suggest an 
acceleration of the price rise later this year or early in 
1967. However, prices of sensitive materials, which con
tributed so much to the recent rise, are likely to increase 
less rapidly. For example, upward price pressures may 
moderate in markets for nonferrous metals. Lumber prices 
have turned down and curtailment in residential construction 
may provoke further declines. Prices of hides have soared 
into a range where the elasticity of demand is high and 
will inhibit further increase.  

Altogether, the rise in industrial prices may remain 
close to the recent annual rate of 3-1/2 per cent through 
the second half, and could pick up additional speed there
after. Prices of foodstuffs probably will decline somewhat 
through the balance of this year as supplies expand. Con
sequently, the index for all commodities may increase little.  
Early next year, however, food prices may no longer be 
declining, and the total index would then be rising again.  

Prospective developments in commodity markets point to 
a slowing in the rate of increase in the consumer price 
index over the next six to eight months, but an acceleration 
again thereafter. Food prices turned down in May, and 
should be lower by early next year. Also, elimination of 
heavy 1966 auto stocks may require large seasonal discounts 
this summer. But by early 1967, average prices of other 
goods may rise somewhat faster in response to increasing 
labor and materials costs. For services, additional 
increases are to be expected, as strong demands pull wage 

rates up in many of these relatively low-wage industries.  

Mr. Hersey continued the presentation, discussing balance of 

payments developments and prospects, as follows: 

In the U.S. balance of payments, the central development 

in recent months has been a further shrinkage in the 

merchandise export surplus, back to levels comparable with 
1958. From peaks around $7 billion in 1964, the trade surplus 

first fell off sharply in early 1965. This year the export 

surplus has declined further, to average about a $4 billion 

rate in the first five months and even less in April and May.  

Easing of demand pressures in various foreign countries 

in 1964 and early 1965 had its main adverse impact on our 

exports during the first half of 1965. In the past 12 months

-43-



6/28/66

expansionary forces abroad have heightened again. U.S.  
exports rose briskly for a while, but from the second half 
of 1965 to the first five months of 1966 the rise has been 
at a rate of only five per cent a year. Intensified demand 
pressure in the United States may have contributed to this 
disturbingly poor export performance. It has certainly 
been the main factor in the steep rise in imports, by 18 
per cent between the second halves of 1964 and 1965 and by 
16 per cent at an annual rate since then.  

Imports of materials and supplies--including quota
restricted petroleum imports--rose 15 per cent further 
from the second half of 1964 to the second half of last 
year. Imports of final manufacturers, which have had an 
average growth rate of almost 15 per cent over the past 
decade, rose by nearly 30 per cent. Food imports also 
rose more than usual.  

Imports of materials excluding petroleum rose 17 per 
cent between the second halves of 1964 and 1965. This 
increase bore the same general relation to the 8 per cent 
rise in U.S. industrial production of materials over the 
same period as we have seen at previous times of unsustain
ably rapid expansion, as in 1955. The growth trend in use 
of materials is steeper now than in the 1950's, but the 
departures from trend, then as now, have been greater for 
imported than for domestically produced materials. The 
slower rise in these imports in early 1966 reflected the 
tailing off of last year's large steel imports, and 
Government stockpile sales also held imports down.  

The shrinkage of the merchandise trade surplus has 
been accompanied recently by other unfavorable developments 
in the current account. Growth in U.S. receipts of direct 
investment income has slowed, partly because oil companies 
are experiencing lower prices and higher taxes in the 
Middle East. The burden on the balance of payments of our 
military expenditures abroad stopped shrinking last year 
because of the Vietnam war. By the first quarter of 1966 
these expenditures, net of military sales, had increased 
to more than $2-1/2 billion, annual rate.  

Consequently, the balance of goods and services-
"net exports" in the GNP accounts--was down to $6 billion, 
annual rate, in the first quarter and is falling lower in 
the second quarter. Outflows of U.S. private capital were 
relatively stable in total from mid-1965 through the first 
quarter.

-44-



6/28/66

With these and other developments, the over-all balance 
on the liquidity basis has been a deficit near $2 billion 
annual rate so far this year. This deficit would have been 
substantially larger but for shifts of foreign official and 
international institution funds into technically nonliquid 
assets. The amount of these shifts in the second quarter 
has been large enough to make the deficit figure, whatever 
it may turn out to be, a potentially misleading indicator of 
recent trends. On the official reserves transactions basis, 
the deficit has fluctuated widely, with an average rate of 
$1-1/2 billion since mid-1965.  

Given the outlook for expanding domestic demands, high 
profits, and upward pressures on costs, few cheery signs can 
be found for the balance of payments. Further reduction of 
the net outflow of U.S. private capital looks unlikely. The 
recent rate of about $3 billion a year--after adjustment to 
exclude amounts financed by U.S. corporations' borrowings 
abroad--is low, matched in recent years only briefly in 1962 
when foreign demand for U.S. bank credit was small.  

Direct investment outflows are likely to be at least 
at the recent $2-1/2 billion rate, not counting either bor
rowings abroad or reinvestment of foreign earnings, because 
U.S. corporations' plans for plant and equipment expenditures 
abroad are very large and still growing.  

Net U.S. purchases of foreign securities have been 
sustained by Canadian new issues in this country. The net 
outflow may remain near the $1 billion rate of the six months 
through March.  

In that recent period bank-reported claims declined, as 
U.S. banks were getting net repayments of short-term credits 
and were still reducing foreign liquid asset holdings of 
their own or their customers. They were also reducing out
standing term loans to foreigners, under the impact of the 
IET, the voluntary restraint program, and monetary tightness.  
Recently, however, there have been net outflows of bank credit 
in some months. With the present stance of monetary policy, 
it is by no means certain that net reflows of bank-reported 
claims on foreigners will continue.  

With U.S. private capital outflows perhaps more 
unfavorable, the projection made here of an over-all rate of 

liquidity deficit later this year around $3 billion in the 
absence of official window dressing assumes no further 
deterioration of the goods and services balance beyond the 
first half of this year. Further increases in military

-45-



6/28/66

expenditures abroad may be about offset by gains from 
investment income and other services. Merchandise exports 
are expected to rise strongly, helped by resumption of raw 
cotton exports at a reduced price. But imports seem certain 
to increase rapidly, too, preventing any improvement in the 
merchandise trade surplus.  

The concluding part of the staff presentation, given by 

Mr. Brill, was as follows: 

The GNP projection presented this morning is, I 
believe, a conservative estimate of the underlying strength 
of economic activity. Increases in GNP are projected at 
$14 billion or more per quarter in the last half of this 
year, and only slightly less thereafter. But defense 
spending could easily accelerate faster than we can 
presently anticipate, given recent trends in defense orders, 
in draft calls, and in apparent target levels for the Armed 
Forces.  

Even without such a defense acceleration, the projected 
rate of increase in GNP is well beyond what the economy can 
produce with available resources, and still maintain stable 
costs and prices. Capacity utilization rates remain high, 
and the over-all unemployment rate is likely to decline 
somewhat further over the balance of the year. In conse
quence, wage rate increases are projected to spread and to 
accelerate. Since productivity growth would be at a slower 
rate, unit labor costs are expected to rise and industrial 
commodity prices are projected to increase at about a 3-1/2 
per cent annual rate.  

For balance of payments reasons, among others, these 
demand and price pressures indicate a need for additional 
restraint on spending. The projection implies an expansion 
of imports continuing to exceed the longer-run trend, and 
the export surplus would remain close to the recent low 
level. The balance of payments deficit will be large.  
Cooling off the domestic economy would provide some immedi
ate relief by moderating the rising tide of imports. More 
importantly, it would reduce the likelihood of a longer-run 
erosion of our competitive position in international markets.  

In the absence of additional restraint on spending, we 
would expect a continued high rate of credit expansion.  
Funds raised in the second half of this year would match the 
high rate we saw in the first half. The total for the first

-46-



6/28/66

six months of 1967 would be moderated by reduced Federal 
borrowing, made possible by tax receipts in excess of 
accruals. But the rate of private credit expansion in 
that six-month period would be fully as high as the average 
for the two halves of 1966.  

An immediate and across-the-broad increase in income 
taxes would be the most certain--and the most general-
method of tempering the advance of spending between now and 
the end of the year. Unfortunately, present prospects are 
for near-term fiscal stimulation. Our projection implies 
that the Federal budget, on a national income and product 
account basis, will shift to a significant deficit in the 
third quarter, and remain in deficit through the remainder 
of fiscal 1967.  

If inflationary pressures are to be constrained, it 
appears then that monetary policy would need to move 
further toward restraining growth in bank deposits and 
credit. Month-to-month swings in financial variables are 
large, and it is hard to be certain about the target to 
shoot for. But an average growth rate for money and time 
deposits together of between six and seven per cent--some
what below recent rates--would, in my judgment, be a 
reasonable next step in generating additional restraint on 
spending.  

With such a target, time deposit growth would likely 
be smaller than the average for recent months--perhaps 
about nine per cent. The growth of money balances 
consistent with this--between 4.5 and 5 per cent--would 
be a modest rate of increase in light of the underlying 
strength of demands for goods and services.  

Interest rates can be expected to respond briskly to 
evidence of additional monetary restraint. Apart from the 
Treasury bill market, financial markets are still taut.  
The calendar of new long-term security offerings for July 
is modest, but that for August is already large. Conse
quently, interest rates on new issues are likely to adjust 
quickly to higher levels. While we have not tried to 
forecast precisely how much change in interest rates might 
occur, we would not be surprised to see new issue rates on 
high-grade corporates approaching six per cent before-
possibly well before--the end of the year.  

Rising market rates would raise questions about the 
viability of the CD market. The highest rates quoted by 
prime New York banks on 3- to 6-month maturities are now 
at Regulation Q ceilings. Indeed, very recently rates of

-47-



6/28/66

5-1/2 per cent have been paid for around one-month maturities.  
Persistent upward pressure on market interest rates, with 
present Regulation Q ceilings, would force larger banks into 
significant portfolio adjustments if they persisted in meeting 
customer loan demands.  

We must also keep in mind that rising market rates might 
also aggravate the problems of nonbank intermediaries. We are 
on the eve of a period that might witness sizable shifts of 
assets affecting financial institutions. Judgments as to the 
magnitude of the problem are hazardous, and aggressive rate 
increases by mutual savings banks and savings and loan associ
ations in the past few days, together with the Board's action 
of yesterday, add additional unknowns to an already cloudy 
situation.  

Nevertheless--with more courage than confidence--we have 
attempted to spell out some of the market consequences of 
implementing, in open market operations, moves to additional 
restraint such as the reserve requirements increase ordered 
yesterday. Technical factors--including System buying over 

the July 4 holiday and low dealer inventories--would probably 
cushion the impact of restraint in the bill market. The bill 
rate, however, would most likely begin to move back into 
closer touch with money market conditions. Thus, bill rates 
might be expected to rise from 10 to 20 basis points over the 

next four weeks. Other short-term rates--represented here by 
the yield on three-month Federal agency issues--might increase 

somewhat more, perhaps from 15 to 25 basis points.  
Long-term rates are likely to respond promptly to upward 

pressures on short rates, with yields on long-term Governments 

increasing perhaps 5 to 10 basis points over the four weeks, 

and yields on other long-term instruments rising somewhat 

faster.  
The net borrowed reserve figure consistent with this 

behavior of market rates is exceedingly difficult to specify 

in the present fluid situation. There are many specific as 

well as general uncertainties, including possible sharp 

seasonal swings in country bank reserve flows, and the unknown 

potential for borrowing by mutual savings banks in connection 

with deposit drains if the System adopts the proposal to act 

as a lender of last resort for this group of intermediaries.  

As the roughest of guesses, we show here a band ranging from 

$400 to $450 million, but perhaps a somewhat deeper marginal 

reserve target might be needed over the longer run to sustain 

the interest rate levels pictured here.

-48-



6/28/66 -49

In implementing a policy of additional restraint, open 
market operations should smooth the transition to tauter 
financial markets. Further increases in market rates of 
interest should be welcomed, and indeed encouraged, but 
credit market conditions cannot be allowed to tighten too 
abruptly. Indeed, market conditions may need to take 
precedence over marginal reserve measures as operating 
targets. On the other hand, cushioning actions should not 
be allowed to offset fully the move to increase required 
reserves. It will be difficult to guide the ship of policy 
between these two reefs.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Swan, Mr. Brill said that the 

staff had not attempted a projection for the Federal funds rate.  

Mr. Mitchell asked what probability the staff attached to 

its projection for GNP.  

Mr. Brill replied that the projection described the outcome 

that the staff considered most likely, given the estimates for 

defense spending. By coincidence, it was not greatly different 

from some other forecasts being made in Washington currently. There 

were some differences, mainly relating to the expected distribution 

of auto sales between the third and fourth quarters, but the estimates 

for the fourth quarter nevertheless were quite close. Of course, the 

levels of defense expenditures assumed were critical in all of the 

projections.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked what implications the kind of mone

tary policy Mr. Brill recommended would have for the GNP projection.  

Mr. Brill replied that in his judgment a policy of limiting 

the growth in money and time deposits to a rate between 6 and 7 per



6/28/66 -50

cent would produce a significant slowing in GNP in the fourth 

quarter--perhaps not down to a $10 billion growth rate, but in that 

direction. He recommended such a monetary policy for the longer run; 

for the short run he would advise caution because of the great 

uncertainties associated with flows of funds among financial institu

tions. As a first step he would suggest not offsetting fully the 

effect on nonborrowed reserves of the increase in reserve require

ments; and then, if there were no adverse reaction, pushing 

cautiously further to achieve a slowdown in deposit growth.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that he was disturbed by the 

possibility of overly generous wage settlements if the economy was 

ebullient at the beginning of 1967. He asked whether the policy 

Mr. Brill advocated was a counsel of futility, involving holding 

the line as best possible, or whether it was likely to prove 

corrective.  

Mr. Brill replied that the recommended policy was intended 

to be corrective. At the same time, he did not think enough was 

known to say that a 6 or 7 per cent growth rate in money and time 

deposits would cut back the expansion in GNP to some particular 

figure, such as $10 or $11 billion per quarter.  

Mr. Hickman asked what level of net borrowed reserves 

Mr. Brill would recommend for the short run, in view of the pressures 

expected at savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks 

in the next few weeks.



6/28/66 -51

Mr. Brill replied that his short-run prescription was to 

keep net borrowed reserves somewhat above the $400 million level, 

but to watch closely the markets' reaction and the flows at 

financial institutions. In effect, he recommended a short-run 

policy of cautious probing, recognizing the uncertainties about 

flows at intermediaries in the coming period, and recognizing 

that later it might prove necessary to deepen net borrowed reserves 

considerably further. The Committee was tentatively scheduled to 

meet again on July 26, and it could then decide whether to move 

more aggressively, depending on, among other things, what new 

information was available on defense spending.  

Mr. Hickman commented that he would expect pressures at 

the discount window to increase as net borrowed reserves deepened, 

the present discount rate to become untenable, and present 

Regulation Q ceilings to be out of line with market rates. In 

effect, there would be a general upward ratcheting of interest 

rates.  

Mr. Brill observed in response that maintaining the exist

ing Regulation Q ceilings in a period of rising rates would in 

itself provide a measure of restraint.  

Mr. Koch made two observations with reference to the 

preceding discussion. First, he noted that the staff projected 

housing starts to fall to a rate of 1.2 million by the fourth



6/28/66 -52

quarter of 1966, and that the projection would have to be lowered if 

policy was tightened further. However, the level of 1.2 million 

starts in itself was below other estimates currently being made in 

Washington, and those other estimates already were giving rise to 

concern. Secondly, he confessed to being somewhat puzzled by the 

discussion of the reserve requirement increase. As he interpreted 

that action, its main effects were to increase costs to large banks 

and to decrease their liquidity slightly; any other tightening would 

have to come through open market operations.  

Mr. Hickman commented he was highly disturbed by the projec

tions for defense spending presented today, of which there had been 

no inkling in the Cleveland District. Personally, he had vacillated 

on the subject of taxes but if the defense projections were correct 

a tax increase was clearly needed since monetary policy could not do 

the job alone. He concluded that the System should bring as much 

pressure as possible on the Administration to act on taxes.  

Chairman Martin then noted that copies of a staff memorandum 

addressed to the Board, entitled "Emergency credit facilities for 

mutual savings banks," had been. distributed to all Reserve Bank 

Presidents on June 27. Copies of a related document prepared at the 

New York Reserve Bank also had been distributed.1/ Chairman Martin 

1/ Copies of the documents referred to have been placed in the files 
of the Committee.



6/28/66

invited Mr. Treiber to open the discussion of the subject of the 

documents.  

Mr. Treiber made the following statement: 

The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
and all the Reserve Banks have been furnished with copies 
of a document prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York under date of June 22, 1966, entitled "Plan to Assist 
Savings Banks in Meeting Extraordinary Withdrawals." Three 
exhibits are attached to the plan. These papers were pre
pared in the light of intense discussions with the heads 
of large savings banks and Savings Banks Trust Company, 
and, also, a large member bank.  

The Board of Governors has approved the making by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of advances to member 
banks on the Collateral Trust Notes of Savings Banks Trust 
Company referred to on page 3 of Exhibit B.  

The plan is designed to meet an emergency situation 
that may never arise. Indeed, we think that the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York is unlikely to be asked to lend 
directly to a savings bank or to Savings Banks Trust 
Company, or to lend indirectly to the Trust Company through 
a conduit loan as described in Exhibit B. But it is 
important to have the machinery in working order. We 
believe that the machinery is in good order.  

In working out the plan it was the view of all involved 
in the negotiations that publicity should be avoided. With
drawals by depositors of savings banks could be accentuated 
greatly if there were wide discussion of a fear of a run.  
It seemed wise to keep the discussions to a limited group.  
It seemed unwise, for example, to suggest that all, or even 

the principal, savings banks have their directors adopt 
resolutions authorizing their officers to borrow directly 

from the Reserve Bank. It also seemed unwise to bring a 

large number of savings banks into discussions of minutiae.  
We think that the brunt of the demand of savings banks 

for credit accommodation to pay their depositors will fall 
on the commercial banks which have over $1 billion of credit 
lines to the New York savings banks. Member bank access to 

the discount window will continue to be subject to the usual 
disciplines.

-53-



6/28/66

Only in the event of vast withdrawals by savings bank 
depositors would the special arrangements come into play.  
We expect to be in continuing close contact with Savings 
Banks Trust Company, the heads of large savings banks, and 
the head of the member bank with which the Trust Company 
has its principal relations. We would also be in frequent 
contact with the heads of the other principal member banks 
in New York.  

We would be prepared to lend directly to the larger 
savings banks on direct obligations of the United States.  
Presumably these would be savings banks in New York City.  
In the normal course of events the smaller savings banks, 
and the out-of-town banks, would seek emergency accommoda
tion in the first instance from Savings Banks Trust Company.  
We would be prepared to lend directly to the Trust Company 
on direct obligations of the United States, but it is 
questionable whether the Trust Company would have such 
obligations available as collateral.  

The conduit arrangement under which the Reserve Bank 
would make a loan under section 10(b) of the Federal Reserve 
Act to a cooperating member bank on the Trust Company's 
Collateral Trust Notes would be invoked only after consulta
tion between the Trust Company, its principal member bank, 
and the Reserve Bank.  

We understand that savings banks hold a negligible 
amount of assets that would qualify as "eligible paper" 
available for discounting under the third paragraph of 
section 13. We think it would not be worthwhile to try 
to use such paper. We would consider it unwise in an 
emergency situation to introduce the additional complicating 
factors that would be involved in the use of such paper.  

It must be apparent that in an emergency situation, 
with a severe run on savings banks, speed is of the essence.  
Judgments will have to be made quickly on the basis of facts 
available at the time. We would have one of our own men in 
the Trust Company to see developments at firsthand and to 
help assure that administration of the Trust Company's 
lending policies are in accord with the approach which has 
been agreed upon in our discussions with the Trust Company.  

All in all, we think we have a workable arrangement.  
Each borrowing case must be administered flexibly and on 
its own merits. This observation applies both to the 
extension of the credit and to the arrangements for paying 
it off.

-54-



6/28/66 -55

Mr. Daane asked whether there were any important differences 

between the procedures Mr. Treiber had outlined and those suggested 

in the Board's staff memorandum.  

Mr. Partee said he thought the staff plan completely 

accommodated the plan of the New York Bank. The staff plan was 

developed in response to the need for a more general approach than 

New York's--one that could be used in other Federal Reserve Districts 

and in connection with institutions other than mutual savings banks.  

He then briefly summarized the staff plan, as set forth in the memo

randum.  

Mr. Treiber indicated that the New York Bank was basically 

in accord with the approach recommended by the Board staff.  

Mr. Ellis observed that while the Reserve Bank was prepared 

to adopt emergency measures to assist mutual savings banks in the 

Boston District, his appraisal suggested that such measures were 

not likely to be necessary. In the past month District savings 

banks had "freshened up" their credit lines with correspondent 

commercial banks, which Mr. Ellis estimated at a total of about 

$200 million. The large commercial banks had reassured the savings 

banks that their lines would be honored and knew that they in turn 

could borrow at the Reserve Bank if necessary. Deposit losses at 

savings banks had not been of great magnitude in April. The banks



6/28/66 -56

had been alerted to the possibility of losses in July and had been 

preparing for it, so they were not likely to be caught short.  

Mr. Ellis said he agreed with the general tone and specific 

proposals of the staff memorandum. He asked, however, whether it 

might not be desirable for the Board to issue a statement to the 

effect that the Federal Reserve would make funds available to mutual 

savings banks if necessary, so that all such banks would be informed 

and possible misunderstandings avoided. He agreed that it would be 

undesirable to suggest a sense of urgency on the matter, but at the 

same time it would be useful to let all mutuals know that liquidity 

would be provided as needed.  

Mr. Bopp said that three of the largest savings institutions 

in Philadelphia had reported no accelerated outflows of funds in June.  

They did not expect much outflow in July and thought that their 

liquidity positions were adequate at present. More generally, the 

Reserve Bank had heard no expressions of concern on the part of 

District institutions. He had not yet had a chance to study the 

staff memorandum, but he shared the view Mr. Ellis had expressed.  

Mr. Wayne said that the only mutual savings banks in the 

Fifth District were located in the Baltimore area. Those banks had 

expressed no concern about anticipated losses; their concern was 

with a possible slowdown in inflows against large forward commitments.



6/28/66 -57

He would concur with the staff proposals and proceed as necessary, but 

he did not anticipate a problem in the District.  

In subsequent discussion of Mr. Ellis' proposal it was agreed 

that giving general publicity to the emergency program was likely to 

create more problems than it would solve, by stimulating concern on 

the part of depositors. It was suggested that the Reserve Banks 

inform savings banks in their Districts of the program directly. In 

those Districts where the number of such banks was too large for such 

a course to be feasible, it was suggested that those known to be 

anticipating problems should be contacted.  

Mr. Brimmer said it was not clear to him whether the emergency 

program was to be restricted to savings banks. He expressed interest 

in hearing the views of the Presidents on that question.  

Mr. Treiber noted that the Federal Home Loan Bank System 

provided a mechanism for meeting the needs of savings and loan 

associations. Moreover, he understood that a few individual savings 

and loan associations had lines of credit with member banks in New 

York, and he had no doubt that those banks would extend credit under 

the lines in question. In general, there did not appear to be any 

need for making additional provision for savings and loan associations 

in the Second District.



6/28/66 -58

Mr. Brimmer noted that the Board staff memorandum included 

the following statement on page three: "Emergency needs for credit, 

if any, seem most likely to develop among mutual savings banks 

although it is conceivable that sizable deposit outflows might also 

be experienced by a relatively few credit unions, nonmember banks, 

and savings and loan associations not having access to Federal Home 

Loan Bank credit, where assistance would be indicated." He suggested 

that if it was clear that the System would not be called on as a 

lender of last resort by such institutions the matter could be laid 

aside. If that was not clear, however, some decision should be 

reached regarding them.  

Mr. Swan concurred, and drew attention to the following 

statement on page two of the staff memorandum: "The staff believes 

that the posture of the System should be to prevent to the best of 

its ability any depositary-type financial institution from failing 

during this period due to lack of liquidity." With respect to 

savings and loan associations, Under Secretary of the Treasury Barr 

had met in San Francisco last Friday (June 24) with some commercial 

bankers, and had indicated that about $5 billion was available for 

the assistance of the associations, including funds recently raised 

by the Home Loan Bank System, funds of the Federal Savings and Loan 

Insurance Corporation, and some $2 billion that the Treasury was 

prepared to deposit directly in the Home Loan Banks. Mr. Barr



6/28/66 -59

thought that that sum would be adequate to deal with the situation.  

If it was not, however, the System would be faced with the question 

of whether it should channel credit through the commercial banks to 

the savings and loan associations. He assumed that the System would 

do so if the need arose.  

Mr. Irons said that that was his assumption also. He 

observed that there were some savings and loan associations in the 

Eleventh District that were not affiliated with the Federal Home 

Loan Bank, and as he read the staff memorandum it was contemplated 

that the System would act as lender of last resort for them.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that at the present point the staff memo

randum did not reflect an official System position.  

After further discussion, Chairman Martin suggested that 

the substance of the staff memorandum be approved by the members of 

the Board and the Reserve Bank Presidents as a general statement of 

System policy, and there was no disagreement.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Mr. Hayes 

submitted the following statement for the record, after summarizing 

it orally: 

Business activity in May was stronger than in April, in 
spite of a drop in automobile sales and residential construc
tion, and some decline in steel production. Capital spending 
plans remain strong. Government spending is rising. While 
there are some signs of lessening pressures on capacity, labor



6/28/66

resources, and prices, the over-all situation is still 
characterized by excess demand. Slackening of pressures 
should be welcomed rather than interpreted as pointing 
to a business downturn. There is no indication so far 
that this has gone far enough to eliminate our concern 
over inflation, much less to be interpreted as 
foreshadowing a decline in business activity. The 
uncertainties in Vietnam are ever present, but at this 
point we do not envisage any fundamental change in the 
economic outlook.  

Returning from a trip which offered wide opportuni
ties to take informal soundings, I am impressed by the 
new wave of skepticism as to our will to handle our 
balance of payments problems. The heavier-than-expected 
foreign costs of the war in Vietnam explain only to a 
limited extent the disappointing developments in our 
balance of payments. And even if these costs may be an 
important contributing factor, they do not constitute a 
valid excuse, in the eyes of foreign observers, for 
inaction with respect to remedial policies. Efforts to 
improve the statistical picture through a rearrangement 
of maturities of our liabilities cannot hide the fact 
that, instead of moving toward equilibrium, we are 
backsliding. I am particularly disturbed by the deteri
oration of the trade surplus, on which so much reliance 
has been placed to achieve balance.  

In the last two weeks, the banking system has 
handled smoothly large flows of funds and has accommodated 
a large volume of tax-related borrowing. The banking 
system has taken the June 15 tax date in stride, but 
unexpectedly heavy borrowing developed in the following 
week in connection with the forward shifting of withhold
ing tax payments. Bank liquidity positions have declined 

further, and loan-deposit ratios are at record levels.  
Banks are willing to pay the maximum permissible rates on 
the shortest-term certificates of deposit to attract or 
hold funds.  

The early June credit data, which do not fully 
reflect heavy tax borrowing, appear to be consistent with 

the moderate slowing down of total bank credit expansion 
so far this year. But credit demands remain strong, and 

the pace of loan expansion is likely to quicken in July.  

Financial markets have been buffeted by peace rumors 

and conflicting interpretations of recent business news, 
including views that a topping out of the boom may lie

-60-



6/28/66

ahead. As a result, the stock market has been listless 
and the volume of transactions moderate. In recent weeks, 
a relatively large flow of corporate and municipal 
offerings, including some large issues, has been absorbed 
surprisingly well. However, over the past few days a 
change in sentiment has been developing, which could well 
lead to further upward pressures on yields despite the 
relatively light calendar immediately ahead.  

The impact of the midyear interest payment date on 
the savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks 
is now the next hurdle to get over. While I have the 
impression that some of the apprehension is exaggerated, 
we must of course do everything in our power to avoid a 
liquidity crisis. I have a good deal of confidence that 
the various arrangements made to cushion any undesirable 
developments will prove to be fully adequate.  

After an absence of five weeks, I am impressed by 
two developments--first, a slackening of very strong 
inflationary expectations; second, growing evidence that 
our increasingly restrictive monetary policy is having 
pervasive effects in all financial markets. Credit 
availability and the willingness to make forward commit
ments have been reduced significantly, and credit costs 
have risen. Financial intermediaries are under intensified 
pressure from a reduced inflow of funds and increased 
demands.  

The modest slackening of inflationary expectations 
in no way alters the need for further restraint through 

appropriate public policies. On the contrary, the strong 

basic outlook still calls, in my judgment, for an effective 
assist from fiscal policy in the form of a tax rise. On 

the other hand, the reduction, for the time being at least, 
in the intensity of the pressures in some sectors of private 

demand permits us to give full weight to the need for a 

cautious monetary policy in a period when thrift institu

tions could be subject to significant deposit drains.  

Depending on how the market reacts to yesterday's 

announcement, we may not have much leeway to deepen net 

borrowed reserves, without calling into question the current 

discount rate and the related Regulation Q ceilings. Net 
borrowed reserves in the range of $350-$400 million seem 

appropriate, with borrowings averaging in the neighborhood 

of $650-$700 million. These ranges may have to be modified 

in the light of unusual liquidity pressures or of an 

unexpected burgeoning of credit demands.

-61-



6/28/66

The time may come fairly soon to consider an increase 
in the discount rate, especially if the rising cost of money 
to banks should trigger a prime rate increase--and I would 
not rule out the possible need, under those circumstances, 
for consideration of further changes in Regulation Q ceilings.  
However, I believe that right now we ought to tread cautiously 
in view of the sensitivity of this midyear period--even though 
we will enter a period of Treasury financing by late July and 
possibly sooner. Alternative A seems quite acceptable for the 
second paragraph of the directive, although I would suggest 
breaking up the very long sentence into two sentences.1/ 

With regard to the telegram 2/ requesting comments on 
commercial bank promotional activities to attract savings 
funds as the interest payment date approaches, we find that 
in our District advertising of bank "savings bonds" and 
savings certificates, while not as extensive as three months 
ago, is spirited and aggressive. A few banks are engaged now 
in active advertising campaigns, using advertisements, 
frequently of a very large size, and offering a variety of 
such instruments with characteristics designed to attract 
different categories of deposits. They invariably stress the 
higher interest rates offered. These banks, which include 

three of the largest banks located on Long Island, have been 

advertising in the New York Times, which has a national 
circulation.  

However, we have found only limited evidence that 

commercial banks in general are stepping up their promotional 

activities in an unusual degree to attract time and savings 

deposits around the end of June. It is problematical whether 

the recent rate increases of several New York savings banks 

will tend to set off a new wave of competitive rate moves.  

1/ The draft directives submitted by the staff for consideration by 

the Committee are appended to these minutes as Attachment A.  

2/ Under date of June 22, 1966, Mr. Sherman had sent the following 

telegram to the Reserve Bank Presidents: "In connection with go

around at Open Market meeting June 28, Board members would appreciate 

having Presidents include comments on question of whether commercial 

banks are now increasing or are planning to increase advertising or 

other promotional activities to attract time and savings deposits 

around end of June. It is not intended that you make a general sur

vey but that comments be based on what you have observed or heard or 

may learn from spot checks."

-62-



6/28/66 -63

Mr. Francis said that impressions received from a few spot 

checks and from other contacts with bankers were that outside of 

the St. Louis metropolitan area there were very few new advertising 

or other promotional campaigns in the Eighth District directed 

primarily to attracting time and savings deposits around the end of 

June. In the St. Louis area, where competition for savings was 

especially keen, bank advertising expenditures had been accelerated 

recently, but he did not expect any difficult liquidity problems in 

savings and loan associations to result.  

Mr. Francis reported that the St. Louis Reserve Bank had 

just completed a series of meetings throughout the District with 

member bankers and representative groups of businessmen. It had 

found accelerating demand for products, for materials, and for 

labor. So great were the demands that shortages were prevalent; 

equipment shortages, materials shortages, and labor shortages. The 

demand for highway trucks exceeded supply. The great demand for 

copper, along with the limited supply, was creating bottlenecks.  

Here, price controls were preventing an allocation of supplies to 

the most useful purposes. Copper was generally utilized for pots 

and pans and spouting while inadequate amounts were available for 

the production of electric motors.  

As a result of the vigorous demand, Mr. Francis said, 

prices of products, of materials, and of labor were being pushed



6/28/66 -64

up rapidly. Manifold inefficiencies of production arose as dollar 

demand exceeded practical efficient production. Wages were increas

ing more than appeared, as less efficient labor was applied to 

particular jobs. The rate of inflation of prices was more than the 

indexes showed, as discounts had disappeared, premiums were paid, 

and less efficient mixes of resources were necessitated.  

That inflation-creating excessive demand was being fostered 

by rapid bank credit expansion, Mr. Francis said. In the Eighth 

District business loans of reporting member banks had been expanding 

at a 25 per cent annual rate since December. In the nation, according 

to the Reserve Bank's figures, the supply of money was continuing to 

increase at a rate of about 6 per cent per annum, although in light 

of the inflation and higher alternative costs of holding cash, the 

demand for cash balances relative to GNP was continuing to decline.  

As Mr. Francis saw it, the great total demand for goods and 

services, fostered by the stimulative fiscal stance and rapid monetary 

expansion, was pushing up prices of goods and services and also demand 

for investment funds. The excessive demand for funds, in turn, was 

pushing up interest rates and possibly was distorting the institu

tional pattern of flow of investment funds.  

Mr. Francis urged a limitation on the rate of monetary 

expansion. In the absence of appropriate fiscal restraint--namely, 

a large budget surplus--the necessary monetary restraint would



6/28/66 -65

probably raise interest rates. But if total demand were adequately 

restricted, demand for investment funds also would be limited, and 

the basic forces pushing interest rates up would be kept in bounds.  

If total demand was not limited by those or other means, and price 

inflation continued, interest rates would be increasingly bid up, 

as they had been in other periods of inflation. The Committee did 

not and could not keep a rein on interest rates, under present 

conditions, with bank reserves, bank credit, and money expanding 

more rapidly than the productive capacity of the country.  

Indeed, Mr. Francis continued, while it was generally 

believed that interest rates had been rising in a restrictive 

manner during the past year, they had, in a very real sense, not 

done so. The cost of money to the borrower and the return to the 

saver were affected by changes in the value of the dollar. When 

one adjusted market interest rates for the decline of the value of 

the dollar as measured by the implicit price deflator, one found 

that interest costs had not risen at all in the past year and that 

the real return to the saver had not increased. Hence, during the 

year market interest rate increases had provided no restriction to 

the excessive total demand either through discouraging spending or 

encouraging saving.  

If limitation of expansion of bank reserves, bank credit, 

and money resulted in further increases in interest rates, Mr. Francis



6/28/66 -66

said, institutional dislocations such as those connected with savings 

and loan associations and mutual savings banks would be augmented.  

But if the choice lay between further facilitating and possibly 

accelerating inflation, on the one hand, and having to face up to 

some institutional problems, on the other, he thought the welfare of 

the nation clearly required the latter. As indicated in the staff 

memorandum discussed earlier, the System had the means, or could 

devise the means, to provide savings banks and savings and loan 

associations with enough liquidity to prevent inordinate financial 

dislocations while at the same time not supplying the economy with 

the liquidity which would contribute to excessive total demand.  

During most of the past year, Mr. Francis observed, the 

Committee's directives had provided that the growth of bank reserves, 

bank credit, and money should be moderate, and since April they had 

called for restricting growth in those magnitudes. Nevertheless, 

bank reserves had grown at a rate of 5 per cent, bank credit 9 per 

cent, and the money supply about 6 per cent. In a period of exces

sive total demand those rates, high by all historic standards, had 

not been moderate or restricted. He believed that the Committee 

should now take those words of the directive seriously and literally, 

and do what was necessary at the Desk over the next few months to 

make them effective. He favored alternative B of the draft directives.



6/28/66 -67

Mr. Kimbrel reported that, although the general level of 

economic activity remained high in the Sixth District, several signs 

of a slowdown in the rate of expansion were being found. Total non

farm employment had been almost stable since January, and average 

weekly hours worked in manufacturing had been trending downward 

since February. Retail sales in May, according to the Reserve Bank's 

estimates, dropped 3 per cent on a seasonally adjusted basis from 

April, a somewhat greater decline than nationally. In part the drop 

might reflect the slower gain in District personal income that had 

characterized the past few months. But a large part might be attrib

uted to slower auto sales. In turn, lower automobile sales had been 

reflected in a 4.5 per cent decline in April from March in the volume 

of new consumer instalment loans extended by District banks. The 

lower rate of credit extensions did not seem to reflect a stiffening 

of standards, according to various lenders contacted.  

Latest information on construction for the District, 

Mr. Kimbrel continued, suggested that, although there had been no 

dramatic change, total contracts had been drifting downward, and 

construction employment was probably over 5 per cent lower on a 

seasonally adjusted basis than in January. Moreover, there might 

be a greater decline in the future if the results of the Atlanta 

Bank's regular quarterly tabulation of the dollar volume on new 

and expanded manufacturing plants announced for future construction



6/28/66 -68

in the District was any indication. Preliminary figures for the 

second quarter of 1966 showed a dramatic decline from those of the 

first quarter, although in interpreting the figures it was well to 

remember that the first-quarter figures were unusually high. Never

theless, the second-quarter dollar volume was considerably below 

that of the same quarter of last year.  

Continuing, Mr. Kimbrel reported that partial data for May 

indicated that the net flow of funds to savings and loan associations 

improved slightly and that some investors from outside the District 

had returned to the market for FHA and VA loans. Nevertheless, those 

changes had not been great enough to affect terms or to lower rates.  

Thus far, Mr. Kimbrel observed, the emergence of new 

competition by commercial banks for time deposits by offering higher 

rates seemed to be confined to the Miami area. At least three of the 

smaller banks there, according to advertisements, were offering 

savings-type certificates at rates between 5-1/4 and 5-1/2 per cent.  

Terms were very diverse, with one bank offering 5-1/4 per cent with 

a six months' maturity on a minimum of $2,500 and another 5-1/2 per 

cent for three years with a $1,000 minimum. Although bank advertis

ing continued heavy elsewhere, as yet there had been no general 

increase in promotional activities and in rates. However, it was 

rumored that some banks were planning to alter their promotional 

activities in response to new savings and loan rate competition.



6/28/66 -69

Savings and loan associations in Atlanta had announced 5 per cent 

rates generally associated with a minimum time and amount.  

The apparently slower rate of expansion in District economic 

activity had not been paralleled by a slowdown in bank credit, Mr.  

Kimbrel commented. During the first three weeks of June, according 

to data from weekly reporting banks, loan growth continued. The 

bank lending practices survey just completed showed either stronger 

loan demand than in March or loan demand that was unchanged from the 

previously strong position.  

If economic conditions in the Sixth District could be 

considered typical of those throughout the nation, Mr. Kimbrel 

concluded, they suggested to him that one should take any further 

restrictive actions with considerable caution.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that a principal problem at present was 

the lack of harmony between over-all flows of money and credit and 

the allocation of funds among different lenders and different 

sectors of the economy. Restraint had been felt markedly in the 

housing and mortgage-lending industries; meanwhile, bank credit and 

the money supply had grown more rapidly than was desirable at the 

current fast pace of business.  

In the Third District, Mr. Bopp said, the mortgage market 

had become increasingly tight. FHA discounts continued to deepen 

in the past three weeks. Current "prime" FHA mortgages were now



6/28/66 -70

discounted from 5-1/2 to 7-1/2 points; the average had been 3 points 

in April and 4-1/2 in May. Lesser quality FHA's were now discounted 

from 7-1/2 to 12 points. Those tight conditions had prompted a local 

"builders' holiday"--a rally called for today aimed at protesting 

market conditions.  

With regard to the Board's query on commercial bank advertis

ing, Mr. Bopp reported that most of the large Philadelphia banks had 

already shifted the emphasis of their copy to attracting savings.  

One large bank, for example, had doubled the amount of space and time 

devoted to savings, while a smaller and somewhat less aggressive 

institution increased savings copy from 25 per cent to about 35 per 

cent. The others fell in that range. The shift was not new, however; 

it had been going on for at least two months. Moreover, none of the 

banks contacted planned "all out" campaigns for the end of June and 

early July. Nor had any advertising and promotion budgets been 

increased significantly in recent months. One bank, in fact, reported 

that it was waiting to see what form interest ceiling legilsation 

would take before changing promotion activities.  

A few savings and loan associations had responded to the 

increased competition by raising dividend rates, effective July 1, 

Mr. Bopp continued. At least six relatively large Philadelphia 

associations raised their dividend to 4-1/2 per cent in June, and 

two others raised the rate earlier. His over-all impression, based



6/28/66 -71

on a spot check, was that savings institutions were not overly 

concerned about the expected withdrawals early in July. Some 

estimated that withdrawals would run 15 to 25 per cent greater than 

normal. Certainly no liquidity crisis was forecast.  

Mr. Bopp reported that during the past week Reserve Bank 

personnel had spoken with senior officials of several banks regard

ing their policies in allocating credit. Construction loans were 

being rationed more than consumer loans. Practically all of the 

banks were either refusing or discouraging loans to finance mergers 

and shifts of ownership, and they were avoiding loans to finance 

inventory in anticipation of future needs, to purchase land for 

speculative purposes, or to speculate in securities.  

Turning from the problems of credit allocation to over-all 

flows, Mr. Bopp was still concerned over the rapid rate of growth 

of money and credit. Just what money market conditions were needed 

to slow that growth was, of course, a difficult question to answer, 

especially given the action taken yesterday on reserve requirements.  

He would be inclined to maintain the current policy posture for the 

next four weeks unless growth in required reserves suggested a 

resumption of the rapid spurt in money and credit, in which case he 

would favor some further movement toward restraint. Alternative A 

of the draft directives would best serve that purpose.



6/28/66

Mr. Hickman said that a spot check of bankers and newspapers 

in the Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Cincinnati areas suggested that few 

if any planned to increase promotional activity for savings at the 

end of June. There was no evidence of plans to change rates or other 

savings terms, and little change in advertising space was anticipated.  

Mr. Hickman then submitted the following statement for the 

record, after summarizing it orally: 

Evidence is accumulating that the pace of economic 
activity is moderating. Recently, such series as housing 
starts, new orders for durable goods, personal income, 
employment, retail sales, and consumer prices have either 
declined or increased less than the average for the first 
quarter. Nevertheless, defense spending and business out
lays for capital goods are large, and aggregate demand is 
pressing upon capacity. Thus, despite recent tendencies 
toward moderation, the balance could be easily tilted 
once again toward overheating if, say, a new surge of 
defense spending were to be imposed on the economy.  

Some insights into the current business situation 
and outlook were provided at the regular quarterly meeting 
of Fourth District business economists held at our Bank on 
June 17. The highlight of the meeting was a lessening of 
the extreme bullishness that had characterized the two 
previous meetings. Most of the group believe that the 
pace of the economy is moderating, and a majority do not 

anticipate an acceleration in activity in the second half.  
Most also feel that the economy has passed the crest of 
inflationary danger. They were, of course, not informed 
of the Board staff's projections for defense spending.  

Despite the general theme of moderation, the group's 
individual forecasts of industrial production were strong 
for the remainder of the year, but a few of the economists 
thought that the index would decline sometime during the 
first half of 1967. The median projection of GNP for 1966 
of $731.5 billion was somewhat less optimistic than the 
"standard" forecast of $735 billion. Quarter-to-quarter 
increases in the median forecast for GNP were $12 billion

-72-



6/28/66

for the second and third quarters of 1966, $10 billion 
for both the fourth quarter and the first quarter of 1967, 
and $8 billion for the second quarter of 1967. The group's 
median forecast for auto production for 1966 was 8.6 million 
cars, with total sales, including imports, projected at 9.2 
million. The median forecast for steel output was 134 mil
lion ingot tons.  

A few specific items reported at the meeting may be of 
interest to the Committee. Reports on the nonferrous metals 
industries showed distinctly less price pressures than in 
earlier meetings, particularly in zinc and lead. On the 
other hand, continuing supply problems were reported for 
manpower generally, for equipment (especially machine tools), 
and for some materials (specifically sulphuric acid and 
copper).  

Before the meeting, we surveyed, on a confidential 
basis, the credit situation as seen by the corporations 
represented by our Fourth District business economists.  
The general view was that bank credit is readily available 
for the large, top-quality companies but at higher prices 
(including the effects of larger compensating balances).  
A few companies reported active solicitation by banks 
wanting to extend credit. In many cases, increased capital 
spending and expansion of accounts receivable financing had 
enlarged the companies' demands for credit. The expansion 
of accounts receivable financing reflects the fact that 
smaller and marginal companies are turning to their suppliers 
for funds, when denied credit by banks.  

Turning to policy, I feel there is no need for any 
major shift at this time. Yet, the staff's projection of a 
considerable expansion in money supply for June is disquiet
ing. Some accommodation of money and credit expansion 
perhaps can be justified by the mid-month clustering of tax 
and dividend payments and CD runoffs, but the tone of the 
money market suggests to me, at least, that we may have been 
a bit too easy. We should avoid at all cost inflationary 
monetary expansion such as occurred in December and April.  

Mr. Hickman added that he had come to the meeting prepared 

to vote for alternative A of the draft directives, but in view of 

the staff's projections for defense spending he now favored 

alternative B. However, he would prefer very moderate further

-73-



6/28/66 -74

restraint until the early-July period of special pressures on nonbank 

financial intermediaries was passed.  

Mr. Brimmer said that he had planned to comment today on 

various developments in connection with the U.S. balance of payments 

but because the hour was late he would turn directly to the subject 

of the Committee's directive and its background instructions to the 

Manager. In light of the Board's action of yesterday he believed 

the Committee should be especially careful in formulating its 

instructions. First, he thought it should be recognized that the 

recent net borrowed reserve figures were slightly shallower than 

those the Committee had intended to achieve; discounting the $417 

million figure for the latest week, which would be revised downward 

if the pattern of the past few weeks continued, net borrowed reserves 

had been running somewhat less than $400 million. Thus, room existed 

for a further deepening of net borrowed reserves, although he did not 

advocate deepening them to $800 million.  

Secondly, Mr. Brimmer continued, the Board's action of 

yesterday should be interpreted as precisely as possible. It was 

a monetary action, intended to reduce the availability of reserves, 

and he hoped the Committee would not act to offset it completely.  

While he thought it would be helpful to ease the market adjustment, 

by no means would he fully offset the action. It was important, he 

thought, to let the market--and especially the larger banks--know



6/28/66 -75

that the Committee did not subscribe to a pattern of activity in 

which those banks competed actively for funds to relend to their 

customers. He would assume that net borrowed reserves would be 

deepened well beyond $400 million, and that while the Manager would 

ease the adjustment and play by ear over the early-July period, he 

would lean as far as possible in the direction of further tightness.  

A figure around $350 million would constitute backsliding. There 

would be more room to maneuver if, as now seemed likely, midyear 

drains from nonbank institutions would be less than anticipated 

because more institutions were raising their deposit rates.  

Mr. Brimmer said that he had considered expressing a 

preference for alternative B for the directive, but would vote for 

alternative A with a strong recommendation for the course he had 

outlined. If the Committee did not take the present opportunity 

to tighten it was likely to find itself constrained by Treasury 

financing activity later and thus to be less able to act.  

Mr. Maisel agreed with Mr. Brimmer that the Committee had to 

act to give the Desk specific instructions on what to do about reserve 

creation in the space between now and the next Committee meeting.  

Required reserves would increase $400 million as a result of the 

Board's action of yesterday and the specific question that had to 

be faced was whether or not the Committee was going to attempt to 

offset that action by furnishing additional reserves to partially



6/28/66 -76

or completely reduce the restraining influence of the Board action.  

It seemed to him that in giving those instructions the Committee 

had to be concerned with what would be happening in total reserves 

and nonborrowed reserves, and not in net borrowed reserves. The 

blue book/ showed a projected increase in total reserves of $160 

million for the four-week reserve period ending July 20. That 

included normal growth but excluded the impact of any special loans 

to thrift institutions or of the change in reserve ratios.  

If one assumed that no reserves beyond the $160 million 

projected were to be furnished in that period, Mr. Maisel said, 

the entire effect of the Board's action in raising reserve require

ments would have to be absorbed by member banks through a slower 

expansion of credit. Total deposits and loans would not expand as 

much during the period as they otherwise would. If the Desk made 

all projected reserves available in the coming week, banks could 

expand deposits sharply. However, as Government deposits fell 

during the next two weeks, banks would not be able to expand private 

deposits as much as the blue book projected and they would have to 

cut back the amount of credit outstanding by more than normal.  

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 

for the Committee by the Board's staff.



6/28/66 -77

After an examination of reserve movements, credit expansion, 

and changes in the money supply since last December, Mr. Maisel 

believed that if in this period there was no additional expansion of 

total reserves beyond the $160 million projected, the Committee would 

be closer to the proper reserve target needed to meet its general 

monetary goals than it was now. That, therefore, should be the target 

for policy: not to allow total reserves to grow by more than $160 

million through the week ending July 20.  

However, Mr. Maisel continued, it might be that the adjust

ment to the higher reserve requirement would have to be spread over 

a somewhat longer period than the next three weeks. If, as the 

situation developed, a six-week period appeared more logical, that 

would mean according to the staff projections that total reserves 

in the week ending August 10 should be at about the same level as 

they were in the week ending June 22. He would have no objection 

to that extended target. If that also turned out in the course of 

the period to be too rapid a halt in credit expansion, even though 

it meant no cutback; the Committee might allow any additional 

expansion to come only through borrowing. That would mean as a 

minimum insuring that nonborrowed reserves were no higher than now 

in the week ending August 10.  

To meet that goal, Mr. Maisel would allow the level of 

borrowings and of net borrowed reserves to rise as sharply as



6/28/66 -78

needed to hold nonborrowed reserves level for that period. He would 

hope that an immediate start could be made in holding back on reserve 

creation. The smaller the increase in reserves in the coming week, 

the smaller would be the amount that had to be absorbed over the next 

month. The added borrowings should, hopefully, cause the banks to 

slow their credit expansion.  

Mr. Maisel thought the Committee should not be surprised if 

banks attempted to gain their additional reserve requirements in the 

period through added discounting. An expansion of reserves through 

the window, offset by open market sales, should not be feared. It 

would offer the opportunity to discuss with banks the need to con

strain loans rather than adjusting through the sales of securities.  

It would also provide an opportunity to make it clear that the 

System intended to hold the present Q ceilings as an aid to restraint.  

Pressure at the window should be allowed for a considerable period 

before any consideration was given to a discount rate change.  

He obviously would avoid a panic in the money market, Mr.  

Maisel continued, but he would not be afraid of fairly sizable 

increases in interest rates. Almost all market interest rates, but 

especially bill rates, were far below the levels which the staff 

projected at the start of the year. The present appeared to be a 

rather light period for financing and therefore a favorable period 

for action.



6/28/66 -79

In Mr. Maisel's judgment the Committee had been extremely 

slow in meeting any logical goal for the rate of credit expansion.  

Now was a proper time to adjust to a target for reserves, credit, 

and monetary expansion. The present opportunity should be seized 

by aiming at finding total reserves at the present level at the end 

of the next six weeks even though reserve requirements would have 

gone up in the interim. That level of reserves would mean the 

Committee was then on a proper path--that being to continue to 

increase reserves at the annual rate of expansion experienced between 

December 1 and August 10 under the projections.  

At the moment, Mr. Maisel did not feel the Committee should 

look beyond cutting back beneath that rate of growth. That might 

be all that monetary policy could do. The Committee should not look 

forward to doing more than it could; but it could continue on that 

path. Further delay in getting on target would increase the danger 

of continuing to tighten for too long. If the Committee moved to 

a proper growth path now, it could then hope to stay with it.  

Mr. Maisel said that clearly he would support alternative B, 

but with the understanding that any increase in total reserves over 

the next six weeks would be a sign that they were increasing more 

than expected. As a result, such increases would show that greater 

restraint was necessary and net borrowed reserves would be allowed 

to rise as much as needed.



6/28/66 -80

Mr. Daane remarked that in the interest of time he would 

simply say that his own appraisal of the continuing underlying 

strength of the economy, of price developments, of the impending 

addition of cost-push inflation--foreshadowed in the staff's chart 

on unit labor costs--to the demand-pull inflation being experienced, 

of the lack of cheer in the balance of payments outlook--all led 

him to the desirability of somewhat greater monetary restraint.  

Under the current uncertainties, it was difficult to be precise 

with respect to any of the monetary variables and, therefore, he 

would favor giving the Manager maximum latitude in the expectation 

he would take advantage of any opportunity to bring about the 

somewhat greater restraint envisaged perhaps more clearly in 

alternative B.  

At the same time, Mr. Daane said, he did not detect any 

great difference between the language of alternative A calling for 

some further gradual reduction in reserve availability "if" liquidity 

pressures were not unusually strong, and that of alternative B which 

similarly called for some gradual reduction in net availability 

"while taking account of" any unusual liquidity pressures. Accord

ingly, he could accept either alternative for the directive.  

Mr. Mitchell favored alternative B on the grounds that the 

staff review pointed distinctly to tightening and the Board's action 

of yesterday also pointed in that direction. For a guideline, he



6/28/66 -81

would suggest keeping total member bank deposits--the bank credit 

proxy--from rising above its estimated June average level of $245 

billion. He would like to see the money supply come back down 

after its large rise in June. Like Mr. Maisel, he thought an 

immediate start should be made in restraining reserve creation.  

Mr. Mitchell favored deepening net borrowed reserves to 

the $450-$550 million range before the effective date of the reserve 

requirement action. If that did not provide effective restraint and 

the proviso clause of alternative B became operative, he would favor 

net reserves in the $550-$600 million range. His basic objective 

was to tranquilize growth in bank credit.  

Mr. Wayne reported that evidence of a slower rate of growth 

in Fifth District business continued to multiply. The Richmond 

Bank's latest survey indicated that the downtrend in new construc

tion business, evident in earlier statistics, continued in June.  

On balance, the survey of manufacturers showed declines in new 

orders and backlogs for the first time in nearly a year and for 

only the second time since January 1964.  

Demand for business loans at District banks remained strong, 

Mr. Wayne said. The position of member banks in the District seemed 

to have eased a little recently, however, as indicated by a consider

able reduction in borrowing at the discount window and a fairly large 

swing from net purchases to net sales of Federal funds. Nonetheless,



6/28/66 -82

some of the District's larger banks apparently planned to step up 

promotional activities in the savings competition. There was 

evidence that at least a few large banks in Virginia and North 

Carolina would intensify advertising of savings-type certificates 

in the week of June 27. All of those banks, however, emphasized 

that the intensity of their promotional activities was geared, as 

a matter of normal practice, to interest-payment dates at other 

institutions and that promotional plans for the next few weeks 

were quite normal. One large bank, however, reported that it 

would avoid any step-up of its efforts in that regard for fear 

that it would antagonize many good savings and loan association 

customers.  

In the policy area, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that the 

important question at the moment concerned the dimensions of the 

current slowdown in the economy's rate of advance. The green 

book 1/ and the staff presentation this morning appeared to resolve 

the balance between weakness and strength on the side of significant 

acceleration in the rate of improvement in the coming quarter. But 

he was skeptical respecting the staff's projections, and accordingly 

was reluctant to take the policy position which they seemed to imply.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



6/28/66 -83

On the whole, he was not convinced that any significant acceleration 

in the rate of expansion in the next month or two could be expected.  

For the present, maintenance of the present posture appeared to him 

to be the safer course.  

So far as instructions to the Desk were concerned, Mr. Wayne 

favored alternative A, which he interpreted as a vote for no signif

icant change in the present degree of restraint.  

Mr. Clay reported that while some Tenth District commercial 

banks obviously had increased their promotional efforts for time 

deposits in late June, the more typical was a continuation of the 

efforts of recent weeks which in itself represented an intensive 

campaign for funds by most city banks. It seemed only realistic to 

assume that bankers were conscious of the July 1 savings and loan 

dividend date as a potential for acquiring time deposits. In private 

conversations, a limited number of bankers had given that as a 

reason for their expanded publicity drive. With the recent increase 

in savings and loan dividend rates and the accompanying promotional 

drives by those organizations, bankers also had expressed some 

reservations as to the volume of funds that they might acquire. In 

one District city in which a banker freely gave the savings and loan 

funds as the goal of the expanded effort by the banks, the savings 

and loan associations had lifted their divident rate to 5 per cent,



6/28/66 -84

the same as the banks' interest rate on savings certificates, and had 

expanded their promotional efforts fully as much as had the banks.  

At this juncture, Mr. Clay felt that monetary policy probably 

should remain essentially unchanged, with policy actions continuing 

to apply about the present degree of pressure on the commercial banks 

and the financial markets. While pressure on resources continued and 

price inflation remained a problem, the economic situation appeared 

to permit such an approach to policy for the present. In view of the 

uncertainties in the period ahead, particularly those arising from 

possible developments associated with the flow of funds, the financial 

situation called for an avoidance of further credit tightening at 

this time.  

Thus, Mr. Clay continued, the Committee should aim for money 

market conditions and net reserve availability about in line with 

the last two weeks. It still should be the Committee's aim to apply 

added restraint if bank credit expansion was much in excess of what 

was expected, insofar as such action was not precluded by the flow 

of funds problem and its associated developments and by the need to 

avoid precipitating a discount rate action. The Manager might 

require more than the usual degree of leeway in meeting the Commit

tee's guidelines in the period ahead. The draft policy directive 

with alternative A as the second paragraph appeared satisfactory to 

Mr. Clay.



6/28/66 -85

Mr. Scanlon reported that a sampling of Seventh District 

opinions indicated the current trend of economic activity was 

extremely vigorous despite cutbacks in autos and home building.  

In the District it was generally expected also that Vietnam 

would require an increasing volume of the nation's resources, 

that tax rates would not be raised soon, that interest rates 

would not decline significantly in the next few months, and that 

the general price level would rise further, but at a moderate 

pace. Capital goods producers continued to anticipate that output 

would rise well into 1967.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that he had nothing significant to 

add on the subject of commercial bank advertising and promotional 

activities.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon shared Mr. Daane's view that in 

the period immediately ahead the Manager should have more than the 

usual amount of latitude in which to operate, but he would urge 

the Manager to move to a posture of greater restraint whenever he 

could do so. Mr. Seanlon favored alternative B of the draft 

directives.  

Mr. Galusha submitted the following statement for the 

record after summarizing it orally: 

My statement today will be confined to food production 
developments in the Ninth District and consumer spending 
patterns as they are developing in the recreation areas of 
the west.



6/28/66

In a survey of opinion of various leaders around the 
midwest and northwest in the livestock industry, the 
following points were developed. Producers are generally 
continuing optimistic even though there are a number of 
major drought pockets, principally along a line through 
eastern Washington, eastern Oregon, central Idaho, south
western Montana, and then broadening through Wyoming and 
extending southward along the eastern slopes of the 
Rockies. Marketings of cows and heifers have increased 
substantially, partly as a result of this, and partly as 
a result of the inversion currently obtaining in the 
cattle markets. Cows had been selling at $150-$160 per 
head, which is $20-$25 above the price level warranted 
by the fat cattle market. This market has been laid at 
the door of the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the 
Administration, which have been unusually confused and 
contradictory. This curtailment of breeding stock may 
have supply implications for next year if it continues 
at present rates.  

Feeders are unhappy. Current price levels have put 
them into loss positions generally vis-a-vis their present 
inventories. However, bumper corn prospects plus an 
unusually favorable spread between present contrasting 
levels for fall delivery of feeders and the February-April 
futures market should cheer them up. Financing is no 
major problem yet, although the Production Credit Associa
tions generally are bracing themselves, particularly in 

the drought areas.  
Wholesalers are pessimistic, but the grocery chains 

are doing very well in their meat operations. The major 

packer visited is optimistic and although they expect fat 

cattle prices to edge up perhaps $1.00 by fall, they 
expect to maintain their margins.  

The wheat situation is due for basic readjustments.  

Criticism of the Agriculture Department's policy is 
mounting. The belief was expressed by one man who is 

particularly knowledgeable in the world markets that 

the increase in acreage is only the first that will be 

necessary if the carryover a year from now is to be 

prevented from dropping below 300 million bushels.  

Approximately 50 per cent of the salable Canadian crop 
has been committed to the present Communist bloc contracts.  

While this is less than last year, the Canadian wheat 

supply is going to be very tight partly because of the 

limits of handling capacity and partly because of the

-86-



6/28/66

pressure felt by non-Communist markets to cover their 
positions. It is expected that prices will continue to 
edge up, placing increasing pressure on the Department 
of Agriculture because of their unrealistic mix of 
social, political, and economic policies in wheat 
pricing and production. PL 480 commitments will be 
switched to coarse grains if possible but both price 
and acreage movements upward are thought inevitable.  

The general atmosphere of foreboding here today has 
no reflection in American spending habits this vacation 
season. A general question of where are the American 
people spending the money they are not spending on 
durables can be answered, in substantial measure, by 
saying that they are spending it on the road. These 
are a few statistics gathered from the principal con
cessioners in the four big western parks: Yellowstone 
reservations up 42 per cent; paid reservations up 24 
per cent; and May travel reservations up 59 per cent.  
There is less criticism of pricing, with fringe services 
such as boat rentals and saddle horses being bought to 
capacity. Yosemite reservations are up 15 per cent as 
are Sequoia reservations; Grand Canyon is up only 10 per 
cent, but revenue is up 15 per cent. The variation from 
Yellowstone for May is attributable in large part to 
seasonal and weather factors.  

Labor is tight on the professional side, and boys 
are in short supply. Vietnam pressures, direct and 

indirect, are blamed. Girls are now 4 to 1 in the work 
force generally.  

Prices are up slightly, but a significant downturn 
in all food costs except canned goods has taken off the 

pressure.  

In response to the Board's wire, we were unable to 
find any substantial number of bankers planning to 
increase advertising efforts. In one instance it was 
noticed that a major Twin City correspondent was attempt
ing to redress some of its earlier wrongs by publicly 
advertising that the local bank be consulted if the 

listener was located outside the Twin Cities.  
The word had gone out quietly from the Farm Credit 

Board to the Federal Intermediate Credit Banks to encourage 

PCA's to follow a four point program: (1) avoid speculative 
financing, (2) avoid loans for undue expansion, (3) con
centrate on production loans, and (4) cease the aggressive 
hard sell of their services.

-87-



6/28/66 -88

What does all this add up to in terms of monetary 
policy? It seems to me that, if it is not presently going 
on, a quiet but directed dialogue should be started on the 
consequences of a discount shift upwards before too long, 
so that if it becomes necessary--as it may well be--the 
Board's peers will not be caught totally unprepared. My 
preference is for alternative A.  

Chairman Martin then noted that he understood Mr. Brill had 

some explanatory comments to make regarding the staff's projection 

of defense expenditures.  

Mr. Brill said that he was somewhat disturbed by the impres

sion that the Committee may have gotten from the chart presentation 

that the staff was privy to advance information on defense spending 

plans. The staff had no special private information on defense 

spending, and the estimates presented today were based entirely on 

its own analysis. The information that was publicly available on 

orders, draft calls, and so forth suggested to the staff that defense 

spending would rise in the third quarter at about the second-quarter 

rate, and then begin to taper off slowly--in contrast to the abrupt 

leveling off in the third quarter that was implied in the January 

Budget Document. The projections did not envisage an acceleration 

in spending from recent rates of increase, but it did envisage a 

higher level than did the Budget.  

Mr. Swan noted that the green book indicated that California 

State-chartered savings and loan associations had an increase in 

share accounts in the first 17 days of June. Some further details of



6/28/66 -89

interest were now available. There had been a loss in regular 

accounts at associations paying 4.85 per cent, a gain at those paying 

5 per cent, almost no change in six-month certificates paying 5 per 

cent, and a quite substantial increase in the three-year minimum term 

accounts paying 5.35 to 5.50 per cent. He hoped those changes indi

cated that the reduced inflows reflected rate differentials and not a 

loss of confidence. If that were the case, there should be some 

response to further rate increases by the associations. As of Friday, 

one or two small institutions had increased their rates on regular 

accounts to 5-1/4 per cent, and he expected that increase to spread 

despite the fact that at the higher rate the associations would be 

subject to restrictions on borrowing from the Home Loan Bank for 

purposes of expansion. The associations were not concerned about 

such restrictions. On the other hand, there was a great deal of 

concern of other kinds, as evidenced by the fact that the Governor of 

California had called a confidential conference on June 22 to discuss 

the outlook for residential construction and mortgage capital. In 

the discussion on Friday with Under Secretary Barr, to which he had 

referred earlier, some of the large commercial banks indicated they 

already had some savings and loan association passbooks on hand for 

collection and deposit after the interest-crediting date. They 

indicated that they did not have large numbers of such passbooks, but 

it was unusual for them to have any noticeable numbers at all.



6/28/66 -90

With respect to bank advertising, as of Friday Mr. Swan had 

noted no increases in activity and no plans for increases beyond 

what was normal for the beginning of any quarter. However, how the 

banks would react if the 5-1/4 per cent rate spread to many savings 

and loan associations remained to be seen; it would not be surpris

ing if banks increased their advertising efforts.  

Turning to policy, Mr. Swan felt that in view of the 

pressures on financial intermediaries and the uncertanties in credit 

markets--including the effects of the announcement of the Board's 

action of yesterday--the Committee should not tighten further, at 

least not in the first two weeks of July. He did not see how the 

Committee could anticipate at the moment the extent to which it 

should offset the reserve requirement increase. He would give due 

regard to the qualification in alternative A; in the language of the 

draft, if "liquidity pressures are not unusually strong and required 

reserve increases are larger than expected," he thought firming 

action would be called for. Barring those two developments, however, 

in the immediate future he would prefer to see the Committee's policy 

stay about where it was now.  

Mr. Irons said he could briefly summarize the economic 

situation in the Eleventh District by indicating that activity was 

showing a somewhat slower rate of growth at a very high level. With 

regard to the Board's inquiry on bank advertising, a spot-check had



6/28/66 -91

indicated no concerted advertising campaign among the District's 

larger banks. Some of the smaller banks in the Houston area were 

advertising heavily, but that was not a recent development; it 

reflected a competitive situation that had existed for some time.  

Mr. Irons believed that developments in financial markets 

were reflecting the bite of recent monetary policy. He felt that 

it would be well for the Committee to exercise some caution in the 

period until its next meeting, and he did not favor further tight

ening on any significant scale. He also felt that there would be 

added pressure on the discount rate and certainly on the prime rate 

if short-term rates continued to push up as they had over the past 

few weeks, and he would not like to see that happen. The current 

relation between the discount rate and short-term market rates left 

little elbowroom in which to maneuver. He would add that the chart 

presentation this morning presented one of the clearest and 

strongest cases for fiscal policy action that he had seen.  

Mr. Irons concluded that during the period until the next 

meeting the Committee should maintain about the situation that had 

prevailed over the past three weeks, with net borrowed reserves in 

the $350-$400 million range. With that thought in mind, he favored 

alternative A of the draft directives.



6/28/66 -92

Mr. Ellis, in briefly summarizing New England economic 

conditions, reported that manufacturing output, construction, employ

ment, the average workweek, personal income, and consumer spending 

had all increased in the most recent data, generally covering April

May changes. Individual highlights, such as the continuing strike of 

11,000 workers at the General Electric plant in Lynn for higher pay 

for engine testers, merely confirmed the general impression of an 

economy operating at full capacity.  

First District banks continued their search for funds to 

meet their continuing loan demand, Mr. Ellis said. Outstanding 

negotiable CD's on June 15 were almost identical with their May 11 

level and showed a 23 per cent year-to-year gain. The remaining 

segment of other time deposits posted a 91 per cent year-to-year 

growth. Past patterns revealed that most of the CD's on the books 

of the smaller banks represented local funds, often from municipal

ities, rather than out-of-State funds. Those local contacts provided 

the smaller banks with assurance that they could continue to hold 

their deposits against the competition of larger banks in the reserve 

cities. For that reason he did not see in the District widespread 

concern by small banks as their bigger neighbors pushed CD rates 

closer to the Regulation Q ceiling.  

While there continued to be a steady stream of commercial 

bank announcements of consumer-oriented savings plans in the District,



6/28/66 -93

Mr. Ellis continued, no advertising programs had been observed that 

were designed especially to pull funds out of savings institutions 

at the time of dividend payments.  

Mr. Ellis confessed to an uneasy feeling that the Committee 

had lost momentum during June in moving to resist the economy's 

pressure to expand credit and the money supply. The June projections 

of a 15 per cent annual rate of increase in private demand deposits, 

and of nearly 13 per cent in the money stock, differed so much from 

the 4.5 per cent growth rate in real GNP as almost to constitute a 

definition of inflationary pressures.  

Mr. Ellis went on to say that the projections for the next 

few weeks--prepared before the change in reserve requirements-

indicated a need to inject perhaps $1 billion reserves to meet 

seasonal requirements. In a bill market already laboring under 

pressures of strong demand and limited supply, it would be difficult 

to supply reserves by that route without further depressing bill 

rates. Those factors counseled a substantial reliance on RP's, as 

was suggested by the Manager's recommendation the Committee had 

approved earlier today. Perhaps a lagged provision of reserves 

should also be relied on to lend tightness to the feel of the market.  

By the middle of July, Mr. Ellis continued, much of the 

present uncertainty concerning possible deposit losses by savings 

banks and savings and loan associations would have been dispelled.



6/28/66 -94

His own intuition urged him to the view that the problem would be not 

nearly as serious as advance billing indicated. Accordingly, he 

anticipated that by the time of the Committee's next meeting near the 

end of July it would be possible to reappraise pressures on the dis

count window and to consider the desirability of discount rate 

increases without any change in the current Regulation Q ceilings.  

For the present, Mr. Ellis said, the Committee in effect had 

three alternative courses suggested by the two draft directives. He 

would characterize alternative A, without the proviso clause, as 

standing firm in a passive sort of way, and alternative A with the 

proviso clause as active resistance if the rate of reserve growth 

accelerated. Alternative B called for a gradual tightening. His 

own preference for this particular time was alternative A with the 

proviso clause. It allowed some reaction against sharp reserve 

increases if they materialized and if market conditions permitted, 

and it left the initiative for further tightening with the market.  

He would consider it undesirable to ask the Manager to work with a 

target formulated in terms of total reserves rather than net borrowed 

reserves for the four-week period. He suggested a net borrowed 

reserves target in the $400-$500 million range, and he would expect 

borrowing fairly consistently to exceed $700 million.



6/28/66 -95

Mr. Hayes said that he had understood from the comments around 

the table that others who had expressed a preference for alternative A 

also favored including the proviso.  

Chairman Martin remarked that he did not think there was much 

difference among the various views on policy expressed by Committee 

members today. The majority appeared to prefer alternative A of the 

drafts of the second paragraph of the directive. In his own judgment 

nothing more was required at present. He favored giving the Manager 

as much latitude as was reasonable over the coming period.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would find an answer to the following 

question helpful: How much, if at all, was the Committee asking the 

Manager to offset the effect of the Board's action of yesterday? To 

communicate adequately in present circumstances, he felt that some 

numerical indication was needed of the operating objectives the Com

mittee had in mind.  

Mr. Hayes said that, based on his experience with past changes 

in reserve requirements, it would be quite surprising if the full 

impact of the change in requirements was permitted to be reflected in 

the level of net borrowed reserves over any short period. An abrupt 

change of such a magnitude would be extremely upsetting to the market.  

It seemed obvious to him that the Desk would have to offset most of 

the effect in the short run, granting that the Committee intended to 

work toward a tighter position as that became feasible.



6/28/66 -96

Mr. Brimmer noted that the reserve requirement change would 

be effective at reserve city banks about the middle of July and at 

country banks a week later. The Committee's next meeting was tenta

tively scheduled for four weeks from now, and he believed that over 

the four-week period there should be some bite from the Board's 

action.  

Mr. Hayes agreed that the Board's action should be permitted 

to have some effect. However, a $400 million deepening in net bor

rowed reserves in a four-week period struck him as beyond any 

reasonable expectation.  

Chairman Martin said he concurred in Mr. Hayes' point, and 

thought Mr. Maisel had had the same point in mind when he suggested 

that the adjustment might be spread over a six-week period. He 

(Chairman Martin) favored giving the Manager full latitude, as he had 

indicated earlier. If the Committee attempted to deal with the 

matter on a purely statistical basis it was likely to make difficulties 

for itself. At the same time it was clearly the Committee's intention 

to let the reserve requirement change have some bite.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought the Committee might be 

sweeping the matter under the rug and not facing up to the problem.  

In his judgment the members favoring alternative A in effect favored 

a sterilization of the tightening effect of the change in reserve 

requirements. He did not advocate deepening net borrowed reserves



6/28/66 -97

by the full $400 million in a four-week period, but he did advocate 

letting a substantial part of the change in requirements--perhaps 

half--be effective in that period. The Manager should deepen net 

borrowed reserves as rapidly as he thought was feasible over the 

coming period.  

Chairman Martin commented that while Mr. Mitchell's position 

was a legitimate one he personally did not think that targets of 

operations could be spelled out so specifically. The period in 

question was one in which thrift institutions would be under con

siderable pressure. Along with others he hoped those pressures 

would turn out to be less than had been anticipated, but the risk 

of severe repercussions to firming action had to be borne in mind.  

The Committee should not call for tightening credit regardless of 

how things worked out; a feel of the market was required, and that 

was why he favored giving considerable latitude to the Manager.  

Mr. Maisel said the problem the Committee faced, as he saw 

it, was that of arriving at some measure of agreement on specific 

objectives.  

Chairman Martin expressed doubt that the Committee could do 

so under current circumstances.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed that it was necessary for the Committee 

to give the Desk flexibility, but it also had to give the Desk some 

guidance. He was as sensitive as anyone to the state of the



6/28/66 -98

financial markets, but it was necessary to recognize that the 

Committee had not achieved the kind of control of the aggregate 

variables it had planned. While he did not favor abrupt action, 

he thought it should be made clear to the Desk that the Committee 

wanted to begin to achieve some real restraint.  

Mr. Hayes commented that in his judgment the Committee faced 

a new set of circumstances as a result of the increase in reserve 

requirements. At all times the Committee's judgments had to be 

attuned to all relevant factors, and a $400 million increase in 

reserve requirements was one such factor. Personally, he could not 

conceive of letting net borrowed reserves increase by $400 million 

in a rather short period of time without cataclysmic results. It 

would take a considerable period to deepen net borrowed reserves 

from $400 million to $800 million if the Committee was to avoid 

precipitating a crisis.  

Mr. Brimmer observed that he did not favor deepening net 

borrowed reserves to $800 million by the time of the next meeting, 

but he did think the figure should be deepened well beyond the $350

$400 million range.  

Mr. Hayes indicated that his preference was for a target 

range of $350 to $400 million, with the proviso that the target 

should be deeper if there was a surge in credit demands and shallower



6/28/66 -99

if the severity of liquidity pressures at financial institutions 

was great. He would give the Manager a considerable degree of 

latitude.  

Mr. Daane said he did not detect any real difference in the 

positions various members were taking; in general, they seemed to 

favor some further gradual firming, if conditions permitted. He 

personally could not say at present by how much net borrowed 

reserves should be deepened, but he favored movement in that direc

tion if and when the Manager thought it was feasible.  

Mr. Mitchell thought that it would be appropriate to deepen 

the levels of net borrowed reserves in the period from the present 

to the time that the reserve requirement increase became effective, 

and then to shift to shallower levels. The objective would be to 

"wedge in" the impact of the change in requirements.  

Chairman Martin remarked that the problem with which the 

Committee was struggling appeared to be that of avoiding incon

sistency in policy.  

Mr. Maisel observed that some members felt that the 

inconsistency lay in the fact that the Committee had been calling 

for a tighter policy but still had allowed bank credit to rise at 

a very rapid rate.



6/28/66 -100

Mr. Holmes noted that in May the bank credit proxy had 

increased at only a 2-1/2 per cent annual rate. Before the last 

meeting the Board's staff projected a rise in June at about a 6-1/2 

per cent annual rate. Around mid-June their estimate, and also that 

of the New York Bank, was a 3-1/2 per cent rate; and now the Board's 

projection was about 5 per cent and the New York Bank's about 6 per 

cent. For July the staff projections ranged from 9 to 13 per cent, 

with the increase reflecting the large rise from the middle to the 

end of June that resulted from tax payments, including the speed-up 

in payments of withholding taxes. If the Committee felt that an 

increase in July in the bank credit proxy on the order of 10 or 11 

per cent was too great, it could call for activating the proviso 

in the directive and moving toward deeper net borrowed reserves.  

Chairman Martin reiterated his view that an attempt to use 

statistical measures under present circumstances would lead to 

difficulties. He thought the Committee wanted the Manager to have 

latitude and that it would like to move towards firming if the 

opportunity presented itself. If there was no such opportunity it 

did not want the Manager to act in a way that would result in chaos 

in the market. In his judgment either alternative A or B could be 

interpreted within that framework.  

Mr. Maisel said he favored the course suggested by 

Mr. Holmes' final remark--namely, that the Desk should operate to



6/28/66

prevent the bank credit proxy from rising at a rate as rapid as 10 

or 11 per cent in July, if it could do so.  

A number of members concurred in Mr. Maisel's statement.  

Chairman Martin then asked whether there would be any 

objections to adoption of alternative A for the second paragraph of 

the directive, and none was heard.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that, while there has been some 
reduction in automobile sales and residential construction, 
over-all domestic economic activity is continuing to expand, 
with industrial prices rising further. Mortgage market 
conditions remain tight and total credit demands continue 
strong. The foreign trade surplus has declined and the 
international payments deficit has increased. In this 
situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy 
to resist inflationary pressures and to strengthen efforts 
to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 
of payments, by restricting the growth in the reserve base, 
bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 

with a view to maintaining about the current state of net 

reserve availability and related money market conditions, 
except as changes may be needed to moderate unusual liquidity 
pressures at financial institutions; provided, however, that 

if such liquidity pressures are not unusually strong and 

required reserve increases are larger than expected, opera

tions shall be conducted with a view to attaining some further 

gradual reduction in net reserve availability and firming of 

money market conditions.

-101-



6/28/66 -102

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, July 26, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 27, 1966 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on June 28, 1966.  

First paragraph 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 

meeting indicate that, while there has been some reduction in auto

mobile sales and residential construction, over-all domestic economic 

activity is continuing to expand, with industrial prices rising 
further. Mortgage market conditions remain tight and total credit 

demands continue strong. The foreign trade surplus has declined and 

the international payments deficit has increased. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist inflation

ary pressures and to strengthen efforts to restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by restricting the 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

Second paragraph 

Alternative A (preserving current firmness, with qualifications) 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to maintaining about the current state of net reserve avail

ability and related money market conditions, except as changes may 

be needed to moderate unusual liquidity pressures at financial 

institutions (; provided, however, that if such liquidity pressures 

are not unusually strong and required reserve increases are larger 

than expected, operations shall be conducted with a view to attain

ing some further gradual reduction in net reserve availability and 

firming of money market conditions).  

Alternative B (firming, with degree conditioned by movement in 

required reserves 

To implement this policy, while taking account of any unusual 

liquidity pressures at financial institutions, System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 

with a view to attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve 

availability and attendant firming of money market conditions, and 

to attaining somewhat greater restraint if required reserve increases 

are larger than expected.


