









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 23, 1966, at 

11:30 a.m.1/ 

PRESENT: Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 

Mr. Brimmer 

Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 

Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 

Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 2/ 

Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Garvy, Green, Mann, Partee, Tow, and 
Young, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board 

of Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

1/ This meeting was preceded by a joint meeting of the Board and 

the Reserve Bank Presidents to discuss certain proposals regarding 

discount administration. Copies of the minutes of the joint 

meeting have been placed in the Board's files.  

2/ Withdrew from meeting at point indicated in minutes.



8/23/66

Mr. Garfield, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gramley, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Economist, Government Finance 

Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Furth, Consultant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Strothman, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Taylor, Baughman, Jones, and Craven, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 

Banks of Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, and 

San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Monhollon, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Messrs. Arena and Rothwell, Economists, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston and Philadelphia, 
respectively 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, and 

by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

July 26, 1966, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions 

and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign 

currencies for the period July 26 through August 17, 1966, and a 

supplemental report for August 18 through 22, 1966. Copies of 

these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.



8/23/66

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the gold stock was being reduced by $75 million today 

in order to replenish the Stabilization Fund, which had been hit 

by a French gold order of $145 million. On the London gold market, 

recurrent buying pressure had now reduced resources of the gold 

pool to $76 million, representing a drain of $236 million since 

the first of the year. What he found most ominous was the large 

suppressed demand for gold. Such demand had been suppressed by 

the very tight money conditions throughout the world, but it could 

break through into the market if there was any serious disruption 

in the circle of parities.  

At the time of the previous meeting of the Committee, 

Mr. Coombs recalled, the fate of sterling was hanging in the 

balance. If a collapse had occurred, the System probably would 

have been struggling today to halt a speculative onslaught 

against the dollar. However, a number of acute uncertainties 

present at the time of the previous meeting--the risk of a 

breakdown of the Wilson Cabinet, the risk that Chancellor Callaghan 

would fail to support the wage-price freeze, and the risk that the 

trade unions would revolt--had all receded, at least for the time 

being. The British program was about as drastic as could have 

been expected, and it should soon begin to bite. Nevertheless, 

the general atmosphere in the exchange market remained almost as



8/23/66 -4

despondent as before; everyone who could stay short of sterling 

continued to do so. In that atmosphere, sterling remained highly 

vulnerable to any new setback, and selling pressures had resumed 

during the past few days, perhaps reflecting some speculation 

associated with the forthcoming Fund-Bank annual meetings. On 

the other hand, if something could be done to trigger a shift in 

expectations, and if the enormous short position in sterling that 

had been built up over the past few months could be exploited, the 

situation might turn around.  

During July, Mr. Coombs continued, the British ran a 

deficit of $1,120 million, of which $1,050 million was covered by 

central bank and other assistance. They chose at month-end to show 

a reserve reduction of only $70 million. That report was greeted 

with derision in the market, but the market also took the report 

as a sign that the British apparently still had plenty of credit 

resources at their command and sterling actually improved a little 

after the figures were announced. To cover the total deficit the 

Bank of England made a three-month drawing of $100 million on the 

Federal Reserve swap line; it drew another $100 million on the 

Bankfor International Settlements, and $130 million on the sterling 

balance credit package negotiated at Basle last June. In addition 

the Federal Reserve and the Treasury supplied $145 million through 

purchases of guaranteed sterling. Finally, at month-end the



8/23/66 -5

Federal Reserve and the Treasury supplied $400 million of over

night credit, and an additional $175 million of such overnight 

credits were obtained from four other central banks. Of that 

total of $1,050 million of credit assistance, the British repaid 

$575 million on August 1, so in effect they began the month of 

August facing a deficit of $575 million. So far this month they 

had suffered sizable further losses, which by month-end might 

easily come to $400 million. Perhaps half of that amount, i.e.  

$200 million, might be covered by further drawings upon the 

sterling balance package, and they might want to cover the bulk 

of the remaining $200 million by further three-month drawings on 

the System swap line, under which $250 million was already 

outstanding.  

Reverting to the total of $575 million of overnight money 

provided at the end of July by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, 

and four foreign central banks, Mr. Coombs said he could see no 

alternative but to repeat that operation at the end of August. He 

would hope that the $175 million obtained at the end of July from 

four foreign central banks would again be available. If August 31 

fell on any other day but Wednesday, he would also have recommended 

at this meeting that the Federal Reserve join with the Treasury in 

overnight credits of $200 million from each agency. But since an 

overnight credit extended by the System on a Wednesday would show



8/23/66 -6

up dollar for dollar in the "other assets" item in the weekly 

statement, it had seemed to him preferable to recommend to the 

Treasury that they take over the entire $400 million of overnight 

money. The Treasury had agreed to do so. What was foreseeable, 

as far as the System was concerned, between now and the end of the 

month was a possible drawing by the British of $100, or even 

$150 million, on the Federal Reserve swap line on a 3-month basis.  

Mr. Coombs also mentioned that the System Account yesterday 

bought $250 million of lire from the Treasury, which had acquired 

the lire in a special borrowing from the International Monetary Fund.  

Of the amount purchased, $225 million had been used to pay off the 

outstanding drawings under the swap line with the Bank of Italy.  

In effect, the Treasury had provided the System with a backstop 

for swap drawings which, in the case of Italy, were threatening 

to run on too long. He would hope that was a precedent for opera

tions in other currencies. There was now open access to the Fund, 

through the technique developed in the case of lire, and that should 

help to relieve the worries Committee members and the Account 

Management had felt about getting involved in swap drawings that 

might go on too long. The remaining $25 million of lire obtained 

from the Treasury was used to pay down the System's forward commit

ment to the Bank for International Settlements, totaling $40 million, 

to deliver lire for sterling.



8/23/66

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
July 26 through August 22, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the $100 million standby swap arrange

ment with the Netherlands Bank, having a term of three months, expired 

September 15, 1966. He recommended renewal for another three-month 

period.  

Renewal of the standby swap with 
the Netherlands Bank was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then commented on his memorandum dated August 18, 

1966, on sterling and the gold market, a copy of which has been 

placed in the Committee's files. In that memorandum, he recalled, 

he had pointed to the risk of a new crisis in either sterling or 

the gold market, or both, which could be triggered by speculation 

about a devaluation of sterling during the course of the annual 

Fund and Bank meetings. Those meetings often stimulated speculation 

about changes in parities, and this year such speculation probably 

would focus on sterling. Since the memorandum was prepared, the 

risk had, in his judgment, become more imminent and more menacing.  

In fact, he was beginning to think there might be some serious 

trouble immediately following the publication on September 2 of 

the British reserve figures for August. Earlier the Bank of England 

had been hopeful that through market swaps and similar arrangements



8/23/66 -8

it might be able to show a small gain for the month and to indicate 

simultaneously that no additional recourse to central bank credit 

had been made during the month. They would then have reported a 

true figure, and that could have had a useful effect in tilting 

the balance of expectations in favor of sterling.  

But the way things looked now, Mr. Coombs said, on 

September 2 the British would have to announce either a reduction 

of reserves, an acknowledgment of further recourse to central bank 

credit, or both. The market reaction to such an announcement, 

coming as it would 40 days after the new policy package was 

announced on July 20, might well set off a new burst of selling, 

which undoubtedly would be aggravated by speculative talk associated 

with the Fund and Bank meetings. As the Committee could see from 

the figures he had quoted, the British had been utilizing their 

credits at a rapid clip, and it might not take much longer to run 

through all of them. If a final effort was to be made to defend 

not only sterling but, more particularly, the dollar, through 

enlarging the swap network, he thought it was necessary to begin 

moving right away.  

Mr. Coombs said he would like to make one point clear: it 

was quite true that the immediate reason for suggesting a massive 

increase in the swap network was the speculative pressure on sterling, 

but the basic reason was to avoid the pressure on the dollar that



8/23/66 -9

would result from a sudden collapse of sterling. The dollar would 

become the target if sterling were to collapse, and the pressure 

would be reinforced by the probability of a breakout on the 

London gold market. If sterling did go down, the System would 

have already in place the additional borrowing facilities with the 

continental central banks that would be indispensable to a success

ful defense of the dollar. Of course, there was the possibility 

of last-minute negotiations, but such negotiations during the past 

few years had involved finding the right people on hand at the 

time they were needed; the next time they might not be there. In 

summary, whether sterling stood or fell, he saw an urgent need for 

swap line increases of the kinds suggested in his memorandum.  

There was admittedly a risk, Mr. Coombs added, that such 

a major reinforcement of the swap lines might suggest a spirit of 

desperation, and thus alarm the market further. However, that had 

not been the market reaction to other recent announcements of 

central bank credit arrangements. Those announcements had invar

iably been received as evidence of the determination of the central 

banks to act together in defense against speculative pressures. At 

present the market was aware of the virtual breakdown of the Group 

of Ten negotiations looking toward the creation of additional 

reserve assets. It was aware of the pressure on sterling and the 

situation with respect to Vietnam. There was a growing feeling



8/23/66 -10

that the whole system of international financial solidarity was 

beginning to come apart. Announcement of a new large effort 

demonstrating to the market that it was not coming apart--in fact 

was being strengthened--should do a lot to change that psychology.  

The greater risk, Mr. Coombs said, was that a new package 

of credit facilities might suggest to the market that the existing 

facilities had been virtually exhausted. But that risk could 

readily be averted if all outstanding drawings under the swap 

network were reported as of the end of August. It would be highly 

useful, in the event of an increase in the British swap line, for 

the British to publish exactly what they owed under it. That 

would make it clear to the market that not only were those credit 

facilities being increased but that a large unexpended balance was 

available for intervention.  

In summary, Mr. Coombs said, he thought there was the clear 

danger of a breakdown of the international financial system within 

the next month or 6 weeks. He saw very little that the Group of 

Ten could do to stop it; their negotiations had reached an impasse.  

The U.S. Treasury was not in a position to do a great deal about 

it. The Stabilization Fund had only limited amounts of money and 

the Treasury was set against providing medium-term credit through 

the Export-Import Bank. The burden therefore fell directly on the 

Open Market Committee.



8/23/66 -11

Mr. Hayes, after stressing the highly confidential nature 

of the subject, noted that in the past few weeks there had been 

discussions by a Governmental committee centering in the Treasury 

as to the type of emergency that might develop and the part that 

the swap arrangements might play in dealing with it. Mr. Daane 

had attended those meetings, and Mr. Hayes asked him to comment.  

Mr. Daane said that the particular group (usually called 

the Deming Committee) was set up in response to a directive from 

the President in June 1965. The main concern of the group was the 

international monetary reform question and the whole program of 

the Group of Ten. However, the President also requested that this 

group keep under surveillance the sterling problem, then clearly 

developing, which eventuated in the September assistance package.  

At intervals, whenever the British situation seemed to be partic

ularly difficult, the committee had taken a look at the various 

possible approaches. In connection with that, the Secretary of 

the Treasury had in the past requested Mr. Coombs and Mr. Hayes to 

come down and discuss with the group and with him the question of 

various alternatives. A couple of weeks ago the same request was 

made of Mr. Coombs with respect to a question from the Treasury 

side as to whether there were ways of preventing or avoiding an 

emergency that could, as Mr. Coombs had noted, react upon the 

dollar as well. In response, Mr. Coombs had pointed up the



8/23/66 -12

possibility of increasing the swap lines, always making clear, 

however, that that particular mechanism was the responsibility of 

the Open Market Committee. The interagency group was not entirely 

of one mind, but he (Mr. Daane) thought the real differences were 

more in terms of timing and technique than substance. The Treasury 

seemed to lean toward Mr. Coombs' suggestion as a most feasible 

and desirable approach. There was some feeling within the group 

that it might be preferable to attempt to put together a more 

direct package of assistance, but he thought it was fair to say 

that the Treasury view, shared by Mr. Coombs and himself, was that 

it would be unrealistic to think of that sort of credit in any 

major magnitude being arranged under current circumstances. In 

general, the principal difference in views turned on whether one 

could better put together a larger swap package, and get the kind 

of psychological boost that could come from it, now or after an 

emergency had actually developed. There was some feeling that 

perhaps the package could be put together more readily after an 

emergency had developed than in advance. There was also some 

feeling that putting together such a package would relieve some of 

the continentals from direct assistance to sterling. That more or 

less countered an alternative approach favored by some, which 

would be to wait for the emergency, go on unilaterally, and then 

turn to the continentals for reciprocity. In any event, no



8/23/66 -13

clear-cut Administration view had evolved from those discussions.  

As he had said, he thought the differences involved mainly timing 

and technique, but it was clear to him that the Treasury was 

leaning heavily toward the view that the best way of proceeding 

was along the lines suggested in Mr. Coombs' memorandum.  

Mr. Daane added there was one further difference of view.  

Some of the group felt that the market would get a psychological 

boost, but there was some feeling that announcement of an increase 

in the swap lines might have a perverse effect, for reasons 

Mr. Coombs had discussed. Mr. Daane stressed that the committee 

operated on a confidential basis and that its deliberations should 

be held in close confidence.  

In response to a question as to his personal view, Mr. Daane 

said he felt strongly that Mr. Coombs had outlined the best proce

dure under current and foreseeable circumstances. He was highly 

skeptical, from his contacts with central bankers in the Group of 

Ten sessions and otherwise, that it was realistic to expect them 

to put up any substantial money directly. He thought the existence 

of this backlog of credit lines would prove reassuring to the 

market. In his judgment, it would be inadvisable to wait for an 

emergency to develop and then go hat in hand to the continentals.  

If the suggested course was followed, there was a good chance of 

forestalling such an emergency. Aside from simply reassuring the



8/23/66 -14

market, the System would acquire a right to currencies that could 

be useful in dealing with any dollar movements that would constitute 

a real threat to the status of the dollar.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that it was clear to him that this was 

one of the most crucial issues the Committee had had to face in 

some time. It warranted full discussion. In his own view, there 

was no workable alternative to the type of program that had been 

set forth unless the Committee wanted to take the risk that all of 

the past efforts to preserve sterling parity would come to naught, 

with all that could mean for the dollar and the financial structure 

that had been built up in the postwar years. The idea of a direct 

multilateral package of assistance was something that he had 

discussed informally from time to time with various influential 

people on the continent, and he did not think it could be worked 

out. In a discussion last week the Governor of the Bank of England 

indicated that he was of the same opinion. That was an important 

factor, because obviously no one would want to seek a multilateral 

package unless the British wanted to obtain it.  

Mr. Hayes also stressed that the great merit in the scheme 

proposed was that it would provide important new protection for 

the dollar whatever happened to sterling. The pressure on the gold 

market and the continuing serious U.S. balance of payments problem 

made it important to do everything possible to reinforce the



8/23/66 -15

defense of the dollar. It went without saying, of course, that 

the Committee would not want to pursue the Coombs' proposal, or 

anything else of the kind, without the full blessing of the 

Treasury. The Committee had followed that policy since the 

inception of its foreign currency operations.  

Mr. Hayes also said that he had discussed the matter with 

Secretary Fowler and Under Secretary Deming, both of whom were 

favorably disposed toward the program, although the Secretary 

indicated that he was not in a position at the moment to give a 

formal Treasury approval. Over the weekend he (Mr. Hayes) had 

also talked briefly with Chairman Martin about the proposal. The 

Chairman had authorized Mr. Hayes to tell the Committee that, 

while he obviously had not had an opportunity to consider all of 

the details, he was in sympathy with the basic program objectives 

and felt it desirable to make the effort to prevent what could be 

a disintegration of the present financial system. The Treasury 

had indicated that it hoped the Committee would have a full discus

sion today and would be prepared to go ahead with the program on 

short notice if and when final Administration clearance was obtained, 

which might be a matter of weeks, days, or hours.  

Mr. Robertson stated that he had talked to the Secretary 

this morning about the matter. The Secretary was inclined to 

favor the approach and hoped the Committee would approve the use



8/23/66 -16-

of the particular instrument, subject to action being triggered

by notice from the Secretary to the Chairman or Acting Chairman

of the Board of Governors, so that if it was necessary to move

it would be possible to move fast, without a need to reassemble

the Committee.

Mr. Hickman asked whether there had been any indication

of the attitude of the major European central banks, and Mr. Coombs

expressed the view that the attitude of the Bank of Italy would

probably be favorable. In the case of the Bundesbank, as the

Committee would recall, several approaches had been made to them

over the past year about the possibility of increasing the swap

line to $500 million. He had not been able to determine what was

blocking those efforts, but he thought the Group of Ten delibera-

tions may have been a factor. He hoped the Germans would accept

a swap-line increase. If they did, the rest probably would fall

in line rather quickly.

Mr. Mitchell asked about the role of the IMF in such a

situation, and Mr. Coombs replied that its main role was that of

a fall-back to provide medium-term credit. In the present situation

there were two important limitations. First, so far as the British

were concerned, their drawing rights were pretty well used up.

Mr. Mitchell asked if there was any provision for emergency assist-

ance, and Mr. Coombs said he did not believe so; none had been



8/23/66 -17

granted to date. The second difficulty about the Fund, he added, 

lay in its slow-moving machinery, which in the process of turning 

over gave wide advertisement to the problems under consideration.  

An advantage of the swap network lay in the ability to move fast.  

It could absorb day-to-day pressures, and most important of all 

was the impression it gave to the market of central bankers 

having a common interest in maintaining the present parity system 

and being prepared to put up money to support it.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that from Mr. Coombs' document and 

comments he gathered that the contingency involved was the 

possible devaluation of sterling; without that contingency there 

would be no need to expand the swap network. Mr. Coombs replied 

that nothing, so far as the defense of the dollar was concerned, 

worried him more than a breakout in the gold market, which could 

be triggered by a devaluation of sterling or by other causes.  

Mr. Mitchell suggested that enlarging the swap network on 

a crash basis might stir up a great deal more anxiety than would 

be desirable. He wondered whether it might not be better to go 

about the process more deliberately, perhaps on occasions when 

swap lines came up for renewal, and take the chance that some action 

on an emergency basis might be necessary.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that a serious domestic crisis might be 

impending. If on top of that a broad effort was undertaken to



8/23/66 -18

rescue sterling from its present difficult position, the combina

tion of problems might be more than could reasonably be handled.  

Mr. Coombs expressed agreement on the domestic side and 

said that was the foundation of his suggested approach on the 

international side. A breakdown on the international financial 

sphere could not be afforded; and if nothing was done, such a 

breakdown was likely to occur.  

Mr. Mitchell then raised the question whether the point 

had not been reached where "papering-over" operations should be 

stopped.  

Mr. Hayes replied that that would almost amount to saying 

that one was willing to throw the door open to "every man for him

self" in the international financial field.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that a large package of credits 

for the British already existed. He was not against enlarging it 

further. However, if the continental central banks did not go 

along, other efforts were likely to be ineffectual.  

Mr. Coombs noted, in reply, that the lines of credit now 

being extended to the U.K. by the continental central banks came 

to $1.1 billion, or roughly equivalent to what the U.S. was 

putting up.  

On the matter of timing, Mr. Hayes said that if the Committee 

were in a position to proceed deliberately, that might be well and



8/23/66 -19

good. Whether or not that would have a better effect psycholog

ically, he did not know. He was inclined to think that announcement 

of a simultaneous massive increase of the swap lines was more likely 

to make a favorable impression, but in any event the time element 

did not permit the deliberate approach.  

Mr. Daane, stressing the confidentiality of the observation, 

said that within the Government there were two assumptions. The 

first was that a likelihood existed of a major crisis in September, 

and the second was that in the went of such a crisis the U.S. would 

do something with respect to it in terms of providing financial 

resources, unilaterally if necessary. It really came down to the 

question of how best to proceed; whether the U.S. would be in a 

better position to meet the situation if the enlarged swap network 

was put in place now.  

Mr. Coombs commented that if he had been in a position to 

negotiate gradual increases in the swap network, with periodic 

announcements, that might have been the best way. But the opportu

nity for that had passed. Even though there was a risk of backfire 

from announcement of a package of large swap increases, the 

alternative was so bad that he thought it necessary to take a 

chance.  

Mr. Bopp noted that only a short while ago negotiations 

with the Bundesbank for a more modest increase than now envisaged



8/23/66 -20

had been unsuccessful. Mr. Coombs commented that the next renewal 

of the swap agreement with the Bundesbank would not occur until 

February 1967, and that would be too late to attempt to negotiate 

an increase.  

Mr. Ellis referred to the extremely large short positions 

in sterling and the question whether something could be done to 

turn the situation around. He asked whether an announcement of 

enlargement of the swap lines would be likely to have an effect 

on the short positions.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he would hope that it would help 

to turn things around. What the market feared at present was that 

the British credit resources were almost gone, and that no more 

would be forthcoming.  

Mr. Ellis noted that the memorandum also referred to the 

possibility of negotiating an enlargement of the gold pool, and 

Mr. Coombs replied he had been working on that for the past month 

or six weeks. He believed that the Germans and Italians would 

agree to increases in their shares sufficient to expand the pool's 

resources by $100 million. He had not approached anyone else, but 

if the Germans and Italians agreed, others probably would go along.  

Then it would be possible to continue to intervene for a while 

longer in the gold market.  

Mr. Ellis inquired whether the possible backlash effect of 

a failure to negotiate a simultaneous doubling of several major



8/23/66 -21

swap lines should not be taken into account, and Mr. Coombs said 

he would contemplate negotiating with the Germans first. If the 

Germans were not prepared to go along, he might suggest calling a 

halt at that point. He thought he would know after contacting no 

more than one or two central banks whether the plan could be 

negotiated or not. Therefore, the risk of a leak should not be 

too great.  

Mr. Ellis noted that the memorandum indicated that no 

approach to the French was contemplated, and Mr. Coombs said the 

swap line with the French was useless. The only purpose in contin

uing the swap line was to symbolize some continuing link between 

the Bank of France and the Federal Reserve, and to avoid an overt 

disruption of relationships which might lead to market distrubances.  

Mr. Shepardson noted that a memorandum from Mr. Furth dated 

August 17, 1966, a copy of which has been placed in the files of 

the Committee, contained an alternative suggestion for dealing with 

the British situation. Mr. Coombs' proposal would involve a 

straight increase in the swap line, while Mr. Furth had suggested 

certain possible offsets to such an increase.  

Mr. Coombs expressed the view that the market effect of a 

swap-line increase would be negated if any of the other credit 

arrangements were to be canceled out. He added that some of them 

were not actually available to the British at the present time,



8/23/66 -22

for example, the Export-Import Bank line. As to canceling the 

September 1965 package, a considerable amount of money had in fact 

already been committed under that authorization. He thought the 

main objective was to improve confidence. If the market received 

the impression that the central banks were standing back of the 

British program, it might be hoped that the British would not have 

to draw further on the credits available to them. Otherwise they 

might have to draw all that was left, and that would add up to a 

tremendous amount of short-term debt.  

Mr. Shepardson asked Mr. Daane whether, in the discussions 

of the interagency Government group, there was indication of further 

effort on the part of the Administration in regard to dealing with 

the U.S. balance of payments problem.  

Mr. Daane noted that, as Mr. Coombs had pointed out, 

consummation of the increased swap lines would put this country 

in a stronger position in case there was any speculative ricocheting 

against the dollar. If the outflow of dollars continued, it would 

clearly have an implication there also. But he did not think there 

had been any real linkage of the two problems in the discussions.  

That did not mean, of course, that the Government was saying there 

was no further problem on the U.S. balance of payments. They were 

working, and would be continuing to work, on a program to improve 

the balance of payments situation.



8/23/66 -23

Mr. Coombs commented that it was not known what the 

Administration would or would not do on the balance of payments 

side if dollars flowed out and it was necessary to draw on the 

swap lines to mop them up. The most the Committee could do was 

to make every effort to be sure that the System did not get 

locked in on swap drawings. An avenue had now been opened up for 

the Treasury to go to the Fund for help. If, for example, the 

System drew guilders in order to forestall a loss of gold, the 

Treasury acquired some responsibility to take the System out if 

the drawings went on for too long, by going to the Fund.  

Mr. Brimmer commented that he had been participating in 

some of the discussions in Washington about the balance of payments 

situation. Some effort was being made to look beyond ad hoc 

programs. However, those possibilities were still under considera

tion at a secondary level. Some people were raising questions 

about the longer-run viability of the Department of Commerce program 

on direct investments. Some people were talking about taxes, but 

that had not gotten any blessing one way or another. There was 

also some feeling that the question of tourism should be looked 

into, along with the deployment of troops on the European Continent.  

Likewise, there had been some discussion of the use of swaps, the 

Group of Ten negotiations, and other matters. Some of the differences 

of opinion seemed to reflect variations in the basic interests of



8/23/66 -24

people participating in the discussions and the agencies they 

represented. That helped, he thought, to explain the differing 

views on how to deal with the balance of payments problem. In 

any event, no new program had as yet come up to the Cabinet 

Committee on the Balance of Payments.  

Mr. Clay said it seemed to him that the fundamental dif

ference between the present proposal and other papering-over 

operations was that on this occasion the British had taken definite 

steps of a fundamental nature to correct their basic problem. If 

their internal political situation permitted them to persevere, 

the new program should bring about some correction of the situation.  

The papering-over technique was giving them time to achieve results 

from the basic steps taken. As to the papering-over of the U.S.  

problem, he thought whoever was talking with Administration 

people should emphasize that there must be a fundamental program 

for dealing with the balance of payments problem. That should be 

a part of the package. It should be emphasized that the objective 

was not just to save the pound but to give the dollar more time 

and to shore up the foundations of the British situation.  

Mr. Clay noted that the Coombs' proposal would involve 

increasing the swap lines to a maximum aggregate amount of $5.2 

billion. He asked what the System's financial risk would be if 

sterling should fall.



8/23/66 -25

Mr. Coombs said that first of all there would be the 

financial risk involved in the credits extended to the British 

under the swap arrangement. Last fall there had been some basic 

discussions with the Bank of England and the Chancellor of the 

Exchequer. The result was an understanding that a banking 

obligation of the Bank of England was involved and that it would 

have to be paid off if that took every dollar of their reserves.  

They still had more than $3 billion of reserves plus the remainder 

of their securities portfolio. So if sterling went down, and they 

owed the System $600 or $700 million, the System should be able to 

get its money back.  

In event of a devaluation of sterling, Mr. Coombs said, 

the French might move quickly to parallel the British action. The 

Scandinavians and others might also move. So there could be a 

crumbling of the parity system around the world. Talk of an 

increase in the price of gold and a new set of parities would 

generate a drive against the dollar. Foreigners might pull money 

back from the U.S., including money in the stock market, or 

increase their demands on the gold market. Here again there would 

be a direct challenge to the dollar. The dollar would be under 

tremendous pressure if sterling went down, and the best hope was 

to work out some clear understandings with the countries that it 

was felt could be relied upon to develop a firm defensive network.



8/23/66 -26

Mr. Hayes then remarked that he gathered it would be 

appropriate for the Committee, if it so desired, to authorize 

Mr. Coombs to commence negotiating enlargement of the swap lines, 

but only if and when a formal approval of the program was received 

by the Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board of Governors from 

the Treasury.  

Mr. Wayne suggested that conceivably the Secretary of the 

Treasury might not give a formal approval.  

Mr. Hayes said the only thing the Committee had thus far 

was an indication of favorable leaning on a personal basis. The 

negotiations should be started only if the Secretary of the 

Treasury formally asked the System to undertake the program as a 

matter of U.S. policy.  

Mr. Daane remarked that no U.S. policy position had yet been 

formulated. The question would have to go to the top level.  

Mr. Wayne commented that the matter was too important to go ahead 

under a kind of gentlemen's agreement.  

Mr. Hayes repeated that he would propose that the program 

become operative only if and when formal approval of the Treasury 

was received, and Mr. Mitchell raised the question whether "approval" 

or "request" was the more appropriate term.  

Mr. Mitchell also asked whether it was conceived that the 

System would be acting just as an agent of the Treasury, and



8/23/66 -27

Mr. Hayes said he thought it was recognized that the System did 

not have to do anything it considered unsound, and the Committee 

had never accepted the thesis that it would take any action it 

thought was wrong. That was different from saying that even if 

the Committee considered a program sound, it would not undertake 

the program unless it was consistent with U.S. international 

financial policy as expressed by the Treasury. He saw little 

difference, in that context, between an approval and a request.  

It was his recollection that the System's foreign currency 

activities had been undertaken from their inception with the full 

approval of the Treasury.  

Mr. Robertson remarked that the question whether to under

take the program was one for the Committee to decide, but any 

action must be triggered by a specific notification from the 

Secretary of the Treasury that it was time to act.  

Mr. Hayes then suggested that the Committee authorize 

negotiations to increase the swap lines with the understanding, 

however, that the negotiations would not be activated until there 

was specific notification from the Treasury that they wished the 

Committee to proceed.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that Mr. Coombs had indicated that if 

negotiations with either of the key countries failed, the program 

probably should be called off. Suppose the Germans were willing



8/23/66 -28

to go to only $500 or $600 million instead of $750 million? Would 

the proposed Committee action give Mr. Coombs enough leeway? 

Mr. Coombs responded that he hoped it would. If the Germans 

agreed to only $500 or $600 million, he would not consider that a 

fatal blow to the negotiations. His memorandum had only referred 

to the $5.2 billion aggregate figure as a maximum.  

Mr. Hayes then said that all the Committee would be granting, 

subject to notification from the Treasury, was authority to 

Mr. Coombs to attempt to negotiate the proposed swap-line increases 

within the suggested maximum amounts. He assumed that Mr. Coombs 

would furnish the Committee a full report of the results, with a 

request for formal ratification of whatever actions seemed feasible 

as a result of the negotiations.  

Mr. Daane expressed the view that the record should be clear 

that the Committee was authorizing the negotiations subject to 

notification from the Treasury that such action was fully consistent 

with U.S. international financial policy, and that the timing was 

appropriate.  

Mr. Shepardson asked whether it would seem appropriate, in 

further discussion with the Treasury concerning the swap program, 

to use the occasion to press for Administration concern on the 

total balance of payments problem.  

Mr. Hayes said he thought it might be a mistake to try to 

tie that in as a quid pro quo. However, he would not lose any



8/23/66 -29

opportunity to stress informally the need for action on the balance 

of payments. Mr. Daane said that insofar as he, Governor Robertson, 

and Governor Brimmer had participated in any Governmental review 

of the balance of payments position, they had always stressed the 

need for correction through the development of a broad-gauged 

program. He thought it was quite appropriate to continue to press 

the matter whenever opportunities presented themselves.  

The consensus of further comments was that it would be 

inadvisable to tie the proposed program regarding the swap lines 

to a request for more vigorous efforts on the balance of payments 

problem, but that System representatives should properly use all 

appropriate opportunities to stress the need for fundamental 

correction.  

Mr. Patterson asked whether Mr. Coombs was being authorized 

to proceed to negotiate swap arrangements which, however, would 

not be put into effect until the Treasury requested, and Mr. Hayes 

said Mr. Coombs was not to begin negotiations until word was 

received from the Treasury.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
Mr. Coombs was authorized to negotiate 
for an enlargement of the swap network 
along the lines proposed in his 
memorandum of August 18, 1966, subject 
to the understanding, however, that 
such negotiations were not to be begun 
until the Chairman or Acting Chairman



8/23/66 -30-

of the Board of Governors received
specific notification from the
Secretary of the Treasury that the
proposed program was fully consistent
with U.S. international financial
policy and that the timing was
considered appropriate.

At Mr. Hayes' suggestion, Mr. Daane then presented a brief

summary of the Group of Ten meetings held at The Hague, Netherlands,

on July 25-27, 1966. The first order of business, he said, was a

meeting of the Deputies on the morning of the 25th, at which they

finalized the report that would be made public this Thursday. He

thought he had given enough of the flavor of that report at

previous Committee meetings to make it unnecessary to go into

detail concerning it. It did represent a considerable agreement

and consensus on the elements of contingency planning for reserve

creation. But the real meat of the meetings at The Hague was in

the sessions of the Ministers and Governors, which involved a

debate between the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury and the French

Finance Minister on whether or not to go forward into the second

stage of contingency planning and, if so, under what conditions.

The Secretary clearly came off best in the debate. The communique

issued at The Hague, which would be sent to each Committee member

along with the report of the Deputies, indicated that U.S. interests

were fully protected in getting into the second stage of the

negotiations, which would involve wider participation. It pointed



8/23/66 -31

out that one of the principles involved was that the interest of 

all countries in the smooth working of the international monetary 

system was recognized. That was the U.S. position, and had been 

all the way through the negotiations. The communique said that 

it was appropriate to look now for a wider framework for considera

tion of questions that would affect the world economy as a whole, 

and it recommended a series of joint meetings in which the Deputies 

would take part along with the Executive Directors of the Monetary 

Fund. It indicated that a report should be expected no later than 

the middle of 1967. Nine of the countries of the Group of Ten had 

agreed to go into the second stage, and the French had been isolated 

in their negative position.  

The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 1:50 p.m., 

with the same attendance as at the morning session.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period July 26 through August 17, 

1966, and a supplemental report for August 18 through 22, 1966.  

Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

Interest rates have moved sharply higher in an 

atmosphere of considerable market apprehension since



8/23/66

the Committee met four weeks ago. The continued weight 
of credit demand, including two Treasury financing 
operations, further signs of inflationary pressure as 
evidenced by the steel price rise and the terms of the 
airline strike settlement, the rise in the prime rate, 
the cloudy outlook for CD's in the weeks ahead, and the 
Board's action to raise reserve requirements combined 
to put inexorable pressure on the financial markets. All 
sectors of the financial markets and all maturity ranges 
were affected. Rates on Federal funds, Treasury bills, 
bankers' acceptances, commercial and finance company 

paper, dealer loans, Federal Government agency obliga
tions, and corporate and municipal securities all moved 
into new high ground, while stock market values declined 
about 7 per cent.  

With dealer financing costs high and prices eroding, 

the underwriting of new issues has become a highly un
certain undertaking, and this in turn has contributed 

to the movement of prices and rates. There are many 

illustrations of the pressures the market is facing.  

To cite only a few: (1) On August 9 a $239 million 

issue of short-term notes--tax-exempt and fully Government 

guaranteed--by the Public Housing Authority was placed 

at an average cost of 4.61 per cent, up half a per cent 

from the rate on a comparable issue a month earlier.  
Major underwriters joined forces to enter a single bid 

for a major portion of the issues and exacted as much as 

a 1/2 per cent underwriting spread. (2) On August 16 

the Urban Renewal Authority was able to place only 

$55 million of a $130 million offering, either because 

no bids were received or because the rates involved were 

in excess of rather flexible legal limitations. (3) A 
relatively new firm selling computer services was forced 

into the capital market after having been refused credit 

by a number of major banks, and paid up to 8-1/4 per cent 

for a 1970 maturity. (4) The syndicate handling the 

$250 million A.T.&T. issue, originally offered on August 3 

to yield 5.58 per cent, was terminated with only two

thirds of the issue sold. The issue closed yesterday at 

a yield of 5.86 per cent, up a quarter of a per cent in 

20 days.  
In the Government securities market, rates on three

and six-month Treasury bills reached peaks of 5.10 and 

5.49 per cent, respectively, last Friday, 30 and 60 basis 

points higher than at the time of the last meeting of the

-32-



8/23/66

Committee. A technical rally Friday afternoon and 
yesterday erased only part of this rise. Yields on 
intermediate-term Treasury issues rose by as much as 
60 basis points, with the 4 per cent note of February 
1969 reaching a peak of 5.88 per cent. Long-term 
issues were up as much as 15 basis points in yield, 
with the "bellwether" 4-1/4 per cent bonds of 1987-92 
hitting a peak of 4.97 per cent. In yesterday's 
auction, average issuing rates were set at 5.02 and 
5.41 per cent on the three- and six-month bills, down 
3 and up 9 basis points from the rates set a week 
earlier.  

Despite alarms and excursions and an underlying 
tone of gloom and weakness, the markets continued to 
perform. Securities were traded and funds were raised 
at the successively higher yield levels reached. At 
each higher level, rates have proved irresistible to 
some investors; there has been some short covering by 
professionals, and there are always a few optimists 
who become convinced--at least temporarily--that a 
turning point is at least in sight. While the markets 
have functioned, the performance has been a shaky one.  

There remains a substantial risk that some unexpected 
development or the cumulative pressure of demand on 

the supply of funds could set off a series of disruptive 
events in the market that would be hard to control, 
particularly if psychology got out of hand. Caution, 

fortunately, is the order of the day in the markets, 
but we should be alert to the potential dangers in the 

current situation.  
Against this negative background, the Treasury had 

to carry out a refunding of issues maturing August 15 

(to which holders of November maturities were eligible 

to join) and then raise $3 billion in cash in an auction 

of March and April tax bills on August 18. The initial 

reactions to the Treasury's offer of a 5-1/4 per cent 

note and a 5-1/4 per cent certificate were quite favorable, 

with Government securities dealers generally adopting a 

more constructive attitude than in recent Treasury opera

tions. But as time went on the atmosphere soured, and 

when the books closed on August 3 both new issues were 

quoted at par bid, down 5/64 from their peaks. They have 

since declined almost uninterruptedly. At last night's 

close, a week after payment date, the new Treasury note 

was offered at 99 to yield 5.49 per cent. Those dealers

-33-



8/23/66

who stood up to their function of underwriting Treasury 
financing operations have suffered substantial losses 
as a result of their participation.  

Last week's auction of $2 billion March and 
$1 billion April tax bills was preceded by a rise in 
the prime rate to 6 per cent and the Board's reserve 
requirement action. Despite the eagerness of banks 
to acquire the tax and loan deposit that comes with 
successful bidding, there was considerable caution in 
the bidding, with some banks withdrawing altogether and 
others cutting back their participation. While both 
issues were covered, bidding was lighter than in any 
similar auction in recent history, the range of bids 
was wide, and some underwriting bids were entered at 
rates of 6 per cent or more. Average rates of 5.34 
per cent and 5.43 per cent were set for the March and 
April issues, respectively. Secondary market trading 
started at rates well above the market for outstanding 
bills and after some decline they closed yesterday at 

5.58 and 5.60 per cent. The Treasury's experience with 
its latest financing raises some fundamental questions 
about the possibility of carrying out an effective debt 
management policy in a period when rates are constantly 
on the rise and the market's ability and willingness 
to perform an underwriting function are weak. Further 
tests will be supplied now that Congress has given the 

go-ahead signal for the issuance of new Federal agency 
participation certificates, expected to total $4.2 
billion in the current fiscal year. The first instal
ment should be forthcoming soon after Labor Day.  

Even keel was, of course, an important consideration 

during much of the period since the Committee last met.  
It was fortunate, perhaps, that required reserves and the 
credit proxy consistently fell below the levels desired 
by the Committee at the last meeting. If these aggregates 

had been running strong, there would have been a clear
cut conflict between even keel and the Committee's 
desire to keep a tight rein on bank credit expansion--a 

conflict that would have made the conduct of open market 
operations even more difficult than it was. In the event, 
estimated required reserves appear to have declined in 

August somewhat more than was envisioned at the time of 

the last meeting, and the credit proxy has also been 
running below expectations even after allowing for the 

effect of the rise in bank liabilities to their foreign

-34-



8/23/66

branches (mentioned in the blue book)1/ which are not 
now, but should undoubtedly be, reflected in the credit 
proxy.  

Net borrowed reserves in the three weeks ended 
August 17 averaged in the lower end of the range that 
most Committee members mentioned at the last meeting, 
and in the week ended August 10 the figure turned out 
after revisions to be $301 million, well below that 
range, although we had no means of knowing this at the 
time. At the same time, other money market conditions 
were tighter than they had been. The effective rate 
on Federal funds reached 5-3/4 per cent in the week the 
books on the Treasury financing were open, and moved to 
5-7/8 per cent with some trading at 6 per cent in the 
week ending August 10 when net borrowed reserves were 
low. Interest rates rose steadily during the period, 
as noted earlier. Banks apparently were managing their 
reserve positions cautiously, and borrowing averaged 
close to $800 million. There appeared to be a tendency 
to overborrow at the discount window over the weekends, 
with some easing in the Federal funds rate at the end 

of statement weeks as banks found they had more reserves 
than they needed. This short-lived easing in the funds 
market had no effect on dealer loan rates at New York 
City banks, which remained at peak levels throughout 
the period except for a modest volume of loans against 

rights to the Treasury financing made by one of the 
New York banks at a rate just under 6 per cent.  

In general, the somewhat lower level of net 
borrowed reserves--in the over-all context of rate 

developments--did not mislead anyone into thinking that 

Federal Reserve policy had relaxed, nor did the repurchase 

agreements made by the Desk against rights at the discount 

rate encourage dealers to go overboard in subscribing to 

the new issues. On the other hand, any attempt to maintain 

interest rates steady during the even-keel period would 

have required a massive outpouring of reserves in the face 

of developments during the period and of the market's 

conviction that Federal Reserve policy was not only tight 

but bound to get tighter after the refunding was out of 

the way.  

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 

for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-35-



8/23/66

At the moment the market is anticipating that the 
Federal Reserve will be a large buyer of securities to 
offset the reserve impact of the settlement of the 
airline strike, pre-Labor Day holiday reserve needs, 
and at least part of the reserves to be absorbed later 
on by the Board's action raising reserve requirements.  
In light of this, there was some rally in the Government 
bond market on Friday afternoon and yesterday and Treasury 
bill rates receded from their recent peaks. Today the 
bond market is again off; prices that had been moving 
up are back down again. Corporate rates are tending to 
affect the Government bond market as well. As we move 
into September the expected pressure on bank CD positions 
at a time of expanding seasonal loan demands should lead 
to growing pressure on financial markets generally. In 
order to maintain pressure on the ability of banks to 
expand credit without disrupting the Government securities 
market, we shall have to be as flexible as possible in 
the conduct of open market operations. During the period 
since the Committee last met, we made use twice of 
matched sale-purchase contracts to absorb reserves on a 
temporary basis--the operation last Tuesday being con
ducted at the lowest gross return to the dealers that 
we have seen. Today, with net borrowed reserves falling 
below what we thought the Committee intended, the Desk 
has made some further matched sale-purchase contracts.  
In my view, this instrument has proved its value as a 
tool of open market operations. In supplying reserves 
in the weeks immediately ahead, we would plan to rely 
first on outright purchases of Treasury bills and other 
securities to the extent that they are available, but 
will try to minimize any major impact on rates in a 

market where the ready supply of all issues is fairly 
small. Should repurchase agreements become a useful 
tool I would plan to make them at a rate above the 
present discount rate, although the precise rate would 
have to depend on market conditions at the time the 

contracts were undertaken. In view of the need for 

flexibility I recommend that the Committee not take 

action today to restore the continuing authority 

directive to limit RP's against Government securities 

to securities maturing in less than 24 months. Similarly, 
I believe it would be advisable to retain the $2 billion 

leeway on purchases and sales--authorized by the Committee 

at the last meeting--between now and the next Committee 

meeting.

-36-



8/23/66 -37

In response to a question, Mr. Holmes verified that if 

repurchase agreements were made at rates above the present 

discount rate, it would be the first time that that had been 

done recently. Probably the rate would be linked to the three

month bill rate, but the precise rate would depend on market 

conditions at the particular time. He felt that it would be 

desirable to get away from the discount rate, and he did not 

think that that would shock the dealers unduly at this juncture.  

Asked for his view as to where the net borrowed reserve 

figure would come out for the current statement week, Mr. Holmes 

said that last night the Desk had been looking at a figure of 

roughly $470 million. Today it was found from the country bank 

sample that required reserves were about $50 million lower than 

anticipated, and with this and other revisions the Desk was 

looking at a figure of around $390 million this morning. As a 

result of the matched sale-purchase contracts made today, he 

would expect a figure around the $470 million level, but tomorrow 

there might be trouble again.  

Mr. Hickman commented on the fact that required reserves 

were again falling below the target, and Mr. Holmes replied that 

recently that had been the case consistently. When he last checked, 

the credit proxy showed about a 2 or 3 per cent growth in August, 

compared with the 4-6 per cent growth estimated at the time of the



8/23/66

last Committee meeting. Required reserve figures were still 

coming in lower than anticipated, which would mean that, if 

anything, the credit proxy would be revised further downward.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period July 26 through August 
22, 1966, were approved, ratified and 
confirmed.  

Mr. Hayes inquired whether any members of the Committee 

disagreed with the Manager's recommendation that no change be 

made at this meeting in the continuing authority directive, and 

no objections were heard.  

Mr. Hayes then called for the staff economic and financial 

reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distrib

uted prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in 

the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

At this time, when the System is in the process 
of making a quantum jump in the intensity of monetary 
restraint, it is reasonable to want to assess carefully 
any dangers that may be inherent in such a policy course.  
This afternoon, Mr. Partee will be discussing the 
possible ramifications of recent policy changes on 
financial markets and institutions. For my part, I am 
making the assumption that policy can be implemented 
effectively without creating financial crisis, and will 
address myself to two questions: first, whether this 
policy is what the economy needs, and, second, how much 
of it is needed and how long the economy can stand it.

-38-



8/23/66

The proposition that the economy needs more 
restraint is neither as simple nor as self-evident 
as might seem on first blush. Current wage and 
price developments that tend to excite us are not 
necessarily leading indicators; very often these are 
lagged responses to economic sins committed earlier, 
or responses to essentially temporary supply and 
demand phenomena. The question that has to be answered 
is whether general economic circumstances will likely 
be such that current wage and price trends will persist, 
or perhaps accelerate.  

In this connection, I would remind the Committee 
that the staff projection of GNP incorporated in the 
green book 1/ has real GNP expanding at less than a 
4 per cent annual rate in the third and fourth quarters 
of this year, down from the 5-1/2 per cent rate during 
the first half of the year and the almost 7 per cent 
rise in the second half of 1965. Moreover, even this 
projection might turn out to be over-optimistic in two 
respects. First, it was completed before the July 
housing starts figures were in, showing a sharp drop 
to levels we didn't anticipate till year-end. If 
starts fail to bounce back--this is a volatile series, 
but the drop in permits and the continued strain in 
mortgage markets do not look encouraging--this could 
pare three-quarters of a billion or so from the $14 

billion rise in GNP projected for the third quarter 

and perhaps twice that from the fourth quarter.  

The second area of possible over-optimism is 

consumption, projected as rebounding to a pace double 

that of the slow second quarter. This isn't an 

unreasonable expectation, since the reduced pace of 

total consumer spending in the spring seems to have 

been associated mainly with the slackening in disposable 

income plus, in some measure, the auto safety hassle.  

But while most attention has been focused on lagging 

auto sales, other consumer outlays have held up 

relatively well; over all, there doesn't seem to have 

been much change in consumers' propensity to spend.  

Disposable income is now slated to rise more rapidly 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 

for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-39-



8/23/66

than earlier--at least there is no big tax bite 
scheduled--and with June and July retail sales 
looking good, the green book projection is 
persuasive.  

My reservations about this consumption out
look are based more on hunch than hard evidence.  
Consumers have generally behaved rationally in the 
postwar period; when prices have risen significantly, 
more often than not they have decided to hold back 
on buying. This rational approach, along with 
tightened consumer credit standards, may operate 
to confound Detroit in a month or so, when the new 
models arrive in the showroom.  

But, whatever reservations one may have about 
consumers' contribution to inflationary pressures 
in the months ahead, large increases in Federal and 

business spending are in prospect. The course of 
defense orders and order backlogs, and enlarged 
draft calls, continue to suggest a further rise in 

defense outlays in the months ahead. Quantifying 
this remains necessarily arbitrary, but the number 

we are using--an increase of $2-1/2 billion this 

quarter and the same next quarter--is not regarded 

as outlandish by other (equally blind) forecasters 
in town.  

Federal nondefense spending is rising, too, 
and Medicare payments, after a slow start, may 

accelerate. Thus, we would expect total Federal 

outlays--defense, nondefense, and transfer payments-

to rise more rapidly than tax receipts, and on a 
national income accounts basis the Government's net 
contribution to the economy to move from a $4 billion 
surplus in the second quarter to about a billion 

dollar deficit in the fourth quarter, hardly a fiscal 

policy appropriate to the times.  
The other major expansionary force--business 

investment spending--seems ordained to rise over the 

balance of the year, and perhaps even to accelerate, 
since the spending increase was held down somewhat 

earlier this year by construction strikes and delivery 

delays. Shortly there will be a new reading on 

current and future business capital spending plans.  

Until then all we can say is that most of the relevant 

factors--the high rate of capacity utilization, the 
still high profit margins, the prospects of accelerating

-40-



8/23/66

wages, and the backlogs of machinery orders--appear 
to be pointing to continued rapid expansion in 
business spending for plant and equipment, if the 
funds can be found.  

Business inventory accumulation could also add 
to the pressure on resources. Businesses have 
tended to accelerate buying in anticipation of price 
rises, and one might argue that the staff GNP projec
tion is too conservative in expecting some moderation 
in inventory demands. Protective buying and stock
piling could provide a more powerful thrust to the 
economy than is allowed for in the projection.  

Balancing the probabilities attaching to the 
various components of activity, I think it's a fair 
assessment that, over the next several months, gains 
in real output will be slower than the peak rates 
reached last winter, in part because of labor and 
plant capacity limitations in some key areas such 
as machinery, but in part also because of slackening 
in some demands. Nevertheless, it doesn't seem 
likely that activity will be slowing fast enough to 
head off mounting inflationary pressures. Even if 
our projection is shaded down a bit, it would still 
imply, for the balance of this year, industrial 
production rising rapidly enough to keep manufacturing 
capacity as fully utilized as ever, and unemployment 
still below 4 per cent.  

For some time ahead, then, the greater danger 
is that we'll be staying in the zone of plant 
utilization and labor shortages where wage and price 
escalation is possible. Thus, the July rise in the 
consumer price index--four-tenths of a per cent--will 
bring wage increases of 2 cents an hour to over a 
million workers, including the auto workers, and this 

along with the rise in steel prices will likely provide 

the arguments for higher price tags on the new model 

cars. In turn, this will make it more difficult to 

argue for moderation in other wage contracts to be 

negotiated this fall. In the context of a still strong 

economy, price rise engenders price rise. Given the 

dim fiscal outlook, it doesn't seem to me that the 

System has much option now but to move aggressively 
toward curtailing expansion in demands, particularly 
in the business sector. At the same time, we will have 
to redouble our efforts to detect signs of any spreading

-41-



8/23/66

weakness in demands, in order to avoid carrying 
such a policy stance too far or too long.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Events have moved so swiftly since the last 
meeting of the Committee that it is difficult to 
frame an appraisal of the situation. Interest rates 
have adjusted sharply upward, so that past relation
ships and funds flows may have little relevance for 
the new configurations beginning to emerge. The 
stock market has declined markedly further, certainly 
due in part to the pull of high interest rates and 
concern among investors about "tight money", but the 
financial implications are by no means clear. Un
certainty and apprehension have come to dominate 
the mood of both lenders and borrowers, and changes 
in portfolio policies and financing plans doubtless 
are now in process. Such is the price of escalating 
financial tautness in an increasingly inflationary 
economic environment.  

The biggest question mark currently, of course, 
is the possible extent of a CD runoff at the major 
banks. These banks already are paying the ceiling 
rate on large-denomination CDs of most or all 
permissible maturities. Even so, the rise in 
outstandings has slowed, with banks in New York 
and Chicago showing no net increase since mid-year 
and other weekly reporters an expansion of less 
than $200 million. The recent further sharp rise 
in yields on alternative money market instruments 
puts the banks at a clear competitive disadvantage.  
Therefore, in view of the heavy schedule of CD 
maturities, and assuming that Regulation Q is not 
changed, some runoff of outstandings seems certain.  

Even a fractional runoff of maturing CDs, which 
in September will probably total close to $5 billion, 
could readily involve a funds outflow of $1 to $2 
billion. But there really are no past guides to 
provide the basis for a prediction. Perhaps the bulk 
of the funds will remain with the banks, even at a 
concession in yields, because customers will wish to 
remain in good standing for other purposes. This seems

-42-



8/23/66

to have been the experience of outlying banks, at 
least when yield differentials were moderate. Any 
substantial diversion of funds into other markets, 
moreover, will tend to hold down yields on the 
alternative instruments, though the prospects for 
this do not seem especially promising. Offsetting 
upward rate pressures in the market will probably 
be coming simultaneously from increased supply, bank 
selling, declining corporate liquidity, and investor 
apprehension.  

Bank deposit growth generally has not been 
especially large over the summer. Taking daily 
average figures for the three months through August, 
we estimate that private demand deposits will show 
virtually no change while Government deposits will 
have dropped $800 million. Total time deposits will 
have increased by $4.8 billion, an annual growth rate 
of 12.5 per cent versus 16 per cent in 1965. Time 
deposit expansion has occurred mainly outside the 
money centers, however, since the big banks have not 
done well with their negotiable CDs and have had 
continuing savings deposit losses partly offsetting 
growth in consumer CDs.  

Meanwhile, loan demand has continued very strong.  
Total loans at all commercial banks, on a last Wednesday 
basis, rose at annual rates approaching 20 per cent in 
both June and July, and business loans showed an almost 
unbelievable 30 per cent growth rate over the two-month 
period. Loan expansion appears to have slowed thus far 
in August, reflecting liquidation of both security and 

finance company borrowings and a marked slowing in 
business loan growth. But the latter development is 

probably temporary; the speedup in corporate payments 

of withheld taxes has substantially reduced August 

cash needs, after greatly boosting them--and probably 

borrowing too--in July and June.  

That most big banks are expecting a strong fall 

loan demand emerges clearly from Federal Reserve Bank 

reports on their recent interviews with selected large 

banks. And this prospect is suggested also by the 

aggregate figures on corporate sources and uses of 

funds. We estimate that corporate investment expen

ditues--for plant, equipment, and inventory--in the 

second quarter exceeded internally generated funds by 
$13 billion, at annual rates, up from $10.5 billion in

-43-



8/23/66

the first quarter and $4.7 billion in calendar 
1965. With capital expenditures continuing to rise 
and earnings recently leveling out, it is hard to 
see any appreciable diminution in this gap in the 
months ahead. Additional funds are being raised 
in the capital markets, and the new issue calendar 
may well rise even further in the fall, but a sizable 
residual demand on the banks seems certain to remain.  

Assuming continued substantial business loan 
demand, and a sizable runoff in CDs, what can the 
banks do to adjust? There is a limit to continued 
liquidation of Government securities--especially for 
the large banks--because of minimum liquidity needs 
and pledged asset requirements. Municipal security 
portfolios, which had continued to expand overall 
until recently, provide an obvious source of funds, 
but at substantial cost to the banks and to market 
stability. Security loans and loans to finance 
companies can be pushed out, as seems to be going on 
at some large banks, but efforts by these borrowers 
to obtain funds elsewhere may further limit banks' 
ability to sell CDs.  

On the liability side, a few of the largest 
banks have obtained substantial funds recently from 
their foreign branches, although prospects for 
maintaining inflows in that magnitude for very long 
seem doubtful. And almost all the big banks still 
have room under the rate ceilings to compete more 
aggressively for consumer CDs; I would not be 
surprised to see some do so as the September 
dividend-crediting date approaches.  

In the end, however, it seems likely that more 
banks--including major money market banks hard pressed 
by CD losses and prime customer credit demands--will 
have to come to the Federal Reserve for assistance.  
Increased borrowing, whether on a regular basis or 
under a special assistance program, will pose problems 
for open market operations and for interpreting money 
market statistics. Greater accommodation of the major 
banks at the window will not necessarily be offset by 
lesser borrowing by the smaller banks, given the 
pattern of reserve distribution, but it will provide 
the base for increased credit expansion by the banking 
system as a whole. Hence, it will be important for 
open market operations to mop up any excess reserves

-44-



8/23/66

provided to the system through assistance operations 
involving individual banks. Such excesses are 
likely to show up initially in the very short-term 
money markets, and to be reflected in such things as 
Federal funds rates and flows, availability and rates 
on dealer loans, and yields on the shortest-dated 
Treasury bills.  

It is for these reasons that the draft directive 
language provided by the staff 1/ places more emphasis 
than usual on money market rates and conditions and 
less on net borrowed reserves. We feel that close 
attention to the money market will provide a better 
indication of any developing ease than will net 
borrowed reserves, which may become a less meaningful-
and perhaps even a perverse--indicator of pressures 
on aggregate reserves in the period ahead.  

The "no change" directive specifies that money 
market rates and conditions be held about where they 
are today, which should be accompanied by some CD 
runoff in the weeks ahead. In this event, member 
bank deposits in September should increase less than 
the 8 per cent we would have projected in the absence 
of the developing CD problem; perhaps a figure around 
6 per cent would be a reasonable expectation. The 
"tightening" directive specifies a gradual firming 
in money market rates and conditions. This should 
result in a sizable and growing CD runoff, and 
consequently in only a modest growth in the bank 
credit proxy for September--perhaps 2 or 3 per cent.  

In either alternative, we feel that the Account 

Manager will need an unusually large degree of 
discretion to deal with potentially destabilizing 

developments; the possibility that such may occur is 

greater now than it has been for a long time past.  

Asked whether the projection for increase in member bank 

deposits in September was seasonally adjusted, Mr. Partee said 

that it was, although he warned that there was a certain amount 

of variation in the seasonal adjustment. He went on to say that 

the projections were very speculative and that they were included

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-45-



8/23/66 -46

for purposes of illustration as much as anything else. It was 

quite early to be having any firm view of September projections.  

A principal factor, however, was the delivery of $3 billion of 

tax bills late in August, which would give a large impetus to 

average bank credit for the month of September. The 8 per cent 

projection included substantial demand deposit expansion, in 

recognition of what had occurred in every last-of-quarter month 

for the past several quarters. It also allowed for a lesser 

rise in time deposits than had been occurring recently, including 

nothing but a seasonal change in CD's. The 6 per cent projection 

assumed a modest CD runoff; credit growth would be lower--perhaps 

in the 3 per cent range--in the event of a large CD runoff.  

Mr. Hayes said he understood that the 6 per cent figure 

was a rough estimate in event of the kind of CD runoff that might 

be expected from the maintenance of existing credit conditions, 

and Mr. Partee agreed, emphasizing that it was a very rough 

estimate.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that the inflow of funds to certain 

U.S. banks from their foreign branches did not show up in member 

bank deposits (the credit proxy). Therefore, if the inflow 

continued, there could be some credit expansion beyond that 

indicated by the credit proxy. Mr. Partee agreed, but added that 

the current inflow might well be less than the high figure of



8/23/66 -47

around $700 million in July. If that rate of inflow continued, 

he estimated that it would represent the equivalent of an increase 

in the credit proxy figure by two or three points for the month, 

on an annual rate basis. For the year as a whole, the influence 

would not be so great because the inflow was not too significant 

during the first half of the year. Mr. Hayes agreed that the 

inflow was not likely to continue at the high July rate.  

Mr. Hickman asked Mr. Partee about the degree of confidence 

he attached to the projection of an easing of short-term money 

market rates. It would seem that the pressure of strong loan 

demands would tend to mop up available funds. If the System 

maintained the current state of conditions in the money market, 

would it not, in effect, be supplying more reserves than needed? 

Mr. Partee replied that in the blue book the staff had 

projected perhaps a moderate easing of short-term rates. The 

System would be buying a considerable amount of securities and 

current changes in private investors' portfolio composition should 

favor short-term instruments against intermediate- and long-term 

securities. There could be more easing if, in fact, a considerable 

amount of credit was provided through the discount window. For 

the period immediately ahead, maintaining money market rates about 

where they were would probably not mean easing but absorbing any 

sloppiness that might develop.



8/23/66

Mr. Hickman said he was wondering if one could not get to 

the same place by maintaining required reserves about where they 

were. He did not like to place reliance on money market conditions 

if there was some better policy guide.  

Mr. Partee replied that the staff was very reluctant to 

specify the reserve aggregates at this time because the relation

ships were so uncertain in view of the deposit shifts that were 

taking place.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

As Charlie Walker observed recently, the "mix" 
between Federal monetary and fiscal restraint today "is 

very much like an extra dry martini--about 6 parts monetary 
to only one part fiscal." Mr. Brill has suggested that the 
mixture is now becoming even drier than that.  

It has sometimes been argued that this sort of recipe 
ought to be well suited to the U.S. balance of payments 
situation, because monetary restraint particularly restrains 
capital outflows. But the 1966 experience to date exposes 
the flaws in this line of analysis. The sharp tightening 
of credit conditions has indeed reduced net outflows of 
capital significantly. But because monetary restraint 
has so far operated very selectively on domestic demand, 
it has not prevented excessive aggregate demand pressures 
from sharply worsening the external balance on goods and 
services.  

The effect of tight credit on capital flows is clearly 
visible for flows of U.S. bank credit and of foreign liquid 
funds. In July there was a reflow of about $140 million of 
bank credit covered by the VFCR reports; only about one
third of this was seasonal. In view of the developing 
squeeze on large U.S. banks, it now seems reasonable to 

take the July movement as a portent for the near-term 
future, and to regard the second-quarter outflows as 

only a temporary interruption of the reflow that had

-48-



8/23/66

developed earlier. Japanese and Italian borrowers in 
particular have been repaying debt to U.S. banks, and the 
Japanese would be repaying even faster if the authorities 
there were not trying to slow them down.  

The second capital flow that clearly reflects tight 
money and high interest rates in this country also comes 
through U.S. banks. I refer to the inflow of foreign 
private liquid funds through the foreign branches of U.S.  
banks. Such inflows were exceptionally large in July 
and early August, totalling about $900 million, and were 
also sizable--about $1/2 billion--during the first half 
year. The huge surge in July was related to the run on 
sterling and should be viewed as temporary. But funds 
are also being attracted out of other currencies by the 
very high Euro-dollar rates that U.S. bank branches are 
now prepared to pay.  

Other capital flows have been less clearly affected.  
It may be that the falling off in new Canadian security 
issues in this country since April owes something to the 
high cost and relative scarcity of U.S. funds. We know 
very little so far about this year's direct investments.  

Against the known improvements on private capital 
account must be set a disturbingly large deterioration on 
current account. From the fourth quarter of 1965 to 
the second quarter of 1966, the annual rate of current 
account surplus declined by about $1-1/2 billion.  
Merchandise imports increased as rapidly as before, 
despite large releases from domestic stockpiles, while 
merchandise exports leveled off. The balance on military 
transactions plus services apparently did not change much 
over this particular period, but has worsened by comparison 
with the year 1965 as a whole.  

The net result of all these changes, and of others 
that we cannot yet measure, has been to widen the payments 
deficit on the liquidity basis of calculation to an 
annual rate of roughly $3 billion in July and early 
August.  

The alternative payments measure, based on official 
reserve transactions, has developed very differently, and 
shows a seasonally adjusted surplus during July and early 
August. The difference results mainly from that fact 
that the huge inflows of foreign private liquid funds 
in that period improve this balance but do not affect the 
liquidity calculation. Since a large part of the 
exceptional July inflows should be regarded as temporary, 
we should expect to see a renewed deficit on the official

-49-



8/23/66

settlements basis later in the year, although that deficit 
might be held well below the liquidity deficit by some 
continuing inflow of foreign liquid funds.  

To answer more broadly the questions of where we 
now stand and where we are heading, one needs to take 
account of longer-run trends and of likely business cycle 
swings. I would be prepared to concede that we may not 
yet have seen much trend deterioration in the payments 
position this year. The increase in the liquidity 
deficit from a rate of $2 billion a year in 1964-65 to 
$3 billion now may be largely explainable in terms of 
temporarily or cyclically excessive demand pressures 

whose adverse effects have outweighed the cyclically 

favorable effects of unusually tight credit. Similarly, 
the official settlements deficit might still have been at 
about the $1-1/2 billion rate of 1964-65 if it had not been 
for cyclical boom developments here and the recent run on 
sterling. These rough impressions of trend cannot, of 

course, be closely appraised until long after the event.  
The worrisome thing is that the earlier trend of 

slow improvement in the balance of payments appears to 
have been stopped in its tracks. Moreover, it is in danger 

of being reversed if, as the green book suggests, the 

upward pressure of rising labor costs is now to be added 
to the existing pull of demand on prices of manufactured 
materials and products. It seems to me that the fiscal

monetary policy martini that we have concocted this year 

is likely to produce a much worse hangover in the balance 
of payments (and also in the domestic economy) than would 
a mixture containing a forthright dose of general fiscal 

restraint. The tightening of credit that has helped our 

capital account can be reversed a lot more quickly in 
some future recession than can a price-cost spiral that 

will have impaired our international competitiveness.  

My remarks are in no way intended to question the 

recent trend of monetary policy--quite the contrary.  
The point is that unless restraint of some kind can be 

pushed to the point where it significantly dampens 

aggregate demand and heads off the inflationary spiral, 
the long-run prognosis for the balance of payments is 
very bleak.  

Mr. Hayes suggested that, since Mr. Robertson might have to 

leave before the meeting was finished, he start the go-around of 

comments and views on economic conditions and monetary policy.

-50-



8/23/66

Mr. Robertson said that first he would like to suggest, in 

view of the discussion earlier today, that the staff be asked to 

update last year's contingency planning on how to handle the 

securities market in the event of a sterling crisis.  

It was agreed that that should be done.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

Beyond question, the current economic situation is 
so fraught with inflationary pressures that we need to 
be applying all the restraint upon the availability of 
credit that we can reasonably bring to bear. The main 
issue that should concern us today is how best to achieve 
that policy posture (with perhaps a secondary issue being: 
"How can we recognize that position when we get there?").  

Already there is a good deal of monetary restraint 
present in our financial system. Interest rates have been 
rising sharply, securities markets are tight, and both 
bank and nonbank credit extensions to private borrowers 
as a group seem to have slowed somewhat.  

Even so, when we see the kinds of excess demand still 
apparent in most markets, the accelerated rates of advance 
in prices and wages that are taking place, and the overlay 
of inflationary expectations apparent in many quarters, 
we simply cannot sit back and assume that monetary policy 
has done enough.  

There is one major problem that we must take account 
of, of course, in contemplating any further firming by 
monetary action. That is the subject--already discussed 
this morning--of the highly uneven impact of the credit 
restraint already achieved, and the likelihood that still 
more uneven effects could follow from further credit
tightening action. These uneven credit effects need to 
concern us--not just because they are inequitable, or 
because they give rise to political hostility, but because 
the kinds of credit being least affected are those financing 
some of the most inflationary and unsustainable types of 
private expenditures, most particularly business plant, 
equipment, and inventory spending.

-51-



8/23/66

The kind of discount administration program we have 
talked about this morning seems to me to offer us one 
possibility of doing something--not everything, but 
something--to redress this lack of balance in credit 
restraint. In my judgment, some such program--adjusted 
and qualified as seems wise in the light of the best 
thought of everyone in the System--has to be an essential 
part of our future monetary policy. To fall short on 

this score will be to stop monetary policy from making 
its fullest contribution to the very difficult task 
of economic stabilization that this country faces today.  

I am going to assume, therefore, that we will take 

steps in the direction outlined that will make further 
tightening via open market operations feasible and 

desirable. To be specific, I would like to see net 

borrowed reserves running deeper by at least $100 
million--one-fourth of the reserve effect of the reserve 
requirement increase--by the time that action becomes 
effective in early September. Beyond that, I recognize 
that member bank borrowings might mount considerably higher 

as banks seek discount window assistance in meeting the 

September squeeze. I would urge the Manager not to engage 

in open market purchases to reduce such borrowing, but to 

instead be prepared to conduct operations to keep such 
injections of borrowed reserves from in any way easing 

the climate of firmer money market conditions that I 

hope we will have achieved by then.  

Finally, let me say a few words about the desirability 

of keeping the "proviso" clause in the directive. It is 

important in our instructions to the Manager to keep in 
mind the need for providing him with sufficient flexibility 

to moderate unexpected and undesired surges or contractions 

in credit demand. Generally, he should be able to make 

the net position of banks and the money market less 

comfortable if credit demands prove very strong and more 

comfortable if such demands become weak. As strong demands 

converge on banks, the Manager in his operations should 

force the banks to meet some part of their resulting 

reserve needs through the discount window; in that way, 
the discipline of the window can be added to the discipline 

of the market place. On the other hand, if demands prove 

weak, it would not be amiss if banks as a whole were in a 

position to reduce some of their indebtedness to us.  

However, in as inflationary a situation as we face 

today, we should be more wary of letting the indebtedness

-52-



8/23/66

of banks to the Federal Reserve become too low than about 
forcing it to high levels. In the current circumstances, 
this means that the Manager should see to it that net 
borrowed reserves deepen further, and more rapidly if 
credit demands prove strong and threaten to bring about 
a rapid aggregate reserve expansion. Only if it is 
crystal clear that demands are weakening, or if in the 
unlikely event that financial markets become patently 
disorderly, should he let up in any significant way on 
the pressure on banks.  

I believe the following wording for the second 
paragraph of the directive would accomplish the objectives 
I have in mind: 

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of possible unusual liquidity pressures on banks, 
System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to attaining further firming of money market 
and reserve conditions, with the firming to be 
greater if bank credit tends to expand more than 
expected.  

Mr. Hayes then made the following statement: 

The pace of the business expansion appears to be 
increasing in the current quarter, and there are signs 
that inflationary pressures in the economy are accelerating.  
As has been true for many months, the outlook is for 
continuing strength in the economy over the remainder of 
the year and well into 1967. Price developments in July 
were very discouraging, as wholesale food and farm 
prices once again rose sharply; and earlier hopes for 
lower prices in this area later in the year seem to have 
vanished. Consumer prices continue to rise at a rate of 
about 3.5 per cent. The airline wage settlement seems 
likely to set an excessive wage pattern for upcoming 
contract demands; and emergence of cost-push pressures 
is further indicated by the recent steel price increase.  

There is no basis for encouragement as to our 
balance of payments position, despite some recent official 
and press comments in that direction. A preliminary 
deficit figure of $437 million for July is very unfavorable 
even after allowance for seasonal factors. For several 
months we have observed a serious deterioration in our 
trade surplus, and apart from special transactions our 
liquidity deficit would have increased from a $2.0

-53-



8/23/66

billion rate in the first quarter to a $2.5 billion 
rate in the second quarter. For the time being, pressure 
on the dollar in foreign exchange markets has been 
significantly reduced by heavy borrowings in the Euro
dollar market by overseas branches of American banks.  
Incidentally, this was not reflected in the required 
reserves of the banks involved and has provided a 
partial alternative to enlarged Federal fund purchases 
and borrowings at the discount window.  

Bank credit statistics are as usual highly confusing, 
but the growth so far in 1966 has been only a little 
below last year's excessive rate. There has been some 
uncertain indication of a more significant slowing in 
the last few weeks, even after allowance for the estimated 
growth of U.S. bank liabilities to overseas branches.  
However, New York bankers are projecting a further 
substantial loan increase for the third quarter and are 
again tightening their lending policies. The prime rate 
boost was of course intended to facilitate this process 
of rationing. Current loan demand is no doubt swollen 
by fears that credit may become still harder to obtain 
some months from now. Meanwhile the big city banks are 
faced with the prospect of a considerable loss of negotiable 
CDs over the coming weeks and months, in the light of 
the recent sharp upward movement of nearly all market 
interest rates.  

Coming to matters of policy, I am impressed anew 
by the urgent need for development of a concerted System 
approach in view of the very difficult economic and 
financial conditions we face and the lack of clear 
understanding of these problems in many quarters outside 
the System. In the first place, the need for general 
Governmental policies of restraint seems to be obvious; 
yet there is still no evidence of a likely near-term 
assist from fiscal policy in the form of a tax rise.  
With the burden on monetary policy therefore excessively 
heavy, we must be even more than usually alert to the 
risk of causing undue financial strains or disorderly 
markets, without losing sight of our basic goal of 
slowing the rate of bank credit growth.  

In connection with recent increases in reserve 
requirements, I think it worth emphasizing the inevitably 
intimate connection between reserve requirement changes 
and open market operations. Inasmuch as open market 
operations are inherently capable of supporting, 
reinforcing, or nullifying the reserve effect of a

-54-



8/23/66

requirement change, it would have been useful to have a 
prior general discussion of possible future reserve 
requirement changes at a meeting of the Committee, just 
as it has been our general practice to use this forum 
for a general exchange of views on the desirability of 
a discount rate change.  

My second observation on the latest change in 
requirements has to do with my concern that the System 
may be playing into the hand of those who maintain that 
a very sharp distinction may be made between cost of 
credit and its availability. More concretely, it seems 
illusory, for example, to refrain from approving a 
discount rate rise on the ground that it may lead to an 
escalation of market rates, while raising reserve require
ments in the hope that this may lead to slower credit 
expansion without appreciable rate effects. There seems 
to be little doubt that the two recent increases in 
reserve requirements have been a significant contributing 
cause of the sharp upward move in market rates. I might 
add that our directors wish to be associated with these 
comments on the necessarily close tie between cost and 
availability of credit.  

Turning to open market policy, I would hope we can 
maintain a firm rein on bank credit expansion. Further 
tightening should be closely geared to the pace of growth 
of bank credit as that can best be measured in the short 
run. In this connection, it is worth noting that the 
bank credit proxy for August, after allowing for re-lending 
of funds obtained from foreign branches, appears to be 
running at or below the lower end of the 4-6 per cent range 
mentioned at our last meeting. I will be pleased if this 
is the way the August figures finally come out. Looking 
ahead, I would continue to feel that a rise in the proxy 
at a rate significantly above 6 per cent would be reason 
for greater restraint, provided that market conditions 
permit such action by the Manager. In general, I believe 
we should be paying close attention to the uncertainty 
that has prevailed in financial markets. In terms of net 
borrowed reserves, I have in mind a level of around $500 
million, with higher levels if credit expansion is exces
sive.  

A higher net borrowed reserve figure of course implies 
forcing the banks to acquire more of their reserves through 
the discount window; and this in turn would automatically 
give the System additional leverage over the banks' credit

-55-



8/23/66

policies. As I said earlier, all of this can be accom
plished in the period immediately ahead without any 
essential change in the method of administering the 
Reserve Banks' discount windows. I think all of us 

agree that we should try to force more banks into the 

window; but, as I have already suggested, this is the 
automatic effect of any tightening through our tested 

instrument of open market operations.  
The discount rate is even more glaringly out of line 

with market rates than it was about six weeks ago, when 
the directors of a number of Reserve Banks voted to 
increase it. Our own directors feel quite strongly that 

the rate should be raised now that the Treasury financing 

is out of the way. I very much hope that the Board of 
Governors will see fit to go along with an increase some 
time in the next two weeks or so, as I think it would be 
most unfortunate if the impression were to gain ground 
that the rate is "frozen" at its present level until the 

banks become much tighter than they are now. The discount 

rate has traditionally been a "member of the team" of 

credit policy instruments. At the very least it has been 

moved from time to time to bring it in line with the 

realities of market conditions, even when it was not used 

as a dramatic advance signal. It is so far behind the 

parade now that it may cause unnecessary public confusion 
as to our basic policy objectives, besides rendering 

administration of the window more difficult than it would 

otherwise be. I am not sure in my own mind whether the 

rise at this time should be by 1/2 per cent or by 1 per 

cent.  
As far as the first paragraph of the directive is 

concerned, I would suggest adding to the phrase "and 

interest rates have risen substantially" the words "in 

an atmosphere of great uncertainty." Alternative A of 
the second paragraph would best express my policy conclu

sions, but with all the provisos involved I would not 

object to alternative B if the majority prefers it.  

Mr. Francis observed that there were some similarities between 

the economic problems of the British for the past three or four years 

and the economic problems of the United States during the past year.  

In both cases public policies had fostered excessive total demand

-56-



8/23/66 -57

for goods and services resulting in inflation. Total demand in 

excess of ability to produce leads not only to current price infla

tion but also to bottlenecks and other inefficiencies of production, 

which, as time passes, may cause the margin between demand and 

available supply to become even larger. The British might have had 

greater real production in the recent past if they had not followed 

excessive total demand policies which led to inflationary wage 

settlements and "hoarding" of labor.  

In the United States, Mr. Francis said, prices had been 

rising during the past year, and output was not being hampered by 

shortages of key items. Current wage demands, the breakdown of 

the administration's price guidelines, and talk of wage and price 

controls pointed up the seriousness of the problem of excessive 

total demand. The problems of wage negotiations and of commodity 

pricing would be greatly simplified if there were public confidence 

that total spending was being kept within limits which would foster 

general price stability. The longer total demand outpaced real 

output the greater the economic problem became, as evidenced by 

the British situation.  

But the economy continued to operate under the pressures 

of excessive total demand, Mr. Francis remarked. Although total 

spending slowed in the second quarter, the last half of the year 

apparently would resume a rapid pace similar to that which spending



8/23/66 -58

had followed since the end of 1964. It was highly unlikely that 

the productive capacity of the economy could accommodate that 

level of demand without further and sharper price increases, and 

as one looked towards next year's wage bargaining, the inflationary 

prospects seemed even more dismal.  

It became increasingly clear, Mr. Francis said, that fiscal 

policy had been far too expansionary and had been the primary 

contributor to excessive total demand during the past twelve months.  

Moreover it would apparently continue in the same direction over the 

last half of this year. But he did not think a withholding of 

appropriate monetary measures was justified because of lack of a 

more enlightened fiscal policy. Rather, the Committee should view 

fiscal policy as part of the given total demand picture and adapt 

monetary policies accordingly.  

During the past year financial intermediaries had been slow 

to increase their rates on both loans and savings, Mr. Francis noted.  

That reluctance to adjust to market conditions had resulted from 

their own conservatism and short-run profit considerations, pressures 

from the administration and the supervisory agencies, and restrictive 

laws and regulations. As a result, the flows of funds through banks, 

savings and loan associations, and other financial intermediaries 

had declined, and, surprisingly, the smaller flows had been char

acterized as a rate war for funds among financial institutions. The



8/23/66

reduced role of the financial intermediaries had been induced by an 

expansion of direct lending and borrowing in the capital and money 

markets and by an intensified use by corporations of their own liquid 

funds. Most funds raised in the open market went to governments and 

the larger well-known businesses. Small borrowers who relied chiefly 

on financial intermediaries for credit were those mainly affected by 

these changing credit flows.  

It had been suggested, Mr. Francis added, that supervisory 

agencies should further limit rates paid by financial intermediaries 

at a time when most other rates had been working up. It seemed to 

him that that would be the wrong thing to do. To the extent that 

the limitation held back adjustments in particular areas, it mis

allocated resources. Such actions would tend to reduce further the 

role of financial intermediaries and would make it still more dif

ficult for those small borrowers that relied on financial institutions 

to get an appropriate share of the credit. Also, there was a risk 

that diverting funds from banks and other intermediaries might be 

interpreted as monetary restraint (i.e., a slower growth in deposits, 

bank credit, and measurable liquid assets) when in fact total liquid 

assets might continue to rise unabated via other avenues. It was 

becoming increasingly evident that over the past four months the 

firmer stance of the Committee had brought about a leveling off in 

the rate of growth of total reserves and money.

-59-



8/23/66 -60

While the rate of growth of productive capacity might be 

a reasonable first approximation of a norm for the growth of the 

money supply, Mr. Francis remarked, there were times when a lesser 

rate was appropriate, just as there were times when growth should 

be more rapid than normal. In this period of easy fiscal policy 

and higher interest rates, when the rate of growth of demand for 

money holdings was exceptionally low and there was an excessive 

total demand, now, if ever, was the time when the money stock 

should not be increased so rapidly as the demand.  

The recent moderation of monetary expansion was most 

encouraging, and he would like to see restraint applied with 

increasing pressure until there was evidence that spending plans 

and inflationary expectations had been moderated. He thought that 

maintaining the same degree, or somewhat less, of total reserve 

availability than had prevailed over the past few months was in 

order. Shortly, he would expect that the banking system would be 

increasingly unable to accommodate further spectacular increases 

in business lending such as had occurred since April.  

There had been some talk of an autumn "liquidity crisis" 

both for banks and for nonfinancial corporations, Mr. Francis 

noted; but that should not deter the Committee from its quest for 

long-run stability. If anything like a liquidity crisis should 

show itself, it seemed to him that the necessary short-run adjust

ments could and should be made through the discount window.



8/23/66 -61

The discount rate continued to be increasingly out of 

step with market realities and almost any economic reasoning 

argued for its realignment, Mr. Francis said. He was aware, how

ever, that other telling arguments existed for continuing the rate 

without change. So long as those arguments remained dominant, he 

was confident that borrowing could be controlled by proper discount 

window administration as a tighter over-all policy was pursued.  

Mr. Patterson reported that the Sixth District economy 

continued to be exuberant. About the only soft spots were in 

southern Florida, where the airline strike seriously cut the summer 

tourist business, and in some agricultural areas where production 

of cotton and corn was expected to be down because of drought and 

reduced planted acreage. Construction employment held at very high 

levels in most areas of the District, and construction contracts 

through June remained strong despite disruption in the mortgage 

markets. There was a strong advance in manufacturing employment 

in June that helped pull up total nonfarm employment, although the 

July figure would probably show less strength because of strikes.  

However, the strongest growth industry was Government employment, 

which had experienced a seasonally adjusted increase of 8.7 per 

cent since the first of the year.  

Sixth District bankers, especially those in the larger 

cities, continued to complain about difficulties in meeting the



8/23/66 -62

credit demands stemming from the exuberant behavior of the economy 

even though many of the District banks had apparently experienced 

less pressure than banks in other parts of the country. Many 

District banks had been able to hold on to their investments 

despite the loan expansion. The larger city banks were in the 

tightest positions. In Mississippi, where the seasonal loan peak 

generally came in August and September, some banks had been hard 

put to meet loan demands and, judging from the applications at the 

discount window from an increasing number of small country banks, 

the pressures were extending outward from the larger cities. For 

the District as a whole, the major seasonal pressures were yet to 

come although the normal seasonal increase from now to December of 

about 2.5 per cent was small compared with the current seasonally 

adjusted growth in loans of 1 per cent a month. Pressures were 

greatest at the Atlanta banks, and last Wednesday all the Atlanta 

banks raised their prime rates to 6 per cent.  

Mr. Patterson said that, after looking at economic 

conditions in his own area and concluding that they were fairly 

typical of what was going on throughout the nation, it would be 

easy to fall into the temptation of considering that the policy 

the Committee had been following had had no effect at all on 

slowing down the pace of the economy. However, he did not think 

that was so. Undoubtedly, expansion would have been much greater



8/23/66 -63

had policy provided a higher reserve base for the growth of bank 

credit. More importantly, the way rates were behaving and funds 

were being sought out suggested that the economy was tightening 

itself and that that tightening was going to have an increasing 

effect on limiting total demand.  

One of the men at the Atlanta Bank had suggested that 

this was the time for the System to punt. Although he was not 

an expert quarterback, Mr. Patterson believed a football team 

decided to punt when it was in such a position that an offensive 

act was too risky to make and giving the ball back to the other 

team might eventually create a better offensive position.  

On the basis of similar reasoning, Mr. Patterson 

concluded that an increase in the discount rate now seemed to be 

too risky a move to make. He feared that the psychological impact 

would not result in merely a technical adjustment of catching up 

with market rates but rather in pushing the whole rate structure 

up, intensifying the illiquidity of the banks, and ultimately 

forcing the System into supplying large quantities of reserves in 

order to avoid a liquidity crisis.  

Under those circumstances, it seemed to Mr. Patterson 

that the banking system and the financial markets should be allowed 

to handle the ball for a while with the System maintaining a strong 

defense. In other words, it should allow market adjustments with



8/23/66 -64

minimum interference. The recent rise in the prime rate suggested 

that that was already occurring. A strong defense implied that 

the System should not prevent further market adjustements by 

raising permissible rates under Regulation Q nor offset the effects 

of the Board's recent action raising reserve requirements against 

time deposits. If, as a result, more banks were forced to resort 

temporarily to the discount window, a gradual deepening in the net 

borrowed reserve figure should be allowed. He favored alternative A 

of the draft directives, with the change suggested by Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that with the business advance showing 

clear signs of accelerating in the current quarter, financial 

markets had continued under considerable strain. Bankers in the 

Third District expected more intense loan demand in the fall, with 

seasonal growth added to the cyclical thrust responsible for the 

intensity expected. The demand for business loans had been 

especially strong since midyear. Though old customers and large 

borrowers continued to be accommodated, new borrowers had in many 

cases been turned down. All of the Philadelphia reserve city 

banks followed the increase in the prime rate. There had been 

few changes in terms of mortgage loans in the past several weeks.  

Most Philadelphia banks were making mortgage loans only in excep

tional cases and to fulfill previous commitments. Only a minority 

of the banks, however, had attempted to cut back instalment loans.



8/23/66 -65

As for sources of funds to meet the anticipated fall loan 

demand, Mr. Bopp said that two Philadelphia banks expected consumer

type savings certificates to provide the bulk of the funds needed.  

Two other banks thought they could attract some CD funds in the near 

term; however, all expected CD's to decline in the fall. Two large 

Philadelphia banks believed they might be forced to reduce loans in 

the fall as a result of shortages of funds.  

In the nation as a whole, Mr. Bopp continued, it also seemed 

likely that the banking system would come under increasing strain in 

coming months as loan demand intensified under seasonal pressures and 

as banks found it more difficult to replace maturing CD's. Indeed, 

$7.7 billion (about 43 per cent) of the negotiable CD's of $100,000 

and over outstanding July 27 would mature in August and September.  

That raised the question of market reaction to a runoff, possibly 

one of sizable proportions. Since a market confronted with the 

unexpected was more likely to be buffeted by severe pressures, the 

Philadelphia Bank had tried to get some further idea this past week 

of bank expectations regarding the Regulation Q ceiling. The question 

had been discussed with high-ranking officers at each of the five 

major Philadelphia banks. Those individuals expected no change in 

the Q ceiling, and all expected some pressures to develop from CD 

runoffs as rates on other instruments rose. Two respondents cited 

public statements by System officials as the basis for their belief.



8/23/66 -66

One banker believed political considerations prevented any change 

in Regulation Q. Another said that the Federal Reserve System had 

performed two "operations of relief" in behalf of banks previously, 

and that he felt bankers were on their own this time. He also 

stated that he believed "monetary policy has done all it can do." 

Turning to policy, it seemed to Mr. Bopp that the proper 

course was to allow pressures to build slowly and to exert further 

restraint on growth rates in reserves and bank credit. Accordingly, 

he would coordinate open market operations with the Board's action 

on reserve requirements to achieve a gradual move toward further 

restraint. He would use the discount window if necessary to ease 

severe pressures on individual banks. In view of the intense 

pressures currently prevailing in money and capital markets, however, 

he suggested that any move toward further restraint should be gradual 

and should be implemented with great caution. On economic grounds, 

he still favored an increase in the discount rate. On balance, he 

favored alternative B for the directive, but he did not feel strongly.  

Mr. Hickman expressed the view that business activity should 

continue to move forward for the rest of the year, sparked by increas

ing demands for equipment and materials. Defense spending had already 

far exceeded expectations and, as pointed out in the green book, 

"there appears to be no abatement in the pace of the increase." Plant 

and equipment spending was exceptionally strong. As an illustration,



8/23/66 -67

one of the Cleveland Reserve Bank directors, the chief executive 

officer of a leading machine tool producer, stated at the last 

Board meeting that present order backlogs were sufficient to maintain 

production at full capacity for the next 14 months, even without any 

new orders, although he warned that some of the backlog would be 

cancelled in the event of a business recession. Production of 1967 

autos would soon be moving into full swing and, as now planned, the 

auto component would provide more than seasonal stimulus to the produc

tion index in coming months. However, with expected end-of-August 

inventories of approximately 1.1 million cars, equivalent to a 48-day 

supply, planned production might be too optimistic.  

Steel output turned up in July on a seasonally adjusted basis, 

Mr. Hickman noted, but it was expected to decline in August and should 

contribute little to the production index, plus or minus, for the 

balance of the year. Steel companies reporting to the Cleveland Bank 

on a confidential basis indicated that new orders in August were not 

rising as much as usual, and that defense orders thus far had been 

easily absorbed by the industry.  

On the price front, Mr. Hickman said, the public seemed to 

be catching up with the fact that inflation was a clear and present 

danger. Actual price behavior, however, had been mixed, with prices 

of sensitive industrial materials declining recently. While that 

might imply a temporary lessening of inflationary pressures on



8/23/66 -68

industrial prices, the resumption of rising farm and food prices and 

disquieting wage negotiations--both present and future--left little 

room for complacency.  

Nor could one be complacent about the financial situation, 

Mr. Hickman continued, in view of the serious stringencies devel

oping in financial markets. The depressed states of the mortgage 

and stock markets were well known. Beyond that, more selective 

lending policies of banks were pushing corporations increasingly into 

the capital market. Private placements were drying up as a source of 

funds; insurance companies were overcommitted and were themselves 

contemplating use of the capital market. In the municipal market, 

lower prices and rising yields, in part caused by bank selling, had 

resulted in cancellations of new municipal financings. Thus, intended 

policy effects had apparently been achieved throughout all sectors of 

the money and capital markets.  

Moreover, mounting evidence suggested that further pressures 

would build up in the weeks immediately ahead, as strong demands for 

credit pressed on a growing scarcity of funds. Although prediction 

in that area was always hazardous, Mr. Hickman believed the Committee 

could look for sharply higher yields in the corporate and municipal 

markets in the next few months, caused by further bank liquidation 

of municipals, the drying up of CD's, and the withdrawal of insurance 

companies from the mortgage and capital markets. All that had led



8/23/66 -69

and would lead to a desired reduction in aggregate demand. The 

problem was to achieve just the amount of reduction that was needed 

to relieve price pressures without destabilizing the economy. His 

own view was that the Committee should wait to see how the economy 

responded to the steps already taken.  

Mr. Hickman therefore recommended that policy be kept about 

the same until the next meeting, with bank reserves provided only 

to satisfy seasonal needs. If bank credit increased more than 

projected, under the moderate CD runoff assumption, net borrowed 

reserves should be allowed to rise perhaps to as high as $600 

million. On the other hand, if bank credit increased less than 

projected, then net borrowed reserves might be allowed to remain 

about where they were, that is, around $400 million.  

Mr. Hickman said he had been on the call since the last 

meeting, and would like to commend the Manager for his handling of 

a very difficult situation. The refunding was touch-and-go all the 

way, with considerable attrition, and with the new issues drifting 

off in the after-market. The Manager was hampered during and after 

the refunding by major revisions in the reserve statistics, partic

ularly by a shortfall in required reserves below expectations.  

That caused net borrowed reserves for one week to fall below $400 

million. On the other hand, smaller net borrowed reserves were 

accompanied by lower total reserves, nonborrowed reserves, and bank



8/23/66 -70

credit (proxy) than had been adjudged appropriate by the Committee.  

Yet the money market was extremely tight and uncertain. In the words 

of one observer, the market was characterized by "solid erosion." 

Despite all of that, the Desk was able to steer a middle course that 

avoided the extremes of tightness and ease.  

Mr. Hickman repeated that he favored keeping policy about the 

same until the next meeting. He found the first paragraph of the 

draft directives acceptable, with Mr. Hayes' suggested amendment.  

He would suggest a second paragraph reading "To implement this policy, 

while taking account of potential liquidity pressures within the bank

ing system, System open market operations until the next meeting of 

the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the 

current state of net reserve availability; provided, however, that if 

required reserves expand more rapidly than expected, operations shall 

be conducted with a view to requiring greater reliance on borrowed 

reserves."1/ 

Mr. Brimmer pointed out that there was a minor inconsistency 

between objectives with respect to the balance of payments and on the 

domestic side. While the inflow of funds from foreign branches of 

U.S. banks apparently was helpful from the balance of payments 

standpoint, it undercut to some extent the efforts of the Committee 

to achieve further gradual credit restraint at home. That was 

1/ Later during the go-around, Mr. Hickman indicated that a 
directive along the lines suggested by Mr. Mitchell would be 
acceptable to him.



8/23/66

particularly important because so few U.S. banks had foreign 

branches and benefited from the inflow. He hoped that before too 

long the Board would review the situation and reach a judgment 

about the appropriate steps to take, if any, with regard to the 

inflow.  

With respect to the domestic scene, Mr. Brimmer commented 

that the question was being raised increasingly whether the System 

had gone far enough with monetary policy. That was enhanced because 

of the uncertainty and doubts on the part of some observers about 

the differential impact of credit restraint. His own feeling was 

that the System had not gone far enough. Despite the lack of 

additional assistance from the fiscal side--and today's paper quoted 

a high official as giving assurance that there would be no tax 

increase at this time--he thought it was vital that the System push 

on with the use of monetary instruments. The recent informal survey 

of current lending practices, conducted by the Reserve Banks at the 

request of the Board, provided mixed evidence. The responses describ

ing the activities of some of the banks were less comforting than he 

had hoped. While there were substantial variations, even within 

Districts, on balance the evidence indicated that the banks were in 

fact rather close to being prisoners of their large customers.  

While he would not say that in public--only within the Committee--he 

thought he detected such a high degree of value on customer relations

-71-



8/23/66 -72

that the banks, in fact, had difficulty in saying "no." He repeated 

that he thought the System should push on.  

During the past couple of weeks, Mr. Brimmer said, he became 

concerned about the way the Desk was carrying out the directive of 

the Committee. He agreed with Mr. Hickman that it was a difficult 

period, complicated by the Treasury financing and the serious problem 

of how to maintain an even keel, but he had asked a staff member to 

review the operations of the Desk during this period because it was 

possible to see some slippage and he wanted to know why that had 

occurred. The staff appraisal was shared with the Manager, who 

thought it was worthwhile to undertake a review of that kind from 

time to time. The evidence suggested that the Manager had decided 

to accept net borrowed reserves in the lower part of the indicated 

range. The reasons for that decision were convincing to the Manager 

and were accepted by him (Mr. Brimmer). That meant, however, that 

the Committee was starting off with net borrowed reserves not quite 

as it had hoped they would be when the Committee met a month ago.  

How to quantify that was difficult, but he felt that the Committee 

was slightly behind and that it should make up some lost ground.  

As a minimum, he hoped that the effect of the Board's reserve require

ment action would not be completely offset. Roughly one-fourth could 

be passed through to net borrowed reserves, in his opinion.



8/23/66 -73

In summary, Mr. Brimmer thought the Committee ought to come 

out with net borrowed reserves somewhat higher than at present.  

The Manager had suggested a figure in the high $400 millions, but 

he (Mr. Brimmer) was hopeful they would end up in the high $500 

millions. On the discount rate, he would say simply that he had 

heard the comments around the table this morning.  

All of this suggested to him, Mr. Brimmer said, that the 

Committee ought to come out with alternative B, phrased as suggested 

by Mr. Robertson, because it would permit the Committee to make up 

some of the ground that had been lost.  

Mr. Maisel said that from all the documents received for 

this meeting it seemed to him that two critical facts stood out.  

First, it appeared that aggregate demand was going to expand less 

than aggregate supply for the next half year. Second, the credit 

variables, with the exception of business loans, had finally reached 

the point where they were expanding less than normally. Most had 

now reached a level of expansion only about one-half to two-thirds 

of the expansion rate of last year. Those were the two critical 

bases against which the Committee was going to have to operate.  

Accordingly, Mr. Maisel said, it seemed to him the Committee 

had now reached the point where it must consider what impact monetary 

policy was expected to have on the situation with respect to aggregage 

supply and demand. How would the monetary variables react, and would 

the reactions be desirable for the economy? As to action the System



8/23/66 -74

was taking now, when would it be expected to be effective? He did 

not think the answers to those questions were critical at this 

meeting, but he believed they would grow increasingly important over 

the next few months, and he would hope the Committee could have 

specific estimates of the expected impact and the lags involved.  

Mr. Maisel disagreed with the view that there had been any 

undue slippage. Rather, he would want to hold the credit proxy at 

an annual expansion rate close to the average thus far this year.  

It seemed to him that the Committee should start allowing the market 

to react against a rather constant growth rate rather than to 

determine the market, with one basic exception. Business loan 

expansion was far out of line with all other credit variables, and 

he would favor a policy of trying to indicate to the banks, through 

the discount window, that a substitution of business loans for 

securities was not aiding monetary policy in the fight against infla

tion. It should be made clear that if credit was going to be curtailed, 

the place where the curtailment would do the most good was in business 

loans.  

With those provisos, Mr. Maisel said, he would favor contin

uing to follow a credit proxy variable as a basis for Desk operations.  

He would be well satisfied with a 6 per cent expansion rate in the 

credit proxy, and he would support alternative A for the directive 

on the assumption that that was its goal. He would not be concerned



8/23/66

if net borrowed reserves fell below current levels, or if money 

market conditions relaxed somewhat or tightened, provided the 

credit variables continued to expand at about the rates that had 

prevailed recently.  

Mr. Daane made the following statement: 

At the outset Mr. Chairman, I would like to address 
myself to the Board's action of last Wednesday, not in a 
spirit of recrimination or of crying over spilled milk 
but rather because, as indicated in your statement as well, 
I think the considerations surrounding that action are 
highly revelant to the problems and decisions we confront 
today. Perhaps I can most simply summarize my views with 
respect to that action and where it leaves us and leads 
us by reading into the record my memorandum to the Board 
of August 11, 1966. That memorandum read as follows: 

I have reviewed carefully Governor Robertson's 
memorandum of August 9, 1966, proposing a further 
increase in reserve requirements on large holdings 
of time deposits, and the related staff memoranda.  
I have also discussed the possible market impact 
with the Manager of the System Open Market Account.  
On the basis of this review and discussion, and 
despite my feeling that the System should, in the 
absence of sufficient fiscal restraint, move 
further in the direction of credit tightening, I 
am strongly opposed to the suggested reserve 
requirement action at this time for the following 
reasons: 

(1) The announcement effect, in the present 
market, would in my judgment have severe 
repercussions, going well beyond what would be 
desired and well beyond the repercussions of 
a modest discount rate change. If it resulted, 
as it well might, in a substantial forced sale 
of assets by one or more of the largest banks 
this could bring us close to a disorderly market 
and necessitate Account operations and resultant 
reserve expansion contrary to present System 
objectives. Present market sensitivity is amply 
demonstrated in the reception accorded this

-75-



8/23/66

week's issue of Public Housing Authority notes 
and in the current behavior of the new 5-1/4s, 
which are selling below par despite substantial 
Treasury purchases during the past two days.  

(2) The action would intensify the problem 
the banks face in September of replacing existing 
CDs without, in my judgment, achieving the 
differential impact on bank credit expansion 
intended and desired. As I review the staff 
documents, and from my own discussions with 
several bankers whose judgment I respect, it 
seems to me that the real problem confronting 
us is one of avoiding too abrupt a runoff of 

CDs rather than aggravating a squeeze by our 
actions. And I am skeptical, as apparently so 

is staff, that the desired differential effects 
would ensue. I think banks would simply cut back 

further in the credit areas where they are now 

cutting--hitting much harder on other loan and 

investment areas than on business loans, and 

least of all on the demands from their best 

business loan customers.  

(3) The action most assuredly will be used 

by the banks as the peg upon which to hang a 

further increase in the prime rate. This 
unnecessarily exposes the System to the escalation 

of interest rates attack and I would not be at all 

surprised to see some of this come from administra

tion as well as Congressional sources. On the 

other hand, it would expose us to attack from the 

larger banks--and one difficult to gainsay--to 

raise Q ceilings, once more in order to avoid a 

drastic blockage of fund flows.  

(4) Cushioning operations at a time when 

we are normally supplying reserves will necessitate 

much larger open market operations and there would 

be technical difficulties involved in such an 

action.  

In summary, I think the timing of the action 

would be unwise in the light of current market 

developments, of an impending prime rate increase 

(and without an FOMC meeting providing a forum 

for full discussion of the integration of our 

instruments). I question whether the desired 

differential effect will be accomplished and think

-76-



8/23/66

there is a real risk that it will necessitate 
System action either to expand reserves or to 
raise Q ceilings to avoid undue blockage. And, 
finally, it seems to me that further credit 
tightening could better be achieved with a 
further gradual tightening of open market 
operations, subject to a full review by the 
FOMC on August 23, 1966.  
Subsequent to my memorandum the Board rejected the 

proposal to increase reserve requirements, the prime rate 
was then raised, Secretary Fowler publicly rebuked the 
banks, and the Board majority then went ahead with an 
increase in reserve requirements--an action which I did 
not share and would not have shared had I been present.  
Following last Wednesday's action we have, of course, 
had, as I see it, the worst of all possible worlds--a 
resultant sharp runup in interest rates, with serious 
talk of another prime rate increase, and weakness in the 
pound sterling also not unrelated to our recent action.  

In evaluating where all of these developments leave 
us and lead us today, I am impressed by the views expressed 
by members of the Dillon Committee at their meeting last 
Friday. This committee, comprising some of the top minds 
in the country on international and national financial 
matters, did not discuss the Federal Reserve's latest 
action in their joint session with Government officials 
which I attended. Apparently, however, they did review 
it thoroughly in their own deliberations prior to meeting 
with Government officials. And one member of the Dillon 
Committee told me that they were all extremely critical 
of the action, using fairly strong language in the process.  
Only one member of the group (which, of course, includes 
Messrs. Dillon, Heller, Gordon, Rockefeller, Roosa, 
Kindleberger, Mayer, Wilde, and Bernstein) defended the 
action and then only if it was aimed solely at raising 
slightly the cost of CD money and assuming the reserve 
impact would be completely offset by open market opera
tions. Some of the reasoning of those critical of the 
Fed's move did appear in the joint discussions and I 
think is worth noting. The view generally seemed to be 
that we were closer to precipitating a financial crisis 

than anyone in Washington realized; that while monetary 
policy should not "lose its nerve" it was indeed biting 
and biting hard--now--even on business loans; that if it 
had been left alone the market and credit situation would

-77-



8/23/66

have tightened itself more than sufficiently; but that 
the further stress induced by our action could serve 
to provoke a crisis or, at best, be self-defeating 
because of our efforts to prevent such a crisis. There 
was an unequivocal statement of the Dillon Committee 
addressed to the Secretary of the Treasury that what 
was lacking on the Washington side was a clear voice 
and sense of purposeful direction and guidance. I 
might mention also that one of the factors cited as 
contributing to the over-taut market situation was the 
continuing stream of agency issues and question was 
raised as to whether there might be any way to defer 
agency efforts to raise new money.  

As I have thought about all of these matters in 
terms of today's decisions, I am convinced that we 
can allow very little, if any, of the increased 
reserve requirement at this juncture to find its way 
into the net borrowed reserve target. Absent that 
Board action, I think we might very well have directed 
the Manager of the Account to permit the credit markets 
to further tighten themselves somewhat, or even to 
probe cautiously toward a further reduction of avail
ability as market conditions permitted, against the 
background of a slower pace of loan expansion, even 
of business loans as indicated by weekly reporting 
banks, of the inroads on bank liquid asset portfolios 
that have taken place, of the significant volume of 

CDs maturing soon--all leading to existing strong 
pressures and even stronger pressures in September.  
Next month's likely larger CD attritions can only 
serve to add to the pressures on banks facing heavy 

loan demands with reduced liquidity. Thus, I now 
conclude that we cannot utilize the most recent action 

to produce further tightening but must instead think 

about whether we should try to accelerate our seasonal 

provision of reserves through open market operations 

and similarly provide more of a cushion through the 

discount window than is contemplated in the draft 

memorandum on discount administration. Otherwise, I 

think there is the danger of really disruptive interest 

rate developments--disruptive to the financial markets 

and the economy--and that risk is too great to run.  

Unlike Mr. Robertson's view, expressed this morning, 

that he is not bothered by interest rates, I am bothered, 

and especially by their implications in terms of market

-78-



8/23/66

pressures. Last Friday in our regular Board staff 
discussion of these matters, I raised the question 
of the possibility of a financial crisis. Privately 
a staff member slipped me a not altogether facetious 
note that the probability was ranked by one staff 
member at 25 per cent, one member at 33-1/3 per cent, 
and one member at 49.9 per cent (almost a 50-50 chance).  
While I myself do not see the percentages really that 
high, the fact that they exist at all in the judgment 
of informed observers should, I think, give us cause 

for concern. Frankly I still do not believe that the 

kind of further interest rate escalation we see 

emerging--escalation that held the Board back from 

approving a discount rate change, yet was an inevitable 
result of last week's action--should be welcomed by 

us or by the administration. I am puzzled by the 

seeming naivete of the view that cost and availability 

of credit can be neatly separated and central bank 

credit so channeled as to determine which loan demands 

will be satisfied, all without putting severe pressure 

on interest rates. All of whatever experience I have 

myself had with financial markets suggests that this 

cannot be done. To the extent that banks do not meet 

commitments or satisfy borrowers' demands and these 

demands turn elsewhere, the price of money inevitably 

will go on up. The prime rate change undoubtedly 

reflected the fact that large corporate issues required 

more than 5-3/4 per cent and, without the prime rate 

increase, bank corporate customers would have come in 

for their total lines.  

All I am saying is that monetary policy may have 

produced about as tight a credit situation as we use

fully can. While it is important not to let up on the 

restraint we have achieved, I think that we have 

pushed about as far as we can at the moment, without 

the buttress of adequate fiscal restraint, and are 

now achieving all that we can hope for from monetary 

policy alone. In saying, as we all have said, I 

believe, at one time or another, that monetary policy 

cannot do it all alone, I am anxious that we now not 

try to disprove ourselves and bring about a financial 

disorder either at home or abroad. I would not attempt 

a firming of market conditions as per alternative B 

and would perhaps provide reserves more willingly than 

indicated in alternative A. I would eliminate the

-79-



8/23/66 -80

reference to supplying minimum reserves and suggest simply 
maintaining about the current state of money market 
conditions--accepting the Partee definition meaning no 
relaxation--giving full flexibility to the Manager of the 
Account and, as I have already indicated, relying on the 
continuing good sense and efforts of our discount officers 
without elaborate new rules and arrangements. I am not as 
confidently certain as Mr. Robertson that there is no case 
now for some realignment of the discount rate.  

Mr. Mitchell said that if he understood Mr. Maisel correctly, 

the latter was implying that the time might be close for a turn around.  

As he (Mr. Mitchell) looked at the pertinent table in the green book, 

it showed total loans and investments rising in July at an annual rate 

of 10.9 per cent with increases of 8.7 per cent in June, 10.2 per cent 

in 1965, and 8.7 per cent for 1966 to date. While the rate of increase 

was down in August, that was just like touching down an airplane that 

might bounce and take off again. There had not been nearly so much 

of a touching down as to accomplish the objectives the Committee had 

been striving for for a long time. It seemed to him the rate of 

expansion had to be down to the hoped-for August level for a while 

before the Committee had achieved its goals. He thought monetary 

policy was biting, and had been, but he thought it could bite a little 

more. That was why he thought some further tightening was desirable.  

Mr. Mitchell preferred alternative B of the draft directives, 

although he could live with alternative A. However, he had a change 

to propose, recognizing that it would give the Manager a considerable 

amount of leeway, probably more than he could use. His suggestion



8/23/66 -81

was that the second paragraph of the directive read: "To implement 

this policy, System open market operations until the next meeting 

of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to supplying the 

minimum amount of reserves consistent with maintaining orderly 

money market conditions and the moderation of unusual liquidity 

pressures within the banking system; provided, however, that if 

bank credit expands more rapidly than expected, operations shall 

be conducted with a view to requiring still greater reliance on 

borrowed reserves." It would then be up to the Manager to judge 

what it took to maintain orderly money market conditions and what 

it took to moderate unusual liquidity pressures. He thought the 

Manager actually had been operating close to that standard for the 

past couple of weeks. He regarded it as an adequate standard and 

thought it indicated where the Committee should stand in the next 

few weeks.  

Mr. Shepardson noted that several comments had been made 

about the naive idea that credit availability could be affected 

without a rate effect. He did not know of anyone who had that idea.  

The thing he was concerned about was that at times there had been 

more emphasis on rate than availability. The emphasis needed now 

was on reducing credit availability. While recognizing that there 

would be a rate effect, he would look for the guideline at avail

ability, rather than rate. He thought there had been rate



8/23/66 -82

adjustments in recent weeks and months that were not entirely 

compatible with the amount of reduction in availability that had 

been achieved. He did not believe anyone at the table failed to 

recognize that the degree of credit availability had an effect 

on the rate, but the question was one of where the emphasis should 

be placed in the economy of today.  

Mr. Shepardson aligned himself with those who felt the 

Committee should be pushing for some further gradual tightening.  

He would accept alternative B as originally proposed, since the 

philosophy embodied in that language reflected his thinking.  

Mr. Wayne reported that although economic activity continued 

strong in the Fifth District, the latest business survey of the 

Richmond Reserve Bank contained a few indications of a slowing 

trend. In addition to a weaker trend in residential construction, 

a variety of nondurable goods manufacturers now reported some 

decline in new orders and backlogs. Unemployment remained at very 

low levels, however, and wages were continuing upward.  

Nationally, Mr. Wayne added, the dominant question was 

whether the economy was regaining in the third quarter some of the 

momentum lost in the second. The incomplete data now available 

for July and early August were not sufficient, in his view, to provide 

a conclusive answer.  

In the policy area, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that a combina

tion of pronouncements and actions by the System was conveying to



8/23/66 -83

the banks and the financial markets the message of restraint. If 

high interest rates could be effective in curbing excess demand, 

the present general level of rates should do the job, given time.  

The critical factor now was to impose a firm restraint on the 

availability of credit. If that should produce still higher 

interest rates, they would have to be accepted. There was no 

question as to the need for continuing restraint; the only question 

was how it should be applied. An increase in the discount rate 

would be felt mainly through its announcement effects and would 

probably drive up interest rates with little effect on reserve 

availability. It was true that the discount rate was far out of 

line, but the market seemed to be accepting the new relationship.  

Through firm administration of the discount window, borrowing had 

been held to moderate levels and it was doubtful that any feasible 

increase in the discount rate would change the demand for discounts 

greatly. Consequently, he believed an increase in the discount 

rate would produce several undesirable effects without accomplishing 

anything constructive. In the current delicate situation, a sudden 

move of the wrong kind could cause real trouble.  

Mr. Wayne favored keeping the pressure about as it was and 

as it had been for the past month, which meant that reserves would 

have to be supplied, either through the discount window or in the 

open market, to offset most of the additional reserves that would



8/23/66 -84

be required next month. Alternative A of the draft directives 

expressed his views adequately.  

Mr. Clay commented that the basic problem with which the 

national economy was faced continued to be one of overexuberance, 

despite the variation among sectors of the economy. Accordingly, 

appropriate public policy required further measures of restraint, 

including further restraint through monetary policy. The Board of 

Governors recently had taken a step in that direction through an 

increase in reserve requirements on time deposits effective in 

September. Open market operations should be coordinated with that 

action so that the added restraint involved in the reserve require

ment increase was made effective.  

The Committee was faced with a number of uncertainties 

that would have to be taken into account in implementing monetary 

policy through open market operations, Mr. Clay pointed out.  

Those included the various impacts upon the commercial banks and 

the financial markets deriving from the demand for loans, tax and 

dividend payments, CD liquidation, and the higher member bank 

reserve requirements. Recognition had to be given to the conver

gence of a number of those important financial developments as 

mid-September approached and the unknown magnitude of their impact 

upon the financial system. Consequently, allowance had to be



8/23/66 -85

provided in the implementation of monetary policy to meet those 

potentialities. Alternative B of the draft directives appeared 

satisfactory to him.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that the trend of economic activity 

in the Seventh District remained essentially unchanged in July 

and early August. With the exception of the automobile industry, 

there had been no moderation of production gains by District 

manufacturing firms. Upward price pressures remained strong.  

While unemployment increases had occurred in automobile centers, 

other major District areas reported strong labor demand and 

continuation of labor shortages. Help-wanted advertising in 

Chicago area newspapers in July increased 16 per cent, signif

icantly more than the 3 per cent gain posted last year.  

According to a representative of a local steel firm, 

Mr. Scanlon said, customers did not react adversely to the recent 

steel price increase. Although notice of the price hike was given 

several days prior to the effective date of the increase, customers 

did not take advantage of the opportunity to obtain supplies then 

available at the lower prices.  

As a result of unfavorable weather during July, crop 

prospects in the Seventh District had been revised downward. Corn 

production was now expected to be below last year's level in 

Illinois and Indiana. Farmers might defer the marketing of 1966



8/23/66 -86

grain crops since the outlook was for strong prices. Bankers had 

noted that the seasonal deposit increase related to the harvest 

might be somewhat less than originally expected.  

Mortgage terms had continued to firm in the Seventh 

District. Bank loan figures continued to reflect heavy credit 

demands by business, and bankers' statements in connection with 

the recent prime rate boost indicated that they anticipated even 

stronger demands through the fall. Since midyear the growth in 

business loans had been well above the experience in other recent 

years, with the Seventh District relatively stronger than the nation 

as a whole. The major Chicago banks reported that they were following 

restrictive loan policies; few commitments for term loans were 

being made. To a considerable extent, the higher volume of business 

loans had been offset by liquidation of other types of loans, 

probably reflecting tighter loan policies. In addition, there had 

been a marked decline in holdings of both U.S. and municipal secu

rities in the past few weeks. While those developments had reduced 

the rate of growth in over-all bank credit, they had also reduced 

liquidity further.  

The major Chicago banks showed an improved basic reserve 

position compared with a month ago. That was partly due to sales 

of securities but also reflected their acquisition of a sizable 

amount of CD money earlier this month and an even larger increase



8/23/66 -87

in other borrowings. Nevertheless, those funds were short-term 

and there was considerable apprehension as to how the banks would 

meet CD maturities as well as meet the customer loan demand they 

expected.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that preliminary estimates indicated 

some recent slowing in the growth of most monetary and credit 

measures after sharp increases in July. It appeared to him that 

it would be appropriate to maintain the more moderate rate of 

monetary and credit expansion in coming weeks. The settling of 

the airline strike and the increase in reserve requirements 

effective mid-September should help to curb any tendency for more 

than seasonal expansion in adjusted required reserves. If those 

conditions could be achieved within the existing degree of reserve 

pressure, he would recommend such a course. However, if continued 

slower reserve expansion required greater reserve pressure, he 

would favor moves to bring about that condition.  

Mr. Scanlon felt that for economic reasons the discount 

rate should be raised. If the discount rate were brought more in 

line with market rates, the System would be in a position to obtain 

the announcement effect of large and prompt rate reductions if and 

when they should prove desirable. That did not mean that he fore

saw a downturn--quite the opposite. He believed the longer one 

operated with a rate disparity and the wider it developed, the



8/23/66

more difficult it would become to find the "right time" for a 

change. He favored alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Galusha submitted the following statement for inclusion 

in the record: 

Ninth District conditions fairly well parallel those 
set forth in the green book, with these exceptions: 

In the main, the District's experience in the second 
quarter, and continuing into the third, is somewhat more 
bullish than that of the nation. Retail sales, for 
example, rose strongly in the District during the second 
quarter, while there was a distinct slow-down at the 
national level.  

Data for June and July indicate a strong comeback in 
the industrial sector from the April-May pause. Impressive 
gains were recorded in the mining industry, including metal 
mining and petroleum, and continued expansion of taconite 
production. Of the 15,950,000 gross tons of annual taconite 
capacity under construction on June 21, all but 750,000 tons 
were located in the Ninth District, primarily in Minnesota, 
with one large development in the Upper Peninsula of 
Michigan.  

Agricultural conditions continue generally good in the 
District, with the exception of southwestern Montana, which 
is suffering from a severe drought, and areas of North 
Dakota which are suffering from too much rain during the 
critical period of wheat harvest. There is little expecta
tion that livestock prices will depart from 1965 levels to 
any greater extent than presently prevail. Grain marketings 
are uncertain at this point, partly for the reason mentioned 
earlier, and partly because of an indicated tendency on the 
part of farmers to hold grain for continued strengthening 
of price. Because of this strengthening of price, however, 
there is reason for the banking community to expect pressure 
if there is a reversal of current farmer attitudes, whether 
caused by a change in market expectations or crop damage, 
which would affect its storage ability.  

The general picture is one of high cash farm receipts, 
which in turn will mean a continued high level of consumer 
demand.  

The need for an increase in monetary restraint continues 
on balance. Wage settlements being made this summer, and

-88-



8/23/66

the outcome of negotiations which will continue through 
the next twelve months, are of a pattern. What evidence 
of easing has occurred in some areas of the economy is 
at least offset by continued exuberance in other parts.  
The Vietnam requirements are certain to continue to 
accelerate, particularly in the light of the most recent 
developments in China. It might be argued that while 
monetary policy has not been particularly effective in 
curbing the present inflation--the current issue of the 
Economist having likened it in terms of influence to 
sun spots--it still is the only weapon being used.  
Protestations of the banking industry notwithstanding, 
one is left with a feeling that banks are meeting most 
reasonable credit requests, and the term "reasonable" 
is liberally construed.  

The most compelling reason for a further increase 
in monetary restraint, including an increase in the 
discount rate in the near future, would be to free the 
System from the position of technical imbalance with 
market rates.  

These arguments have been advanced with full 
knowledge that there are political constraints which 
may be thought persuasive against such an action now, 
plus the industry pressure that would result from a 
further increase in open market rates if Requlation Q 
is not changed. There is the further argument advanced 
by one of my colleagues that the current degree of 
monetary restraint is so far from the average experience 
of the last decade and a half that our quantitative 
estimates of its impact may be quite poor. It may be 
that under these circumstances the rate of inflation, 
which at present is still of a modest order by world 
standards, is a price that may have to be paid. However, 
I am not persuaded that the case for greater monetary 
restraint has been adequately defeated.  

Mr. Galusha said he could accept either of the alternative 

draft directives. This was a period when flexibility of operations 

would be needed, but at least the present degree of tautness should 

be preserved. It seemed to him the discount rate was in a ridiculous 

position and there would have to be a technical adjustment. There

-89-



8/23/66 -90

was little reason to believe that market rates were going to come 

down very fast, and the longer the disparity existed the more 

difficult it was going to be to change the discount rate.  

Mr. Swan commented that although Twelfth District aero

space firms reported vigorous expansion in employment for the 

second month in a row, total nonagricultural employment in the 

Pacific Coast States remained about the same in July as in June.  

With a decline in farm employment, the rate of unemployment rose 

in July to 4.8 per cent, from 4.6 per cent in June.  

On the financial side, Mr. Swan said that in the four weeks 

ended August 10, total credit at weekly reporting banks declined 

more than a year earlier, but by about the same relative amount as 

elsewhere. The decline in business loans was much greater than a 

year earlier, and contrasted with an increase in the same period 

this year at weekly reporting banks elsewhere in the U.S. Large 

negotiable CD's rose 6 per cent in the period, in contrast to a 

decline of .6 per cent at weekly reporting banks outside the 

District. However, time deposits of States and political subdivi

sions declined; that was the one area where there was considerable 

feeling at major banks that rate increases would be necessary to 

hold the deposits. The prime competition was from the Treasury 

bill market rather than agency obligations. There was still room 

to raise the rates on that sort of time deposits, and presumably 

that would be done.



8/23/66 -91

Looking back over the last four weeks, Mr. Swan was struck 

by the fact that the Committee's directive a month ago referred 

to "maintaining about the current state of net reserve availability 

and related money market conditions." Maybe net reserve avail

ability was at the lower end of the range in subsequent weeks, but 

certainly not related money market conditions. From the August 

figures, it appeared that the changes in total reserves, required 

reserves, and bank credit were somewhat less liberal than had been 

expected. In view of those developments, the substantially increased 

rate structure, and the market uncertainties that existed, it seemed 

to him the Committee should not take further action to tighten 

irrespective of market forces. Instead, he would consider it 

desirable to maintain about the present market conditions, recog

nizing that they were tighter now than a month ago. If credit 

demands were stronger than expected, which he translated into the 

6 per cent figure mentioned by Mr. Partee, then the Committee should 

permit further tightening. Otherwise, he would neither ease nor 

tighten. In trying to find some measure to relate that to, he had 

somewhat the same feeling he assumed was in the minds of the staff 

when they dropped the reference to net reserve availability; namely, 

that the latter could not be used very well in view of the prospect 

of substantially increased borrowing. If this occurred, he would



8/23/66 -92

expect some increase in net borrowed reserves, but that would be 

hard to interpret in terms of money market conditions.  

While he had been thinking in terms of alternative A of 

the draft directives, Mr. Swan welcomed Mr. Mitchell's language.  

He thought it was an improvement over either of the draft 

alternatives, so he would support that sort of directive if the 

reference to bank credit expanding more rapidly than expected 

tied into the 6 per cent projection. He believed that a decision 

on the question of a discount rate increase could not be delayed 

much longer. He would hope it would not be necessary to wait 

until substantial borrowings were already on the books. The 

executive committee of the Board of Directors of the San Francisco 

Bank took no action to increase the rate at its last meeting, but 

expressed much the same kind of concern that had been mentioned 

by Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Irons said conditions in the Eleventh District were 

very strong, probably reflecting some of the same factors being 

reflected nationally. Nationally the situation was one of strong 

inflationary pressures, in his judgment, and called for no lessening 

in the degree of restraint that the Committee had been attempting 

to achieve. It seemed to him that monetary policy had been 

effective recently in influencing the attitude of banks. As to 

the uncertainties associated with the anticipated mid-September



8/23/66 -93

runoff of CD's, that might be something like the situation that 

was feared with respect to savings deposits a month or so ago; 

the situation might turn out to be not as bad as expected, even 

though significant strains might affect banks and markets.  

In view of the illiquidity of banks and the effect of 

the change in reserve requirements, Mr. Irons felt that a reason 

was indicated for trying to maintain for a time about the same 

degree of tightness that had been experienced in the market up to 

this point. He had had in mind that he would favor alternative A 

of the draft directives for the period ahead, but he liked the 

modification offered by Mr. Mitchell because it seemed to reflect 

what the Committee was really trying to do. The Committee was 

trying to get all the restraint it could in the market, but at 

the same time to maintain orderly conditions. Mr. Mitchell's 

modification pointed that up clearly. If what the Committee was 

trying to achieve could be achieved, well and good. If not, then 

the Committee should not force matters, with money market conditions 

as they were and with the uncertainties that loomed ahead around 

mid-September.  

Mr. Robertson withdrew from the meeting at this point.  

Mr. Ellis said that within the framework of generally high 

and rising economic activity in New England, three aspects might 

be highlighted. First, District mutual savings banks reported



8/23/66 -94

downward changes in July deposit balances for the first time in 

many years. Even though new July deposits were up 24 per cent 

and interest credits were up 19 per cent compared with July 1965, 

withdrawals were up an even greater 47 per cent. The net change 

was a .06 per cent decline. Second, the District's member banks 

continued to gain savings and other time deposits at rates 

substantially above the national average. Third, the region was 

not experiencing a slow-down in construction, not even residential 

construction. New England total construction contracts in June 

rose 45 per cent above June 1965. For the first six months the 

total stood 34 per cent above the same six months in 1965.  

Residential contracts in June exceeded June 1965 by 6 per cent, 

and the first six months showed a 9 per cent year-to-year gain.  

June building permits in Massachusetts were up 20 per cent from 

last year, for a six-month cumulative gain of 19 per cent.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said it was fairly 

evident that the economy remained tilted toward inflation. Demand 

pressures of Government expenditures, capital outlays, and probable 

expansion in consumer spending indicated the likelihood of a further 

trend in that direction in the fall. To the cost pressures of wage 

settlements in excess of productivity gains were added the escalation 

of wages to match cost of living increases. Credit creation continued 

excessive, especially after the long period of expansion. The



8/23/66 -95

objective as long ago as last December was to slow credit creation, 

but the record showed acceleration in business loans, total loans, 

total credit, and reserves. There had been three weeks now in 

which the rate of growth seemed less than expected, but, as 

Mr. Mitchell had said, one touchdown does not make a safe landing.  

He expected that demands ahead in the fall were going to produce 

another take-off in the loan category.  

Mr. Ellis agreed with Mr. Brimmer's analysis that the 

Committee's posture should be one of gradual tightening. It was 

simply a question of the next step, and his answer to that question 

rested on two convictions. First, he felt that the September 

"crisis" would turn out to be quite manageable without special 

programs to soften the impact of expected developments. He recalled 

the special efforts to soften the July "crisis" that was supposed 

to occur at savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks.  

Actually, the period passed without great strain. When banks could 

foresee and plan ahead, they did so. The principal potential 

problems were faced by large sophisticated banks. CD deposits were 

not going to disappear altogether, although they might shift in 

form and location. The existing mechanism of the discount window 

would provide whatever cushion was needed. His second conviction 

was that the Committee should continue to focus its attention on 

aggregate reserve availability, and its cost, rather than attempt



8/23/66 -96

to tailor a program that sought to allocate credit by categories, 

at some risk of lessened attention to changes in the aggregates.  

Mr. Ellis said those convictions led him to suggest, as 

a first point, that the Committee should tighten the net borrowed 

reserve target another notch, by perhaps $50 or $100 million.  

Net borrowed reserves had averaged $400 million the past three 

weeks, and he would suggest that the target be moved to $500 

million, plus or minus $50 million. He suggested this target 

knowing that the Committee would meet again only a few business 

days after the effective date of the reserve requirement change.  

It could well postpone until that time an appraisal of how much 

the effect on reserves should be offset. If borrowings at the 

discount window rose substantially above the $800 million average 

of the past several periods, he would add the excess to the net 

borrowed reserve target. That would provide a cushioning reserve 

to those banks that needed it, while not losing the effect of 

some general tightening on other banks. Banks had already been 

advised that the window would be available for distress cases.  

If that course were followed, Mr. Ellis said, he would 

expect market rates to rise if credit demands turned out to be 

as excessive as projected by bankers to whom he had talked.  

Having permitted the rate of bank credit expansion that it had 

since December, the Committee could hardly expect to accelerate



8/23/66 -97

credit growth enough to forestall further rate increases this fall 

if the demand continued to expand as much as he had been told it 

was going to expand. Even the 6 per cent projected rate of credit 

growth associated with the "no change" alternative directive would 

not insure rate stability.  

If action such as he had described were taken, Mr. Ellis 

continued, he would reinforce it by lifting the discount rate 

from 4-1/2 per cent to 5-1/2 per cent when practicable. Inter

nationally, that would confirm the System's intention to fight 

inflation, and it would confirm that the discount rate was still 

a tool of monetary policy. It would buttress reliance on the 

window without attracting less urgent borrowing seeking to take 

advantage of the present bargain rate. It would clear the air 

of uncertainty as to whether or when the discount rate would be 

changed. Further, the longer the System waited to move the more 

difficult it would be to change the rate.  

Mr. Ellis said he welcomed the Manager's advice that he 

proposed to make repurchase agreements at rates above the discount 

rate. The Manager knew, of course, that the nonbank dealers were 

going to protest and charge discrimination.  

As to the directive, Mr. Ellis said that alternative B was 

his choice. While he could support Mr. Mitchell's intent, he



8/23/66 -98

rejected his language as really constituting a "no change" directive.  

He preferred a directive that called for gradual firming.  

Mr. Hayes said it was his impression that the differences 

expressed in the go-around were not enormous. While he would not 

want to minimize them too much, they appeared to represent primarily 

differences in shading, both in interpreting where things had been 

going on the credit side recently and in interpreting the degree 

of danger that might be faced in financial markets and the risk for 

the near-term of rising rates. But the differences seemed rather 

marginal, as exemplified by the fact that several persons had said 

that either of the alternative draft directives was acceptable to 

them. It appeared to him from his tally that the preferences were 

very close, with possibly a little shading toward alternative B.  

Perhaps, however, Mr. Mitchell's proposal represented a compromise 

solution that would be generally satisfactory.  

Mr. Sherman said Mr. Robertson had stated before he left 

the meeting that Mr. Mitchell's proposed language would be acceptable 

to him.  

After the Secretary had read Mr. Mitchell's proposed language, 

Mr. Hayes said he was not quite clear as to what the proviso clause 

meant in view of the preceding language to the effect that a minimum 

of reserves was to be provided consistent with maintaining orderly 

conditions and avoiding unusual liquidity pressures.



8/23/66

Mr. Mitchell said it was his thinking that the Manager 

would be expected to "skate close to the edge" if the credit proxy 

seemed to be going up faster than expected. He thought that in 

the light of today's discussion the Manager knew that the Committee 

wanted to achieve a little firming if it could do so.  

Mr. Holmes said he assumed that what was wanted was as 

much restraint as could be achieved without leading to a financial 

crisis. It was his understanding that a 6 per cent rate of growth 

in the credit proxy would be acceptable to those at the table. That 

was what was presently expected for September, but it might turn out 

to be far different. If it did turn out different and the expansion 

was greater than 6 per cent, then he would move toward deeper net 

borrowed reserves and tighter money market conditions, to the extent, 

however, that there were no liquidity pressures such as to require 

attention.  

Mr. Hayes commented that the Manager evidently felt that 

the proviso clause would not prevent his paying adequate attention 

to orderly market conditions and Mr. Holmes replied that he thought 

it would not. As he understood it, the reference to liquidity 

pressures carried through the whole flavor of the directive. He 

added that he would "skate a little closer to the edge" if credit 

expansion rose sharply.

-99-



8/23/66 -100

Mr. Ellis said he did not want it on record that everyone 

around the table accepted a 6 per cent rate of credit growth for 

September. Such a rate was not acceptable to him. Mr. Shepardson 

agreed.  

Mr. Hayes said he felt sure there were differences of 

opinion on the exact figure, but something on that order was what 

he thought people had in mind as the consensus.  

Mr. Bopp suggested that the policy record entry for today's 

meeting should make clear that that did not mean that the Committee 

was prepared to tolerate disorderly conditions if bank credit expanded 

more than anticipated.  

Mr. Brimmer recalled that he had expressed a rather strong 

preference for alternative B. He hesitated to dissent from the 

consensus, but he would like the record to show that he was not 

happy about the prospect of a 6 per cent increase. If the increase 

fell short of that figure, he would feel better, and he would 

encourage the Manager to "skate a little closer to the edge." He 

was unhappy that the word "firming" had been lost from the directive.  

Mr. Daane said he preferred alternative A to alternative B, 

even in the amended version, but he would not record a dissent from 

the directive.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise



8/23/66

directed by the Committee, to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity is expanding more rapidly than in the second 
quarter, despite further weakening in residential con
struction. Recent wage and price developments suggest 
that inflationary pressures are becoming more intense.  
Credit demands continue strong, financial markets have 
tightened further, and interest rates have risen sub
stantially in an atmosphere of great uncertainty. The 
balance of payments continues to reflect a sizable under
lying deficit. In this situation, it is the Federal Open 
Market Committee's policy to resist inflationary pressures 
and to strengthen efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments, by restricting the 
growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 

supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to supplying the minimum amount 
of reserves consistent with the maintenance of orderly 
money market conditions and the moderation of unusual 
liquidity pressures; provided, however, that if bank 
credit expands more rapidly than expected, operations 
shall be conducted with a view to seeking still greater 
reliance on borrowed reserves.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, September 13, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-101-



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 22, 1966.  

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on August 23, 1966.  

First paragraph 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is 
expanding more rapidly than in the second quarter, despite further 
weakening in residential construction. Recent wage and price 
developments suggest that inflationary pressures are becoming more 
intense. Credit demands continue strong, financial markets have 
tightened further, and interest rates have risen substantially.  
The balance of payments continues to reflect a sizable underlying 
deficit. In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Com
mittee's policy to resist inflationary pressures and to strengthen 
efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 
of payments, by restricting the growth in the reserve base, bank 
credit, and the money supply.  

Second paragraph 

Alternative A (no change, with qualification) 

To implement this policy, while taking account of potential 
liquidity pressures within the banking system, System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shallbe conducted 
with a view to supplying the minimum amount of reserves consistent 

with maintenance of the current state of money market conditions; 

provided, however, that if bank credit expands more rapidly than 

expected, operations shall be conducted with a view to requiring 

greater reliance on borrowed reserves.  

Alternative B (firming, with qualification) 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to supplying the minimum amount of reserves consistent with 

attaining a gradual firming of money market conditions, except as 

changes may be needed to moderate unusual liquidity pressures 

within the banking system; provided, however, that if bank credit 

expands more rapidly than expected, operations shall be conducted 

with a view to requiring still greater reliance on borrowed 
reserves.


