









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 4, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 

Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Messrs. Eastburn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



10/4/66 -2

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Ratchford, Taylor, 
Baughman, Jones, and Craven, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, 
Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on August 23 and September 13, 
1966, were approved.  

Under date of September 16, 1966, there had been distributed 

to the members of the Federal Open Market Committee copies of the 

report of audit of the System Open Market Account and of the report 

of audit of foreign currency transactions, both made by the Board's 

Division of Examinations as at the close of business May 13, 1966, 

and submitted by the Chief Federal Reserve Examiner under date of 

June 17, 1966. Copies of these reports have been placed in the 

files of the Committee.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the audit reports 

were accepted.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions 

and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign



10/4/66

currencies for the period September 13 through 28, 1966, and a 

supplemental report for September 29 through October 3, 1966.  

Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the 

Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this 

week. The Stabilization Fund now had about $100 million of gold 

on hand, with prospective sales during the month of October of 

roughly $75 million. On the London gold market, buying pressure 

was consistently heavy during September and the original $270 

million in the gold pool was further depleted by another $54 million, 

to no more than $12 million. As the Committee would recall, a 

supplement of $50 million to the gold pool had been negotiated 

at the September Basle meeting, and if necessary another $50 million 

could probably be secured although that might well be the end of 

the line. While some slackening in the demand for gold might be 

seen now that the Fund and Bank meetings were over, he continued 

to think that the gold market constituted the single most dangerous 

threat to the dollar.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, there had 

been a gradual improvement in confidence in sterling since the 

announcement of the increase in the swap lines on September 13.  

During the first 13 days of September the British were still



10/4/66 -4

running a sizable deficit which, in the absence of the increase 

in the swap network, would probably have reached major proportions 

during the second half of the month. The turn in the tide over 

the past two weeks had enabled the Bank of England to announce 

this morning a reserve increase for the month of three million 

pounds, while also indicating that no net recourse to central 

bank credit was made during the month. As the Committee would 

recall, the Bank of England had outstanding on August 31 $625 

million of overnight money, of which $450 million was provided 

by the Treasury and Federal Reserve and $175 million by certain 

foreign central banks. The position at the end of September was 

somewhat improved although still vulnerable. The overnight money 

component had been reduced from $625 million to $375 million, 

comprised of $200 million from foreign central banks and $175 

million from the Treasury. The remaining gap of $250 million had 

been covered by a $150 million drawing on the agreement negotiated 

in Basle last June providing for financing of reductions in the 

sterling balances, while another drawing of $100 million of three

month money was made on the Federal Reserve. It was to be hoped 

that today's announcement that the reserve drain was stemmed 

during September, which had been anticipated to some extent in 

the market, would further restore market confidence. Yesterday, 

the Bank of England took in more than $30 million and this morning



10/4/66 -5

they had already taken in an additional $50 million, so the 

signs were accumulating of a return of confidence. He would 

hope to see a string of reserve increases over the weeks to 

come.  

The other major development in exchange markets, 

Mr. Coombs observed, had been the gyrations of the French franc, 

which on several days slipped below par. The Bank of France did 

not seem to be making any special effort to check the rate move

ments and, as far as he could tell, the recent selling pressure 

on the franc seemed mainly attributable to such short-term 

phenomena as money market pressures, an adverse tourist balance, 

and similar temporary developments. On the other hand, he 

thought it possible that there might be some swing of the leads 

and lags against the French franc. The French had benefited 

enormously over the years from the view that the French franc 

could not possibly be devalued, so that importers did not find 

it necessary to cover their dollar requirements. That situation 

might now be turning as the markets reappraised the long-term 

prospects for the currency of a country which had increasingly 

cut itself off from the cooperative arrangements developed among 

the other major industrial countries.  

Mr. Mitchell asked what Mr. Coombs thought was the effect 

on the British position of the pull-back of Euro-dollar funds 

through foreign branches of U.S. banks.



10/4/66

Mr. Coombs replied that the effect had definitely been 

adverse for two or three months, although he did not know the 

extent to which it had resulted in British reserve losses. At 

the same time, the pressures exerted on sterling by the opera

tions of American banks had simultaneously been exerted on all 

major continental currencies. He would assume that the pull

back of funds was an important factor in the third-quarter surplus 

in the official settlements balance of the U.S. It also had 

important implications for the U.S. gold stock.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked whether Mr. Coombs thought the 

British would experience difficulties if U.S. banks continued, 

for the next four or five months, to draw in funds through their 

branches at the recent rate.  

Mr. Coombs replied that such a development undoubtedly 

would slow the pace of the British recovery. His own impression 

was that the pull had been a little too strong in some periods 

recently, but if it were stopped entirely the loss to the U.S.  

would be greater than the gain to the British.  

Mr. Shepardson asked whether a significant share of the 

funds being drawn in through U.S. bank branches was coming from 

the continent.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he thought the main pressure 

exerted on sterling by the pull-back had occurred in July and



10/4/66 -7

August, and that such pressure had lessened in September. He 

would be surprised if at present as much as 20 per cent of the 

funds were coming from the U.K.; the main pull now appeared to 

be from the continent.  

In reply to another question by Mr. Shepardson, 

Mr. Coombs said he did not think much of the reflow could be 

attributed to the issuance of certificates of deposit in 

London by American banks. It was his understanding that the 

volume of such certificates outstanding was not large.  

Mr. Daane asked whether much of the money being drawn 

in was likely to flow out again quickly if there was a change 

in international interest rate relationships. In other words, 

how "hot" were the funds being drawn in? 

Mr. Coombs responded that the funds seemed to be fairly 

hot money. In a sense, the U.S. was buying protection in the 

short run, and there might have to be an accounting if cir

cumstances changed. On balance, however, he thought it would 

be inadvisable to do anything at present to change those flows 

quickly. It was not possible to say where the money would go 

if it was not drawn to New York, and as long as the pull-back 

was not overdone the British should get by.  

Mr. Brimmer remarked that he understood Mr. Solomon 

planned to comment on the subject in some detail in his remarks



10/4/66 -8

later in the meeting. The pull-back of funds had domestic as 

well as international implications, and the Board had been 

giving the subject a good deal of consideration recently. The 

Committee might want to return to it after hearing Mr. Solomon's 

observations.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the members might offer 

any comments they had on the subject in the course of the go

around.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the System open market trans
actions in foreign currencies during 
the period September 13 through 
October 3, 1966, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the original $450 million standby 

swap arrangement with the Bank of Italy--not including the $150 

million increase negotiated recently--would mature October 20, 

1966. He recommended renewal of the swap arrangement at this 

time for another twelve-month period. He would expect that in 

March, when the end of the term of the $150 million increase was 

reached, the two arrangements could be combined.  

Renewal of the $450 million swap 
arrangement with the Bank of Italy for 
a term of twelve months was approved.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the $100 million standby swap with 

the Bank of France would mature on November 10, 1966. He rec

ommended its renewal for another three-month period.



10/4/66 -9

Renewal of the $100 million swap 
arrangement with the Bank of France for 
a term of three months was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that two three-month drawings by 

the Bank of England under its swap line with the System would reach 

maturity soon--a $100 million drawing maturing October 21, 1966, 

and a $50 million drawing maturing October 28, 1966. He recommended 

renewal of both for further periods of three months if the Bank of 

England so requested. That would be a first renewal for the $100 

million drawing, and a second renewal for the $50 million drawing.  

Renewal of the two drawings by 
the Bank of England was noted without 
objection.  

Mr. Coombs noted that four three-month drawings by the 

System would be reaching maturity soon. They were two drawings 

on the Netherlands Bank, of $30 million and $25 million, maturing 

October 21 and November 7, 1966, respectively; a $25 million 

drawing on the Swiss National Bank maturing October 25, 1966; and 

a $25 million drawing on the Bank for International Settlements, 

also maturing October 25, 1966. He recommended renewal of the 

four drawings for further periods of three months, if necessary.  

All would be first renewals.  

Renewal of the four drawings, as 

recommended by Mr. Coombs, was noted 

without objection.



10/4/66

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S. Gov

ernment securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

September 13 through 28, 1966, and a supplemental report for 

September 29 through October 3, 1966. Copies of both reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

The money and bond markets have been subjected 
to wide swings in expectations since the Committee 
last met. At the moment the cloud of excessive gloom 
and pessimism that hung over the financial markets has 
for the time being lifted and a fairly confident 
atmosphere prevails--at least temporarily.  

There are a number of factors that underlie this 
change in sentiment.  

First, there is the growing market conviction 
that fiscal policy measures in addition to those 
announced on September 8 will be forthcoming in the 
near future to deal with the pressures on the economy-
particularly the pressures stemming from the growing 
cost of the Vietnamese war. Rumors and the announcement 
of fiscal action had already had an impact on the bond 
market at the time of the last Committee meeting, but 
the additional discussion since that time has buoyed 
the market significantly further.  

Second, international developments have generally 
tended to give the market heart. There has been a 
growing feeling that prospects for negotiation in 
Vietnam have improved. The lack of serious controversy 
at the annual meetings of the international monetary 
institutions, the feeling that the French seem to have 
isolated themselves, and the apparently better outlook 
for sterling have also been plus factors.  

Third, despite continuing price pressures, the 
market has interpreted recent economic developments

-10-



10/4/66

as on balance indicative of some relaxation of pressure 
on the economy. And while heavy demands in the capital 
markets are still anticipated, there is not the same 
kind of rush to get on the financing schedule that was 
present in August, and the Administration's program of 
limiting the demands of Government agencies has reduced 
an important source of pressure in the markets. In 
this atmosphere, municipal and corporate underwriters 
have become more confident in performing their under
writing functions.  

Finally, the financial markets--after uncertainty 
had neared a crescendo over the tax date--have become 
somewhat less apprehensive about the severity of 
Federal Reserve intentions with respect to monetary 
policy, although there is still a great deal of 
confusion about the proper interpretation of current 
discount window policy. The tax date was passed with
out the dire consequences that many had predicted.  

The CD runoff was large, but not as massive as had 

been feared, partly because a large amount of money 
became available as a result of a temporary investment 

of funds arising out of the financing of a corporate 
merger. As the Treasury rebuilt its tax and loan 
account balances, pressure on the money center banks 
relaxed somewhat and this contributed to a more 

comfortable tone in the money market. The relatively 

low net borrowed reserve figures published for the 
week ending September 21, the lower Federal funds 

rate prevailing throughout much of the period, and 

the prompt action by the System in conjunction with 

the FDIC and the Home Loan Bank Board on consumer CD 

rates, led to a feeling that the System might be paying 

more attention to the high short-term interest rates 

that had emerged. And this feeling was not entirely 

dispelled by the high net borrowed reserve figures 

published for the week ending September 28.  

How long this atmosphere will last is, as usual, 

problematical. The underlying facts of the current 

economic and financial situation have not changed as 

much as expectations, and the markets have probably 

discounted developments that have yet to appear. Unless 

loan demand falls short of current expectations, there 

should be, as the blue book 1/ suggests, continued 

pressure on rates, particularly as the Treasury's actual 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 

for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-11-



10/4/66

moves to raise the cash it needs before the year-end 
unfold. While the near-disorderly atmosphere that 
prevailed in the markets in late August and the heavy 
pressure on short-term rates that prevailed around the 
tax date may not be duplicated, the markets remain 
susceptible to new developments and to new expectations 
about the future course of monetary and fiscal policy.  

Short-term interest rates reached new highs early 
in the period, with three- and six-month Treasury bills 
reaching records of 5.59 and 6.04 per cent, respectively, 
in the Treasury bill auction of September 19--a full 
1/2 per cent above their end of August levels. In the 
changed atmosphere noted earlier, however, a strong 
demand for Treasury bills emerged with rates moving 
sharply downward again as dealers' positions were 
substantially reduced. By last Friday key rates were 
10-20 basis points below their level at the time of 
the previous meeting. In yesterday's uneventful auction 
average issuing rates for the new three- and six-month 
bills were set at 5.41 and 5.67 per cent, respectively.  

System open market operations both were condi
tioned by market developments and the shifting atmosphere 
that prevailed during the period and, to some extent, 
at least, influenced these developments. The week of 
September 21 was particularly complicated by a jittery 
Treasury bill market, tax date churning, and market 
fears of a still tougher monetary policy. In addition, 
country banks exhibited a tendency to build up their 
excess reserves more than normally during the first 
week of their statement period, thus immobilizing 
reserves that were available in the banking system.  
In order to avoid adding to the market's misapprehen
siveness the System took only modest action to absorb 
reserves and net borrowed reserves were permitted to 
run at a low level. This approach to open market 
operations involved a risk that the market might 
conclude that the System had eased policy, but the 
logic of the approach was fortified by the behavior 
of the credit proxy, which at that time indicated that 
bank credit in September might decline at an average 

annual rate of about 4 per cent. In the following week, 
generally comfortable conditions prevailed in the money 
market as the previously built-up country bank excess 
reserves came into play, and the net borrowed reserve 
figure rose to its highest level during this period of

-12-



10/4/66

restraint. Hopefully, one result of the wide swing in 
net borrowed reserve figures--from $187 million to $568 
million--will be to deemphasize their importance in the 
minds of market participants and analysts as a single 
indicator of monetary policy intentions.  

It should be noted that required reserves and the 
credit proxy consistently fell below expectations 
during the period since the Committee last met. The 
credit proxy for September now appears to have risen 
only slightly after taking account of foreign branch 
balances at major U.S. banks, despite a new seasonal 
adjustment that tends to make the September figures 
look stronger than the old seasonal would. I believe 
we should continue to be cautious about overinterpreting 
short-run changes in the aggregates, particularly since 
it appears probable that seasonal adjustment patterns 
may be in a period of radical change. As the blue book 
indicates, the Board staff is now projecting a 5-6 per 
cent increase in the credit proxy over the month of 
October, with the pattern involving substantially 
higher growth by the end of the month compared with 
the end of September. New York Reserve Bank estimates 
involve a somewhat slower growth on average but about 
the same level at the end of the month.  

Treasury financing operations will get underway 
again very shortly. An announcement of a cash offering 
of $3 to $3.5 billion tax anticipation bills is expected 
later this week, with the auction likely on October 13 
and payment a week later. Toward the end of the month 
the Treasury will announce the terms of its November 
refunding, which probably will be utilized to raise 
some new money, with the possibility of a combined 
offering of short- and intermediate-term issues.  

Mr. Wayne asked if Mr. Holmes would elaborate on his comment 

about a temporary investment in CD's resulting from a corporate 

merger.  

Mr. Holmes said that about $1/2 billion had been invested 

in CD's in mid-September in connection with the merger of an oil 

and coal company. Roughly half of that sum had been borrowed from

-13-



10/4/66 -14

banks and half from insurance companies. The CD's would mature 

in mid-October, and while the eventual disposition of the funds 

was uncertain presumably they would be spread around somewhere 

in the banking system.  

Mr. Mitchell asked what Mr. Holmes expected with regard 

to October run-offs of CD's.  

Mr. Holmes replied that from conversations with New York 

banks the picture seemed to be mixed. Some banks were optimistic 

about replacing a large percentage of their maturing certificates, 

particularly now that the level of bill rates had declined. Others 

expected losses of as much as one-half of their maturities.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that despite the concern of some banks 

the general feeling seemed to be better now than it had been a 

month ago, and Mr. Holmes agreed.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period September 13 through 
October 3, 1966, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then noted that legislation enacted since 

the preceding meeting of the Committee gave the System authority 

to engage in open market operations in securities that were direct 

obligations of U.S. agencies or were guaranteed by such agencies, 

and that a staff memorandum concerning such operations, dated



10/4/66 -15

October 3, 1966, had been distributed. (A copy of the memorandum 

referred to has been placed in the Committee's files.) He 

thought some members of the Committee might be skeptical about 

the desirability of undertaking outright transactions in agency 

issues at this time. The Committee certainly would want to give 

careful consideration to that question, and also to the question 

of authorizing repurchase agreements against agency issues. The 

Chairman suggested that the Committee plan on considering the 

subject at its next meeting, after the members had had an opportu

nity to study the memorandum. No objections were raised to the 

Chairman's suggestion.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement on economic 

conditions: 

Every once in a while almost any economist would 
give his eye teeth for just another couple of months' 
figures to help clarify what is going on. For me, 
this is such an occasion. Economic expansion has 
proceeded at a high rate through the summer and into 
the fall. Our preliminary estimates indicate a $14 
billion rise in GNP for the third quarter, although 
about half of this appears due to higher prices, and 
the most probable outlook is for a similarly large 
rise in the fourth quarter of the year. At the same 
time, however, the performance of the stock market



10/4/66

and other attitudinal indices seems to evidence a 
deterioration in business and public sentiment. This, 
along with more fundamental indications of economic 
imbalance, raises growing questions about the prospects 
for continuing vigorous expansion, looking even a rela
tively few months further ahead.  

One of the major questions in my mind concerns the 

behavior of inventories. Clearly there has been a 

substantial acceleration in the pace of accumulation, 

with monthly additions to manufacturers' stocks increas

ing from around $600 million in the early months of the 

year to more than $1 billion in both July and August.  

The latter represents an 18 per cent annual growth rate 

and contrasts with no gain recently in shipments, so 

that stock-sales ratios have increased abruptly.  

It is hard to believe that manufacturers generally 

planned or desired this outcome, and in fact the expansion 

in inventories this year has consistently exceeded that 

indicated by Department of Commerce anticipations surveys.  

In order to keep to the year-end level projected by the 

latest survey, inventory accumulation would now have to 

drop to a 6 per cent annual rate. This seems exceedingly 

unlikely but, by the same token, a continued buildup 

well above desired rates sooner or later would lead to 

downward adjustments in output, with consequent implications 

for income payments and consumption.  

The underlying strength of consumer demand is in 

its own right a question mark at present. Retail sales 

have rebounded well from their spring setback, which 

was mainly due to lower auto sales, but the early weeks 

of September were a bit weaker, due again to the auto 

market. There has not been time yet to test reception 

of the 1967 models, of course, so that September may be 

a poor indicator of prospects.  

The latest University of Michigan survey reports 

that consumer plans to buy cars and home goods are fully 

as strong as a year ago. But that survey also shows a 

further decline in its composite index of consumer 

attitudes, reflecting mainly apprehension about rising 

prices, higher interest rates, and the possibility of 

a tax increase. In fact, the drop in the index this 

year has been just as sharp as it was preceding the 

1957-58 recession. I don't have a great deal of 

confidence in the predictive value of such a measure.  

But to the extent that it may be significant one would

-16-



10/4/66

expect a tendency towards a higher rate of personal 
saving in coming months, rather than the slightly 
lower one embodied in present staff projections.  

The rise in business capital spending, though 
it has been by far the strongest element in the 
private economy, may also have passed its point of 
inflection toward lower rates of gain. New orders 
for machinery and equipment have remained essentially 
unchanged for four months now and backlogs, though 
still climbing, have risen less rapidly since mid
year. The August Commerce-SEC survey also indicated 
a slowing in the rate of rise in plant and equipment 
outlays, from 17 per cent in the first half to 11 per 
cent in the second half of the year. And now the 
probable suspension of the investment tax credit may 
be having some further marginal effect on capital 
spending plans, as desired. In any event, one very 
recent private survey reports that business is 
planning little further increase in capital outlays 
for 1967 compared with 1966. Most capital budgets 
for 1967 probably are still quite tentative, but if 
the 3 per cent increase indicated were realized, 
there would almost certainly be a downward tilt in 
spending as next year progressed.  

About near-term construction prospects there 
can be no doubt. Housing starts have dropped by 
about 500,000 units, annual rate, since early in the 
year, and the pattern of building permits--plus what 
we know of the mortgage market--suggests little or no 
improvement for at least the next several months.  
Residential construction outlays had declined by 
about one-eighth by the third quarter, and a further 
substantial decline is almost certain for the quarter 

now commencing. Private non-residential construction 
outlays also have declined significantly in recent 
months, and contract awards for commercial building 
have noticeably weakened. Presumably this also reflects 
mainly the mortgage situation, though overbuilding in 
some areas may be a factor.  

Against this rather impressive list of weaknesses-
present, probable and possible--must be weighed the 

rising trend in Government expenditures, particularly 
for defense. The figures on cash expenditures for 
defense in July and August suggest a further rise in

-17-



10/4/66

the third quarter of well over $3 billion and perhaps 
as much as $4 billion on a national income basis, but 
we have no specific information on near-term prospects 
other than the general indications of continued rapid 
growth reported at previous Committee meetings.  

There are two considerations to be kept in mind 
regarding an expanding defense effort, however. The 

first is that this would not necessarily insure an 
expanding and ebullient economy; from mid-1951 through 
the next year or so there was little real growth in 
GNP and widespread evidence of weakness in the private 
sectors, despite (and in part because of) the Korean 
War effort. Second, spiraling defense costs would 
enhance the prospect that the Administration might 
seek a general tax increase, which of course could 
change the fiscal implications considerably. Such a 
development might well retard private sector demands 
enough to call for significant modifications in monetary 
policy.  

Under present circumstances, whatever reasonable 
dampening of aggregate demand can be accomplished is 
all to the good. It is evident that there are still 
significant inflationary pressures on both the demand 
and supply sides of the economy, and that resource 
utilization remains very near capacity levels. At the 
same time, it would not seem desirable to ignore devel
opments in the private sector that might lead to 
unnecessary slack and, with any easing in the defense 

effort, possibly to a cumulative downward movement 
later on. Given the uncertainties in the outlook, and 
recognizing the substantial degree of restraint on 
spending already achieved and still in process through 

monetary policy, I would not like to see any further 
tightening now. It may not yet be time to ease off 

appreciably, but the situation requires very careful 

watching and a willingness to do so whenever important 

weaknesses do in fact emerge.  

Mr. Axilrod made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Credit markets during the past two months have 

moved from a period of severe strain to one during

-18-



10/4/66

recent weeks of comparative relaxation. In this movement 
expectations, demand forces, and supply conditions have 
all interacted.  

As Mr. Holmes has pointed out, the decline in interest 
rates of recent weeks was influenced by growing market 
expectations that we are likely to have either a personal 
and corporate income tax increase or peace negotiations 
in Vietnam. Moreover, the emerging bits of news about 
economic prospects for the private sector of the economy 
did not seem to indicate quite as much basic economic 
strength as many had expected. And this impression was 
buttressed by the relative lack of strain in short-term 
markets after mid-September.  

But unless expectational shifts are sustained by the 
fundamentals of demand and supply they are likely to be 
short-lived. Thus, the question becomes one of whether 
monetary policy has become tight enough so that it is 
causing cutbacks in real expenditures to noninflationary 
levels. Or whether credit demands are becoming less 
vigorous for other reasons, such as the investment boom's 
running out of steam on its own.  

Monetary policy does appear to have become quite 
tight in recent months, even though we may disagree about 
what variables best symbolize this tightness. While net 
borrowed reserves have shown little change since June, 
money supply actually dipped slightly during the summer, 
interest rates rose markedly, and credit availability 
was significantly restrained at depositary institutions.  
And since the first of the year the money supply and total 
reserves have grown by only about 2.5 per cent, as compared 
with growth rates of around 5 per cent for both variables 
over all of last year.  

With restrained growth in such monetary aggregates, 
interest rates have risen to the point where bank credit 
growth, too, has been held back, even though some funds 
are being obtained from abroad through the Euro-dollar 
market. Major lending banks are losing CD's, net, at a 

rate which we estimate at about between $1 and $1.5 billion 

per month in September and October. Moreover, the extent 

to which such losses can be made up by competing success

fully against other savings institutions for consumer-type time 

deposits has probably been somewhat limited by the new 

structure of ceiling rates on time and savings accounts.  

And, perhaps more importantly, both banks and other savings

-19-



10/4/66

institutions remain hard pressed to compete with 
interest rates available on market instruments.  

While the fund flows just described represent in 
large part shifts in the pattern of lending and not 
necessarily limitations on the total available for 
lending to final users of credit, this process of 
disintermediation does have its costs in terms of 
effects on the structure of interest rates. I would 
expect, for instance, that disintermediation would 
tend to raise long relative to short rates as banks 
and other financial institutions back away from long
term markets, while former holders of CD's are likely 
to purchase mainly short-term market instruments. Just 
as the movement toward bank intermediation that was set 
in motion by the Regulation Q changes in the early 1960's 
was a tonic for long-term markets, so is the reverse 
process of disintermediation likely to place a strain 
on such markets, especially in the transitional period 
when banks, nonbank institutions, and security markets 
are moving to a new equilibrium relationship.  

But disintermediation may be more an effect than 
a cause in the current credit environment since, given 
current Regulation Q ceilings, it is basically monetary 
policy and credit demands that will determine the level 
of market interest rates, and hence the degree of 
disintermediation. Credit demands thus far this year 
have been buttressed by heavy corporate borrowing. This 
borrowing has been partly from banks, but has been 
especially heavy in the bond market as one might expect 
in a period when there have generally been expectations 
of rising interest rates.  

By borrowing heavily earlier this year, corporations 
have apparently anticipated a part of their future need.  
One indication is that corporate liquid assets over the 
first three quarters of the year have risen by an estimated 
$2 billion (seasonally adjusted and excluding some special 
transactions), despite the acceleration in tax payments, 
as compared with no change last year over the same period.  
Thus, it appears that corporate capital market financing 
could be somewhat less heavy in the period ahead without 
necessarily indicating a reduction in real expenditures.  
However, if the moderation of the corporate calendar in 
recent weeks and the less than expected September expan
sion of bank loans to business continue for some time,

-20-



10/4/66

that would clearly tend to raise questions about the 
trend of the investment boom.  

But while there may be some lingering doubt about 
the continued strength of business credit demands, it 
appears certain that Federal Government demands in the 
period ahead will be large--with perhaps $8-$9 billion 
of gross new borrowing probably required between now 
and year-end. Some abatement of business borrowing 
demands would be welcome in such circumstances; however, 
if business spending does continue high and they choose 
to dispose of their accumulated liquid assets instead 
of borrowing, renewed strains in the short-term market 
could develop as both business and Government attempt 
to utilize it as a source of funds.  

With the supply of funds in the economy tight, 
with the future strength of private credit demands a 
bit uncertain, and with the duration of Federal Gov
ernment demands also uncertain (because there may be 
a tax increase next year), this is probably a good 
time for monetary policy to hold roughly where it is 
for a while. But, in terms of day-to-day operations, 
the rein on money market conditions should probably be 
a fairly loose one. In this period of high uncertainty 
a flexible rein will enable the feedback of information 
from the nonfinancial world to have an influence on 
actual money market conditions. For instance, if money 
market conditions were showing a tendency to ease--as 
indicated by declines in the Treasury bill or Federal 
funds rates--this might suggest that credit demands 
were less than would be expected if economic expansion 
were continuing at its earlier pace. Accordingly, it 
would seem desirable not to fully offset such an easing 
tendency by exerting additional pressure on the net 
borrowed reserve position of banks.  

On the other hand, in the somewhat more likely 
event that money market conditions tend to tighten up 
over the next four weeks in the face of the expected 
October increase in public and business credit demands, 
then at least some of this tautness might be captured 
even if it meant that net borrowed reserves moved deeper 
than they were during the past three weeks on average.  
But a significant movement toward deeper net borrowed 
reserves and tighter money market conditions should

-21-



10/4/66

probably be dependent on a greater than desired expan
sion in the monetary and reserve aggregates.  

The restrained growth in bank reserves and the 
money supply thus far this year--and the absolute lack 
of growth in bank credit during the past two months-
suggest to me that there is scope in the period ahead 
for added expansion in reserves, bank credit, and money.  
The blue book indicates the dimensions of a likely 
further expansion in October. Such an expansion in 
reserve and monetary aggregates would seem a useful 
means of helping the Government and the economy get 
over at least the first hurdles of the fall financing 
season, while the System awaits further clarification 
of basic economic and fiscal policy trends.  

Mr. Solomon then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

What I propose to do today is to review the impact 
on the U.S. balance of payments over the past year of 
the acceleration in total spending on the one hand and 
the tightening of credit conditions on the other--and 
to indicate some of the policy questions raised by 
these developments.  

As best we can estimate it now, the deficit on a 
liquidity basis in the third quarter was at an annual 
rate of $2 billion. For the first nine months of the 
year, the deficit on the liquidity basis thus comes to 
an annual rate of $1.6 billion, only $200 million more 
than last year, despite the substantial deterioration 
in the trade balance.  

On the official settlements basis, we appear to 
have had a surplus of about $1 billion in the third 
quarter, for rather special reasons to which I shall 

return later. In the first half of this year, the 
official settlement deficit was at an annual rate of 

less than $900 million, compared with $1.4 billion in 

1965. All in all, the balance of payments accounts 

look better than might have been expected.  
I turn now to a closer look at the major components 

of the balance of payments.  
The most conspicuous effect of accelerated aggregate 

demand in the past year has been on U.S. imports, which

-22-



10/4/66

have increased much more rapidly than GNP. In July
August, imports were almost 25 per cent higher than a 
year ago. A surge of imports is a normal response to 
excess demand at home. What is encouraging is that 
exports have also continued to increase at a healthy 
rate. After some hesitation in the spring months, 
exports picked up again this summer and in July-August 
were 9 per cent larger than a year earlier.  

Thus, most of the deterioration in the trade surplus 
can be attributed to the extraordinary increase in imports, 
which is in turn directly related to the excessive 
expansion of over-all spending in the U.S. economy.  

It is reasonable to think that a slowdown in the 
expansion of aggregate demand will bring with it a 
slackening in imports. From the viewpoint of long-run 
balance of payments objectives, what is most important 
is that the price level not rise too much. A temporary 
bulge of imports accompanying a temporary surge of demand 
is less harmful to our competitive position than a sharp 
run-up in prices.  

The other major factor contributing to a deterioration 
in the current account surplus over the past year is the 
increase in military spending abroad, which rose by $800 
million (annual rate) from the first half of last year.  
Most of this increase was in Asian countries.  

While the current account of our balance of payments 
has worsened substantially over the past year, the capital 
accounts have moved the other way.  

The improvement on capital account shows up in four 
ways: (1) increased borrowing abroad by U.S. corporations 
to finance direct investment abroad; (2) net repayment of 
U.S. bank loans by foreigners; (3) borrowing of Euro
dollars by foreign branches of U.S. banks for the use of 
home offices; and (4) investment of liquid balances by 
foreign official and international institutions in U.S.  
assets that are classified as nonliquid.  

Let me first dispose of this last item. The Committee 
knows that in the second quarter there was a shift of 
official dollar balances into CD's of more-than-one-year 
maturity and into agency issues. It is difficult to 
determine how much of this shift was a response to 
"jawboning" and how much to higher interest yields on 
these instruments. In any event, the liquidity deficit 
would have been about $400 million higher in the second 
quarter without these transactions.

-23-



10/4/66

Turning to other and less questionable capital flows, 
we may note the increase in borrowing abroad by U.S.  
corporations to finance direct investment. U.S. corpora
tions issued nearly $500 million of securities abroad in 
the first half of this year, while foreign subsidiaries 
of U.S. corporations--so-called Luxembourg corporations-
borrowed a similar amount. These borrowings abroad helped 
to reduce the outflow of dollars to finance what appears 
to be a strong determination of U.S. corporations to 
continue to expand their foreign operations. It seems 
reasonable to assign credit for the increased foreign 
borrowing to both the Commerce Department program and 
stringent credit conditions at home.  

The Committee is well aware of the substantial 
contribution, on the plus side of the balance of payments, 
of net repayments of bank loans to foreigners. Over the 
first eight months of this year, net repayments amounted 
to more than $400 million, despite some renewed net 
lending in the second quarter.  

Finally, we come to the inflow of short-term funds 
associated with the active bidding by foreign branches 
of American banks for Euro-dollars for the use of their 
home offices. This inflow is reflected in a large increase 
in "due to foreign branches" on the books of U.S. banks.  
It amounted to about $800 million in the first half of 
this year and a further $1-1/2 billion since the end of 
June. This massive absorption of dollars in foreign 
hands--or dollars that would have gone into foreign 
hands, including foreign official reserves--is the major 
explanation for the large difference between the liquidity 
balance and the official settlements balance thus far 
this year.  

No doubt part of the improvement in the balance on 
official settlements this summer is a reflection of the 
speculative outflow of funds from the U.K. In effect, 
the dollars that the U.K. drew on the Federal Reserve 

swap line and from other sources and paid out in support 
of sterling were absorbed by U.S. branches abroad instead 

of flowing into official reserves in Europe. From the 
scanty data so far available, we know that increases in 
reserves of continental countries have been rather small 
this summer, and this is consistent with the recent 

strength of the dollar on foreign exchange markets.

-24-



10/4/66

These massive short-term capital inflows are pro
viding temporary relief to the balance of payments, 
which we cannot help but find refreshing. It is clear, 
however, that such short-term capital inflows do not 
represent a fundamental improvement in the balance of 
payments, and it is important not to be carried away 
by any pluses that appear in the accounts. One can 
go further and say that these inflows represent hot 
money that will flow out again as soon as pressure on 
bank reserves is relaxed. Thus we may hate ourselves 
in the morning in the sense that the relief we are 
enjoying at the moment may have to be paid for in one 
of two painful ways in the future: either a rapid 
build-up in European official dollar holdings requiring 
us to use the swaps, draw on the IMF, and sell gold, 
or a severe constraint on monetary policy when ease is 
called for.  

We can take some consolation from the fact that 
when a move toward monetary ease becomes appropriate, 
excess demand will have subsided and imports will tend 
to slacken. Just as the extraordinary bulge of imports 
is being offset by extraordinary capital inflows, the 
later outflow of capital will be offset by a slowdown 
in imports.  

Nevertheless, we must be prepared for the loss of 
these short-term funds, and, if we don't want monetary 
policy to be hamstrung in the future, we must be prepared 
to finance the outflow by drawing on the IMF and losing 
gold, unless we find ways to improve other components of 
the balance of payments in the meantime.  

Mr. Hickman observed that one of the first uses of any hot 

money flowing out might well be by the British, in repaying their 

drawings on the System swap line, and to the extent that was so it 

would be a healthy development. Mr. Solomon agreed with Mr. Hickman's 

observation.  

Chairman Martin said that preceding the go-around there 

might be brief reports on some of the developments at the recent

-25-



10/4/66 -26

meetings of the International Monetary Fund and International Bank 

for Reconstruction and Development. He had attended a meeting of 

the Ministers and Governors of the Group of Ten on Sunday, 

September 25, which was chaired by Dr. Holtrop because the Finance 

Minister of the Netherlands was unable to be present. About two 

hours were spent in debating the wording of the communique that 

was subsequently issued. The communique reaffirmed the position 

the Group had taken at its meeting at The Hague in July. However, 

the French did not reassert the dissent they had made so vigorously 

at the earlier meeting, and there was some inclination to feel that 

that represented a slight softening of the French position.  

The Chairman then invited Mr. Daane to comment on the 

meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten.  

Mr. Daane said that the Deputies of the Group of Ten met 

on the afternoon of Friday, September 30. The meeting was largely 

procedural, and was concerned mainly with three questions: the 

arrangements and preparations for forthcoming joint meetings of the 

Deputies with the IMF directors, the arrangements and preparations 

for forthcoming meetings of the Deputies themselves, and the matter 

of electing a chairman of the Deputies. The first joint meeting 

probably would be held in Washington in late November or early 

December, although that fact was confidential at this point. The 

Deputies themselves would meet in Paris on November 16, 1966.



10/4/66 -27

Dr. Emminger of the German Federal Bank had been persuaded to 

continue to serve as Chairman until sometime after the turn of 

the year.  

Mr. Daane added that there was a definite spirit of 

forward motion in the meeting. The willingness evident to move 

ahead in concert with the directors of the Fund struck him as 

significant, particularly in light of the feelings on that 

question that some of the Deputies had displayed earlier.  

Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Solomon to report on the 

meeting of Working Party 3 that had been held on September 23.  

Mr. Solomon said that the recent Working Party 3 meeting 

focused mainly on the U.S. economy and the U.S. balance of pay

ments. But in the course of the routine multilateral surveillance 

discussion--based on a presentation by Milton Gilbert of the BIS-

some of the European representatives suggested that the Working 

Party should, before the end of the year, conduct a thorough 

discussion of the recent extension of the Federal Reserve swap 

network. Although the discussion was mainly procedural--the issue 

being whether or not such a discussion should be held at a future 

meeting--two points of substance were apparent: (1) did the 

extension of the swap network represent a "permanent or semi

permanent" increase in international liquidity and therefore did 

it have implications for the Group of Ten work on international



10/4/66 -28

liquidity; and (2) was the United States planning to use the 

additional swap facilities to finance what was expected to be an 

enlarged deficit.  

Mr. Solomon reported that Under Secretary of the Treasury 

Deming defended the swap extensions and insisted that discussion 

of them properly belonged among the central bank Governors at 

Basle. He (Mr. Deming) saw no reason for a discussion before the 

end of the year, since the renewal dates were spread out evenly 

over time. In any event, it was impractical to envisage that 

extensions would be talked about in WP-3 before they occurred.  

The matter ended inconclusively with a suggestion that those who 

had requested a discussion submit a note on what sort of discussion 

they had in mind.  

As to the U.S. economy, Mr. Solomon continued, the U.S.  

delegation presented a fairly comprehensive review of monetary 

policy and its effects--both internal and external--over the past 

year. It was clear that the Working Party was strongly aware of 

the degree of monetary restraint that had been achieved and was 

not even hinting at additional monetary restraint. The two 

additional policy steps that were hinted at were, as might have 

been expected, further fiscal action and some further restrictions 

on direct investment.



10/4/66 -29

Chairman Martin said he would make a further comment on 

the Bank-Fund meetings themselves, as he saw them. On the whole, 

they were much better than he had expected. The problem of the 

pound had been largely removed by the System's action in enlarging 

the swap network; the enlargement was viewed as postponing the 

problem, which was precisely what it was intended to do. There 

still was some concern about whether the U.S. was too complacent 

with respect to its balance of payments situation. The dialogue 

concerning new reserve assets had been advanced considerably; 

there was increasing awareness of the difficulty of designing a 

new asset that would supplement existing reserve assets without 

replacing them. He found that problem being discussed seriously 

by proponents of new reserve assets as well as by opponents. There 

was a disposition to think in terms of successive steps, with a 

first round involving an expansion of the existing activities of 

the IMF, and a new reserve asset coming into being subsequently 

rather than simultaneously. That approach made good sense to him, 

and while it was not exactly the approach now advocated by the 

U.S. it was worth consideration.  

The one concern that overshadowed others at the meeting, 

the Chairman continued, related to the price of gold and to the 

role of gold over the next few years. It was recognized that if 

France continued to buy gold automatically the gold exchange



10/4/66 -30

standard would be endangered. It was one thing for the French 

to buy gold because they questioned the manner in which the U.S.  

managed its affairs and accordingly were not willing to hold 

dollars; but it was another thing if they were buying gold simply 

for the purpose of embarrassing the gold exchange standard. It 

was generally recognized that in the absence of new discoveries 

gold production would be inadequate to meet world needs, and that 

there was a real problem with respect to speculation in gold. It 

was unfortunate that at the time of the meeting a British official 

implied that there might be an increase in the price of gold.  

Mr. Wayne asked whether the Chairman would comment on the 

reactions to Secretary of the Treasury Fowler's hints that the 

U.S. might take drastic action to curtail capital outflows.  

Chairman Martin replied that the reaction was generally 

adverse, as might have been expected. However, the Secretary's 

remarks might have served a useful purpose in impressing people 

with the seriousness of the situation.  

Mr. Brimmer observed that on the subject of stronger U.S.  

controls of capital movements he had heard some favorable comment 

by Europeans who thought that the inflow of dollars to their 

countries was a source of inflation. They were hopeful that the 

U.S. would take steps in that area.



10/4/66

Mr. Galusha asked whether any pressure appeared to be 

building up behind proposed legislation to subsidize U.S. gold 

production.  

Chairman Martin said there was some discussion of such 

legislation, but he did not think it was likely to be enacted 

in the present session of Congress.  

Mr. Hayes observed that there had been a vigorous denial 

of the British official's remarks regarding an increase in the 

price of gold by the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Governor 

of the Bank of England. They were disturbed and puzzled by those 

remarks, which were completely at variance with British policy.  

He (Mr. Hayes) was as pleased as Chairman Martin had been over 

the increasing realization that a new reserve asset, unless very 

carefully worked out, might constitute a threat to existing reserve 

assets and international liquidity. He had held that view for a 

long time. With respect to the developments at the WP-3 meeting 

reported by Mr. Solomon, it was clear from conversations he had 

had with several continental central bank governors that they had 

grave doubts about the wisdom of holding discussions of the swap 

network in the WP-3 meetings. They preferred to keep such discus

ions at Basle, and he also hoped that that would be the outcome.  

In response to the Chairman's invitation to add his comments, 

Mr. Bopp said that the surprising thing to him was that no great

-31-



10/4/66

surprises came out of the Fund-Bank meetings. That perhaps was 

fortunate from the point of view of the U.S.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and 

views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

The economic expansion remains very strong, and the 
outlook continues to be one of serious inflationary 
pressures well into 1967. In our Bank we hold to this 
opinion even though we recognize that some observers are 
beginning to take a less sanguine view of next year's 
business prospects. A change in Vietnam is always a 
possibility, but in the meantime the current and 
prospective defense build-up overshadows the moderation 
of some recent business indicators. According to our 
analysis, the fiscal stimulus by the Federal Government 
remains very substantial during the second half of 
calendar 1966 and will still be appreciable in the first 
half of 1967. While the President's restraint program 
has contributed a good deal to steadier financial 
markets and may have helped prevent a serious breakout 
of inflationary expectations generally, the actual 
fiscal measures announced so far can hardly be expected 
to have more than a minor direct impact on business and 
Government spending, and that not until some time in 
1967.  

We see little hope for a letup in cost and price 
pressures between now and mid-1967. In fact, cost-push 
pressures are becoming more serious, while the 
pressures of excess demand continue. Perhaps the 
absence of an inflation psychosis to date reflects in 
good measure the vigor and pervasiveness of credit 
policy, together with recognition that the Vietnam War 
is a major force behind the current boom and that its 
future impact on the Federal budget is too uncertain to 
make inflation a sure bet, 

In analyzing the current inflationary threat and in 
considering possible means of combatting it, I think we 
should guard against the danger of placing too much of 
the blame on excessive expenditures on plant and equip
ment and excessive business lending. It seems to me 
that a too stimulative Federal budget is an even greater

-32-



10/4/66

contributory cause and that in any case the most 
desirable cure is not a sharp and deliberate reduction 
in private plant and equipment outlays. Because of the 
long-run contribution of such spending to increased 
productivity, I believe there should be at least equal 
emphasis on lower Government expenditures and an in
crease in personal income taxes, i.e., the use of fiscal 
policy to cut back consumption growth. Our recent 
efforts to slow the pace of business lending have 
seemed to me essential if an appropriate slowdown in 
total bank credit growth was to be achieved, but in my 
view we should avoid overemphasizing curtailment of 
business loan expansion for its own sake.  

As for the balance of payments, the underlying 
deficit seems to be continuing at about the same rate as 
in the first half of the year, although the liquidity 
deficit will benefit again this quarter from special 
factors--in this case, debt prepayments. We doubt 
whether the August import decline is likely to persist.  
In general, the unsatisfactory trade surplus--with 
exports sluggish and imports at very high levels-
continues to be the major adverse factor, along with 
the less measurable impact of the Vietnam situation.  
The various programs to reduce capital outflows seem 
to be working reasonably well, but this is perhaps 
more the result of the current domestic credit situation 
than the effectiveness of the programs themselves. In 
recent weeks the System has quite appropriately 
endeavored to learn more about the flow of funds to 
major U.S. banks from their foreign branches. However, 
I think we should have clearly in mind the beneficial 
effects of this flow--temporary though they may be-
on the dollar in foreign exchange markets and in 
mitigating foreign central bank demand for gold. For 
these reasons, I would be very reluctant to see measures 
taken which would have the effect of reversing this flow, 
unless the domestic justification for such action was 
very strong indeed. If concern is felt about the failure 
of some of our credit series to reflect adequately these 
foreign fund inflows, the statistics can readily be 
adjusted to take them into account, as in fact is now 
being done both at the Board and at our Bank. Likewise 
the absence of reserve requirements for these liabilities 
does not mean that we cannot make due allowance in our 
policy determination for whatever contribution these 
foreign funds may be making to a greater degree of credit

-33-



10/4/66

expansion than would otherwise occur. Perhaps the 
best way of approaching this problem would be to 
make an informal suggestion to a few of the major 
banks involved not to press too hard on this source 
of funds.  

As usual, the interpretation of recent data on 
bank credit is a perplexing task. Bank credit 
indicators of the last few months are heavily 
influenced by the increased amounts and changed 
pattern of corporate payments to the Treasury since 
April, for which statistical adjustments are 
difficult to make. Nevertheless, there is a good 
deal of evidence that the growth of bank credit in 
September was rather slow, following a relatively 
weak month of August. October may well see some 
pickup in this rate of expansion. Serious un
certainties both as to the probable amount of future 
CD runnoffs and as to the alternative methods by 
which banks may meet these drains also add to the 
difficulty of interpreting current and prospective 
credit data. As Governor Mitchell has pointed out 
from time to time, the change in degree of bank 
intermediation will suggest greater attention to 
total credit growth, but as a practical matter 
statistical measurement of total credit is impossible 
on a timely basis. Considerations such as these 
point up the difficulty of setting forth policy 
instructions in any very precise manner.  

We shall soon be confronted with the need to 
maintain an even keel in view of the prospective 
Treasury cash borrowing in the near future. This in 
itself would suggest maintenance of an unchanged 
credit policy, but I believe such a policy is 
warranted in any case on general economic grounds.  
The securities markets have been notably unstable in 
recent weeks; and while the bond market is currently 
going through a phase of euphoria, this may turn out 
to be another instance of an excessive swing of the 
pendulum, to be followed by a swing in the other 
direction. Also, I think we must reckon with the fact 
that there are widely differing public interpretations 
and misinterpretations of the System's policy state
ment with respect to the discount window. In these 
circumstances, I think the Manager will need 
substantial leeway in order to cope with market 
developments, always in a context of maintaining a firm

-34-



10/4/66

but orderly money market. Both short-term rates and 
net borrowed reserve data should therefore be 
secondary considerations.  

With respect to the discount rate, I feel that 
while we "missed the boat" in July, developments since 
that time have been such that I would not recommend 
action now. I have in mind, of course, the rapid 
escalation of market rates a few weeks ago, the joint 
efforts of the various regulatory agencies to moderate 
or even roll back deposit interest rates, 
and the fact that the Administration has at long last 
recognized the need for action in the area of fiscal 
policy. There may of course be new dramatic develop
ments in the coming weeks pointing up the need for a 
prompt increase in the discount rate, but in the 
absence of such developments I would be reluctant to 
see such an overt rate action.  

If I may digress for a moment on the subject of 
discount window administration, I should like to 
express the hope that the System would hold firmly to 
the line propounded in the September 1 statement in 
discussing with member banks a so-called new or 
revised discount program. It seems to me that the 
essence of the statement was that the window would be 
available as in the past to meet seasonal and unusual 
needs, in accordance with Regulation A; that the 
occasion of borrowing at the window would be used more 
aggressively than in the past to influence member 
banks in the direction of curtailing business loans in 
preference to other means of adjustment; and that if 
this route appeared feasible but also appeared to 
require a somewhat longer period during which the 
adjustment could be made, the System would be willing 
to acquiesce in such a delay. It is never easy to 
trace dollars in a large bank, and I am sure that there 
will be many instances of borrowing where it cannot be 

clearly stated whether a slowdown in business lending is 

the means for liquidation of the borrowing, even though 
this element may play an important part. What I feel 
concerned with and what I would like to see the System 
avoid is a concept on the part of the member banks that 

there are two clear-cut and distinct classes of 

borrowing at the discount window. The dangers of such 

a sharp distinction of borrowing "tranches" were 

discussed at length at the joint meeting of the

-35-



10/4/66 -36

Governors and Presidents on August 23, and it was 
noteworthy that the September 1 statement definitely 
avoided any such definite classification of borrowings.  
Doubtless an intra-System exchange of information with 
respect to borrowings of a longer than usual character 
may be quite useful, but I would hope that discount of
ficers would not encourage the member banks themselves 
to look upon the Reserve Banks as administering two 
quite separate types of discount programs. Mr. Holland 
has prepared a draft letter to discount officers which 
I think deals very effectively with this issue.  

It seems to me that the staff's draft directive 1/ 
is quite appropriate.  

Mr. Francis remarked that total demands for goods and services 

had continued to rise at a faster rate than productive capacity in 

recent months. As a result, the economy had suffered many 

inefficiencies due to the strain on its resources. The nation's trade 

balance was deteriorating, and prices were rising at an accelerated 

rate. Since May both wholesale and consumer prices had risen at over 

4 per cent annual rates compared with about 3-1/2 per cent rates 

earlier in the year. The strong rise in total demand had been in 

part the result of very stimulative fiscal actions and the monetary 

expansion last winter and spring.  

Monetary developments were more restrictive from June to 

September, Mr. Francis noted. Member bank reserves, which had been 

rising at a rapid rate, declined. The money supply of the country 

also reversed its strong upward trend, and commercial bank credit rose 

at a much slower rate. Most interest rates went up much more rapidly

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



10/4/66 -37

than in the preceding year. He would submit a table for the 

record showing this apparent shift of trend.1/ 

Mr. Francis commented that the fiscal influence of the 

Government had continued to be very expansive, reflecting both 

expenditures for Vietnam and the large outlays for welfare programs.  

The high employment budget, which indicated considerable fiscal 

stimulus in the year ending last June 30, was probably even more 

expansive in the second half of this year. In view of the strong 

demand for goods and services and the accompanying upward pressure 

on prices, the greater propensity to invest than to save, and the 

stimulative stance of the Federal Government, he felt that the 

increased monetary restraint from June to September had been 

appropriate.  

Whenever there was a tightening in monetary actions, 

Mr. Francis continued, questions arose as to whether the monetary 

restraint was too restrictive and as to the length of time restraint 

should be exercised. In the current situation, the move toward 

restraint had apparently been substantial, but he believed it had 

not been too great. For one thing, current data frequently were 

misleading because of later revisions, problems of seasonals, and 

irregular movements. But even if it later appeared that monetary 

expansion had been halted, there were reasons to believe that there 

1/ The table referred to is appended to these minutes as Attachment B.



10/4/66 -38

might have been and continued to be a decline in the demand for 

money balances. The markedly higher interest rates which were now 

being experienced probably were causing some decline in the desire 

to hold cash balances. Also, with fiscal actions of the Government 

operating in such an expansionary way, the appropriate monetary 

growth was probably smaller than it might otherwise be.  

Mr. Francis concluded that the June-September trends in 

monetary developments were appropriate and should be continued for 

the near future. If demands for credit were so strong in the next 

few weeks as to push interest rates up, the Committee should not 

interfere.  

Mr. Patterson reported that, in the Sixth District, the 

effects of credit tightening were shown more clearly in financial 

data than in data measuring economic activity. Although the large 

city banks apparently expanded their business loans in September, 

after curtailing them in August, most business loans were made at 

substantially higher rates than those of three months earlier. At 

the large banks in Atlanta and New Orleans over 95 per cent of all 

business loans were made at rates of 6 per cent or higher during the 

first half of September, compared with 45 per cent in June.  

Generally firmer terms on business loans were reported with no 

diminution in the strength of loan demand. At the banks outside 

leading cities, however, loan expansion apparently was not large in 

September.



10/4/66 -39

That the banks had been pressed for funds was suggested by 

the continued selling of U.S. Government securities and slowed-up 

purchases of municipals as well as a slower deposit growth, 

Mr, Patterson observed. Time and savings deposits remained un

changed at District banks in September with reserve city banks 

having had practically no change in their total time deposits for 

three months. Growth of demand deposits in September recovered part 

of the August decline but was less than would ordinarily have been 

expected at this time of the year. District banks had been net 

purchasers of Federal funds ever since late July.  

Mr. Patterson noted that any analysis of economic conditions 

was complicated by the effects of the airline and construction 

industry strikes on the currently available statistics. Both total 

nonfarm employment and manufacturing employment were practically 

unchanged in August from the preceding month. District lumber and 

furniture industries suffered a decline, caused in part by receding 

housing activity. Announcements of new and expanded industrial plants 

in the third quarter continued in a large volume and probably totaled 

about $600 million, down only slightly from the $650 million total 

of the third quarter of last year. Proposed new and expanded pulp 

and paper activities made up a major part of the total. The textile 

industry seemed to be catching up with the demand for nonmilitary 

fabrics, although activity remained high.



10/4/66 -40

On balance, the latest available financial and economic 

information suggested to Mr. Patterson a less frantic pace of 

expansion and a substantial bite on some sectors of the economy 

in the Sixth District. National data pointed to the same conclusion.  

Mr. Patterson observed that for some time the System had 

laid stress on the growing demands for credit as being primarily 

responsible for tight money conditions. There had been backing for 

that statement in the continued expansion of the reserve base and 

the rapid rise in bank loans and total bank credit. That position 

was now less easy to support. Of course, the process of disinter

mediation, as Mr. Mitchell pointed out at the last meeting, might 

complicate the interpretation of bank credit data. However, it 

could at least be concluded that System policy had become a much 

more important factor in the recent credit tightening than it was a 

few months ago.  

The coming Treasury financing suggested to Mr. Patterson that 

an "even keel" would be the appropriate policy to follow during the 

next period. However, aside from the even keel considerations, it 

seemed to him--as it did at the last meeting of the Committee--that 

policy should not be made more restrictive. The financial markets 

had behaved remarkably well recently considering the many strains they 

had undergone. The Committee should be very cautious about adding to 

those strains. He would, therefore, favor a policy of no change.  

The draft directive was acceptable to him.



10/4/66 -41

Mr. Bopp commented that during the past few weeks there had 

been a virtual halt in expansion of total bank credit, a significant 

slowdown in the rate of increase in business loans, and a marked 

downturn in interest rates. On the basis of those developments, it 

might appear that the Committee was well on the way to achieving the 

best of all possible worlds: a significant bite into credit flows 

without a rapid escalation of interest rates. Yet the period ahead 

might well see a swift reversal in those trends. It was quite 

probable that interest rates would rise under burgeoning public and 

private demands for credit and that business loans would increase 

as tax, inventory, and capital spending pressures built up.  

Certainly, Mr. Bopp continued, experience so far in the Third 

District suggested that banks were under pressure to expand business 

loans and that they would do all in their power to accommodate their 

favored customers. Indeed, one of the largest Philadelphia banks-

recently coming under deposit strains--approached the Reserve Bank 

last week to discuss the conditions under which it might qualify for 

the special discount program. That bank had assumed that the principal 

quid pro quo expected was a holding of the line on total loans. When 

the bank found it would be expected to hold down business loans, it 

became more reluctant to borrow. That bank now was advertising heavily 

for 99 month consumer CD's at 5 per cent and had its loan officers on 

the phone soliciting new CD's and attempting to persuade existing CD



10/4/66 -42

holders to renew their deposits so that it might avoid borrowing from 

the Reserve Bank. If other banks found it equally difficult to hold 

the line on business loans, it might be difficult to influence their 

behavior through administration of the discount window. It followed 

that significant upward pressures on business loans might be felt and 

that those pressures might be accompanied by rising interest rates as 

portfolio adjustments were made to permit loan expansion.  

It might be, Mr. Bopp said, that the rise in rates itself 

would retard to some extent the loan increase and inhibit further 

portfolio shifts. The question remained, however, to what extent the 

System should exert a further restraining influence, thus intensifying 

the upward adjustments in rates and making it more difficult for the 

banks to hold CD's and adjust their portfolios in order to make 

business loans.  

In Mr. Bopp's judgment the System's prime objective should be 

to maintain conditions favorable to the recent more moderate rates of 

growth in aggregate reserves and bank credit. If necessary to 

accomplish that objective, he would allow interest rates to firm, 

first in response to pressures from the market, and then--if needed-

as a result of additional action by the System. However, he would not 

impose more restraint than needed to attain that aggregate goal in 

order to help implement the selective policy toward business loans.  

In view of the apparent reluctance of banks to borrow under the



10/4/66 -43

special program, such a policy might lead to hyper-tightness, including 

a more rapid deceleration of total bank credit than was warranted by 

developong business conditions, and upward pressures on interest rates 

which could complicate Treasury financing and lead again to conditions 

of near-panic in financial markets.  

Of course, Mr. Bopp concluded, policy over much of the next 

four weeks had to be directed toward an even keel. The imminent 

Treasury financing dictated that. In the meantime, the Committee would 

have a further chance to judge the strength of loan demand and to 

assess more fully bank response to the special discount program.  

Mr. Hickman commented that this year there were more 

uncertainties and cross-currents than usual as the annual forcasting 

period was entered. Bulls and bears could make equally strong cases 

about the economic outlook, reflecting conflicting evaluations of 

strategic factors in aggregate demand. Despite the Administration's 

announced intent to make more use of fiscal policy, the analyst was 

faced with a step-up in defense spending, the magnitude and duration of 

which were unknown and perhaps indeterminate. Thus, any forecast of 

economic activity much beyond a quarter ahead could easily be wide of 

the mark and, as a consequence, could lead to inappropriate monetary 

policy, fiscal policy, or both.  

With regard to recent monetary policy, Mr. Hickman believed 

that a great deal of pressure had been put on the banking system and



10/4/66 -44

financial markets. Both the reserve base and the bank credit proxy 

declined on average in August and September, with influences to be 

felt later on, even though one might be unable to identify them or to 

quantify the time lags. Since labor productivity might decline if 

growth slackened, the Committee could over-play restraint and do more 

harm than good in its efforts to check built-in inflation, which 

would inevitably result from the failure to apply appropriate fiscal 

policy a year or so ago.  

While recent money market conditions had been somewhat easier 

than he thought he was voting for at the last meeting, Mr. Hickman said, 

in retrospect he preferred what actually occurred to a further 

tightening. He recommended now that the Committee steer a course as 

near the middle of the road as feasible, while attempting to achieve 

money market conditions very slightly firmer than recently. The basic 

goal should continue to be to provide the reserves needed to achieve 

moderate expansion in money and credit, and to promote sustainable 

economic growth. The Committee should not seek to roll back the price 

level, or strain to hold it at present levels, since some inflation 

was now the inevitable result of past errors and omissions. He would 

vote for the proposed staff directive, which seemed to him to be 

reasonably near his position.  

Mr. Hickman said he would like to devote a few minutes to 

summarizing the views expressed at the regular quarterly meeting of



10/4/66 -45

Fourth District Business Economists held at the Cleveland Reserve Bank 

on September 20. The tone of the discussion was less bullish and more 

uncertain than in June. The median forecast of the group showed less 

than a 4 per cent increase in the production index for 1967, less than 

half this year's expected increase of more than 8 per cent. The median 

GNP forecast for 1967 was a gain of 6 per cent in current dollars, 

compared with about 8-1/2 per cent this year; in real terms, the group 

forecasted an increase in the range of 3 per cent to 3-1/2 per cent.  

The group's forecast for corporate profits was not encouraging, 

Mr. Hickman continued. No one expected after-tax profits in 1967 to be 

more than 5 per cent greater than in 1966. Nearly half predicted a 

smaller gain, and the rest expected either no change or a decline in 

aggregate profits. Views on profits were based on the assumption that 

corporate income taxes would not be increased in 1967, although most of 

the group expected an increase.  

There was widespread concern about the uncertain role of 

defense spending in the business outlook, Mr. Hickman noted. The 

group felt that capital spending would continue strong through midyear, 

with little or no short-run effects expected from the change in the tax 

credit and accelerated depreciation. Only one industry, paper and pulp, 

reported that capacity coming on stream was showing signs of becoming 

excessive. It was evident that the corporations represented were 

feeling the bite of monetary policy in varying degrees, although they



10/4/66 -46

understood the System's problem and agreed with its objectives. The 

group was unanimous in recommending a better balance in the mix of 

monetary and fiscal policy.  

Just before the meeting, Mr. Hickman observed, the Cleveland 

Reserve Bank had conducted a special survey on recent financial 

experience of the corporations represented. About half the respond

ents reported that they had borrowed external funds since June.  

Three-fifths of those borrowing had turned to commercial banks, one

third to the capital market, and the rest to parent companies or 

foreign banks. Only one corporation failed to obtain accommodation 

from commercial banks, and that company obtained the needed money in 

the capital market. Almost all borrowers reported paying higher 

interest, and individual companies reported a number of restrictive 

changes in credit terms. The results of the survey corroborated the 

view expressed by the Bank's directors at the last board meeting that 

the investment tax credit would have little short-run effects, but 

might do serious harm in a year or so when there might be need for a 

stimulus.  

Mr. Brimmer said that he was concerned about the disposition 

of some people to have Working Party 3 engage in multilateral 

surveillance, as reported by Mr. Solomon. At the previous meeting of 

the Committee he had mentioned that he was disturbed by the tendency 

toward reviewing national economic policies in WP-3, but had been



10/4/66 -47

reminded that that reflected a long-standing intent. Accordingly, he 

was pleased to hear Mr. Hayes say that some central bank Governors 

thought it was inappropriate to hold such discussions in WP-3 meetings.  

With respect to the activities of U.S. banks in drawing in 

funds through their branches abroad, Mr. Brimmer concurred in 

Mr. Solomon's analysis, and he shared Mr. Hayes' and Mr. Coombs' views 

regarding the best approach to the matter. For the time being, 

anything the System did with regard to those flows might best be done 

quietly and informally. Nevertheless, he was disturbed by the flows.  

When the Board began to focus on the subject in August and asked the 

staff to develop background information regarding them, he had been 

convinced that the flows served to complicate monetary management. He 

was still of that view. He also was concerned about the question of 

equity. While it was true that the System could offset the inflows 

through use of its general monetary instruments, the handful of banks 

involved would be able to obtain additional resources and thus to opt 

out of monetary restraint, and the System's operations would shift the 

burden to other banks. Thus, while he agreed that no formal action 

should be taken at present he hoped that at a later time the System 

might consider steps to attain some control over those flows, through 

the instrument of reserve requirements or otherwise. Unfortunately, 

there now were rumors in the market about possible System actions in 

the matter. It could only be hoped that they would die down.



10/4/66 -48

Turning to the balance of payments, Mr. Brimmer said some 

interesting developments were occurring outside the capital account.  

Some recent analyses by the Administration suggested that the low 

point in U.S. export performance might have been passed in the third 

quarter; if there was even a slight moderation in growth of imports, 

the trade balance might now begin to improve. Over the weekend he had 

participated in a bankers' forum sponsored by Georgetown University 

which was attended by some of the people attending the Bank-Fund 

meetings. Along with Mr. Roosa, and Mr. Shaw of the Commerce Depart

ment, he had taken part in a panel discussion on Saturday afternoon, 

in the course of which Mr. Roosa expressed the view that it was now 

time for the U.S. to take measures to reduce military spending abroad 

outside of Vietnam. Specifically, he urged that U.S. troop strength 

in Europe be reduced. Surprisingly, that proposal seemed to get a 

sympathetic reception. While there was a feeling on the part of some 

in the audience that the international situation might require 

maintaining present troop strength, there was a general disposition 

to consider the question favorably.  

A second point of interest, Mr. Brimmer continued, was the 

view of some members of the group, expressed to him privately, that the 

U.S. might have to face up to more explicit controls over direct 

investment. During the panel discussion both he and Mr. Shaw had 

taken the position that, while there might be some logic to extending



10/4/66 -49

the interest equalization tax to direct investments, such a step would 

be risky and was perhaps undesirable at this time. In personal 

discussions a number of the bankers present took exception to that 

position and indicated that the action might be desirable.  

With respect to the domestic situation, Mr. Brimmer said he 

would not take issue with the analyses given today by the staff and the 

Committee members who had spoken thus far. He would hope, however, 

that the Committee would not again engage in "stop-and-go" operations 

in its effort to influence the rate of growth of bank credit. In one 

sense the sharp reactions in the market this summer reflected the 

difficulty the Committee had experienced in getting bank credit growth 

under control in the spring. If the Committee could avoid undue 

easing now it was less likely to be faced with a subsequent need to 

clamp down hard in order to restrain over-rapid growth of bank credit.  

He would accept the staff's draft directive with the hope that any 

deviations on the part of the Manager would be in the direction of 

slightly more rapid growth of bank reserves.  

Mr. Maisel said it seemed evident that if it were not for a 

sharp projected increase in Vietnam expenditures over the next year 

the Committee would now be concerned that the level of demand might 

be about to shift to too low a level. Certainly many parts of the 

private economy now indicated a downturn in spending. At the same 

time, the individual costs of restricted monetary availability



10/4/66 -50

appeared to be growing. On the assumption that the Government deficit 

would be covered by a tax increase, monetary policy should not add 

further to that pressure. Given the lags behind action, the Committee 

should attempt to see that reserves and credit expanded at a normal 

rate.  

Mr. Maisel said he supported the draft directive, but would 

again make clear his belief that it should be interpreted as "no further 

firming," with the proviso meaning that conditions should be consider

ably easier if required reserves continued to come in under 

expectations and the credit proxy expansion fell below the 5 to 6 per 

cent annual rate expected for October.  

Mr. Maisel thought the Committee should also recognize the base 

from which the present policy started--namely, average free reserves 

of minus $370 million; a three-month bill rate averaging under 5.10 

per cent; and a Federal funds rate of close to 5.50 per cent. He 

thought the Committee should consider the sharp run-up in rates during 

the past period as unusual. He was not concerned with the fact that 

they occurred, since more randomness in movements should be welcomed 

and the market should be made aware of the fact that wider movements 

were to be expected. At the same time, however, the high rates should 

not be accepted as normal and as meeting the Committee's desires. The 

goal should be to return at least to the type of conditions prevailing 

before the recent run-up.



10/4/66 -51

If high demand for loans did raise rates even with a normal 

increase in reserves and bank credit, Mr. Maisel observed, that 

should be allowed, but there should be no attempt to either raise 

rates or to hold them at present levels. If a normal expansion of 

reserves led to lower rates that should be accepted also.  

Mr. Daane said that before turning to the subject of policy 

he would comment on two matters that had been touched on in the pre

ceding discussion. On the question of multilateral surveillance, he 

would simply say that from the beginning that term had meant different 

things to different people. The issue Mr. Brimmer referred to was, 

of course, not a new one. From the outset the U.S. had taken the 

position that it was willing to furnish its statistics to the Bank 

for International Settlements--indeed, it had been more willing to do 

so than some other countries--and to have such information as seemed 

appropriate channeled through the BIS and the Governors meeting in 

Basle to Working Party 3. Multilateral surveillance at WP-3, as the 

U.S. delegation had seen it, and as Under Secretary of the Treasury 

Deming had reiterated, consisted of informal discussions of the 

economic and monetary developments and policies of the various 

countries concerned; questions of international credit assistance, 

swap lines, and so forth, were most properly discussed at Basle.  

From the outset he had shared Mr. Hayes' concern in the matter and had 

tried to help in avoiding formal surveillance procedures. But it was



10/4/66 -52

necessary to recognize the desire of some of the Europeans to harden 

the procedures--to move to a more active review of countries' policies 

and to go beyond the stage of lecturing individual countries to some

thing approaching a formal approval of international credit 

arrangements and financing policies.  

That sentiment of the Europeans was perhaps most marked at the 

time the package of assistance to Italy was arranged, Mr. Daane 

continued. There was considerable resentment then on the part of the 

Europeans that the question of the Italian credit package had not been 

submitted to Working Party 3 for review. The U.S. view was that, if it 

had been submitted to WP-3, no stabilization package would have 

eventuated and Italy would not be in the position it was today.  

On the question of the reflow of funds through foreign branches 

of U.S. banks, Mr. Daane said, he was not convinced that such reflows 

would necessarily complicate the implementation of monetary policy. He 

would concede that insufficient account might have been taken of them 

at times, but looking to the future, it was not inevitable that they 

would represent a serious constraint on monetary policy.  

As to policy itself, Mr. Daane felt that at present it would be 

the course of wisdom for the System to stay "steady in the boat." Both 

the various existing uncertainties that had been mentioned and the 

prospective Treasury financings augured for maintaining an even keel.  

The draft directive appeared appropriate, except that it might be 

desirable to add a reference to the Treasury financings.



10/4/66 -53

Mr. Mitchell said that he agreed with Mr. Partee's diagnosis 

of the economic situation; the private economy was showing unmistak

able signs of some slippage. Recent inventory developments offered an 

impressive sign of weakness, even after allowing for the poor quality 

of the data and the uncertainty of the seasonal adjustments. The 

situation existing in the stock market for some time now did not augur 

well for future economic activity. The earlier general feeling of 

ebullience in the economy appeared to be completely gone. Various 

economic time series indicated that acceleration had ended, in some 

cases as much as a year ago. It was important to recognize that a 

great part of the economy--namely, the private sector--had not only 

lost much of its momentum but might be on the way down.  

Mr. Mitchell felt that monetary policy had been playing a 

significant, and appropriate, role recently. However, he did not 

believe that in the U.S. economy today monetary policy could be used 

effectively to check cost-push inflation. The most that monetary 

policy could do was to slow down the rate of economic expansion. He 

also was impressed with the lagged effects of policy actions; some of 

the consequences of the Committee's actions earlier in the year were 

now appearing. And he was impressed with the fact that banks were 

now taking the kinds of measures to counter demands for business loans, 

as well as other demands, that the System had hoped for earlier--and 

they were doing so without coming to the discount window at all.



10/4/66 -54

Accordingly, he believed the Committee now had all the restraint that 

was needed and, considering lags, perhaps more than was needed.  

Mr. Mitchell said he would not want to see the System enter 

a period in which there was a real threat of a downturn without 

recognizing that threat. Part of the problem was that the Committee 

had, in a way, been hypnotized by the acceleration of defense 

spending. There was no doubt that defense spending had accelerated, 

but there also was no doubt in his mind that if the acceleration 

continued some further fiscal action would be taken. Thus, monetary 

policy would no longer be left to deal with the situation alone. All 

of that suggested to him that the Committee should be concerned that 

it did not go too far in the direction of restraint rather than not 

far enough.  

Turning to the draft directive, Mr. Mitchell said that the 

only quarrel he had with the second paragraph was that he did not 

think the analysis underlying the staff's expectations for the credit 

proxy was very realistic, but he could not improve on it. He would 

suggest some changes in the first paragraph, however, to make the 

language more consistent with the staff views expressed orally today 

and in the green book.1/ Following the phrase at the end of the first 

sentence reading "despite the substantial weakening in residential 

1/ The report, "Recent Economic and Financial Developments," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



10/4/66 -55

construction," he would insert a comma and add "uncertainties in 

equity markets, and a sharp increase in business inventories." In 

the phrase of the second sentence reading "credit demands remain 

strong," he would insert "still" before "remain." Finally, he 

would amend the statement of the Committee's policy in the last 

sentence of the paragraph by replacing the phrase "to resist 

inflationary pressures" with the phrase "to moderate the rate of 

growth in credit use." 

Mr. Mitchell concluded by observing that he agreed with 

Mr. Hayes on the best manner at present for dealing with the pull

back of funds through foreign branches of U.S. banks. However, he 

thought there might well be some backlash in the future as a result 

of those inflows.  

Mr. Hayes said he was not sure he understood Mr. Mitchell's 

suggested change in the last sentence of the directive's first 

paragraph. Was the term "credit use" meant as a synonym for credit 

expansion? 

Mr. Mitchell replied affirmatively, but indicated that he 

had had total credit, rather than bank credit, in mind.  

Mr. Shepardson agreed that there were some indications of 

lessening ebullience in economic activity. However, he felt that 

prospects for defense expenditures lent more strength to the economic 

outlook than Mr. Mitchell had suggested. All the evidence on defense



10/4/66 -56

spending, limited as it was, pointed to significant further expansion, 

and the pressures that would involve had to be recognized. It was 

true that now, hopefully, there was greater prospect of fiscal action 

if those pressures developed; at the same time, such action was still 

in the future.  

Given the conflicts among indicators and the uncertainties in 

the economic situation, Mr. Shepardson said, the staff's draft 

directive, as written, seemed entirely appropriate to him. He would 

interpret the draft as calling for essentially the degree of restraint 

that had existed in the recent period, with allowance for unexpected 

deviations of the bank credit proxy from the projections. At some 

point it might be appropriate to take a definite easing action but at 

this time, with the uncertainties existing in both directions, he 

thought it was desirable to maintain firm money market conditions.  

It would be unfortunate, in his judgment, if money market conditions 

were permitted to ease as a result of an easing in demands; by 

taking up any slack that might develop the Committee would maintain 

some measure of control until such time as it was able to develop a 

better assessment of the outlook.  

Mr. Wayne commented that a feeling of uncertainty seemed to 

be more prevalent in the Fifth District even though employment 

remained strong and prices received and wages continued to inch 

upward. Rates of insured unemployment achieved, or remained near,



10/4/66 -57

record lows. Textile industry respondents to the Richmond Reserve 

Bank's latest survey reported significant declines in new orders and 

backlogs and an increase in finished inventories. Reports had also 

been received that some textile mills had cut back to a five-day 

week. Major manufacturers of man-made textiles recently announced 

substantial price reductions for polyester blends, reportedly to 

bring quoted prices more nearly in line with the actual market and to 

counter the August reduction of cotton prices. Somewhat puzzling 

were reports that the Defense Department would reduce its purchases 

of military textiles this fiscal year perhaps by as much as 30 per 

cent--a move that might produce downward pressures on the prices of a 

number of products. Other manufacturers also reported sluggishness 

in the volume of new orders and some easing of backlogs. The strong 

demand that continued for boxing material and containers was an 

indication that shipments of finished goods would continue heavy.  

Without a clear indication of the reason for it, it was pertinent to 

note that building permits in the District were up substantially in 

August for the first time since last February--the principal weakness 

was in the northern part of the District. Thus far this season, 

flue-cured tobacco prices had averaged almost 7 per cent above 

year-earlier levels.  

In the national economy, Mr. Wayne continued, activity 

remained high and spending continued strong. Industrial production



10/4/66 -58

had moved ahead, although at a reduced rate, despite lower automobile 

production. Substantial gains in personal income supported a high 

level of retail sales. Employment also showed moderate gains but 

there were occasional reports that labor was not as scarce as it was 

earlier. The continuing pressure on prices was evidenced by public 

announcements of price increases in September covering over a hundred 

companies and a wide range of major commodities. Defense expenditures 

seemed to be running well ahead of estimates while education and 

welfare expenditures showed a steady and fairly rapid acceleration.  

Despite large increases in revenue from income taxes, the deficit 

in the cash budget for July and August was substantially larger than 

in the same months for other recent years.  

Despite those sources of strength, however, inflation had not 

escalated in recent months, Mr. Wayne said. The rates at which prices 

and economic activity had been rising had not increased. In fact, 

there were indications to the contrary. Construction activity, of 

course, continued to decline. Manufacturers' new orders were down 

significantly in August. Weakness persisted in a few prices.  

Automobile sales remained low and there seemed to be some concern 

about the sales prospects for the new models. Scattered reports and 

speculations indicated uneasiness about the trend of corporate profits.  

Unit labor costs seemed to be inching up, interest costs were higher, 

and the suspension of the investment tax credit would gradually detract



10/4/66 -59

from profits, If an increase in the income tax rate was added, the 

uneasiness could be converted into pessimism.  

A somewhat longer look at developments confirmed the tendency 

toward slower rates of growth, Mr. Wayne observed. In the six months 

ending with August, nine major measures of economic activity, 

including wholesale and consumer prices, showed an average increase 

of 1.3 per cent for the period, which was substantially lower than the 

increase in any of the three previous half years. In the latest 

period, two of the measures registered declines; in the three previous 

periods there had been no declines.  

As for policy, Mr. Wayne did not believe that the scattered 

signs of slower growth were sufficient to justify any easing at this 

time, although they might be adequate caution against further 

tightening. The slowing had probably been accomplished to a 

considerable extent by monetary restraint and if that pressure were 

relaxed, growth rates might bounce back, especially in the absence 

of further fiscal restraint. It was fortunate that the middle of 

September had been passed with relatively little trouble. The sharp 

drop in net borrowed reserves and the easier conditions in the money 

market which followed were perhaps a cheap price to pay for results 

attained. But he would not want to see the easier conditions 

restored. If the Committee gave the market reason to believe that 

policy had been eased significantly, it could lose much of what it had



10/4/66 -60

worked hard to attain over recent months. It might be that the 

somewhat easier and more settled conditions in the money market 

during the last half of September were due to temporary factors 

and would shortly be reversed. It might be, however, that they 

were caused in part by actions of member banks to contain demand 

and to ration credit. If that should be the case, the Committee 

might be able to accomplish adequate restraint without quite such 

high interest rates or so much tension as there had been a month 

ago. Until it could be seen whether that was true, he would favor 

keeping a firm control on the availability of reserves.  

Mr. Wayne favored adoption of the draft directive.  

Mr. Clay remarked that while forthcoming economic devel

opments could not be known with certainty, there appeared to be 

little reason to doubt that the national economy would continue 

under the pressure of over-stimulation, with resources tight and 

costs and prices rising. It might be that some sectors of economic 

activity would level off or decline, but the probable additions 

from the military sector suggested that aggregate demand for goods 

and services would remain in excess of the capacity for orderly 

production. Certainly, it appeared the better part of judgment 

that public policy, including monetary policy, should be formulated 

on that premise.



10/4/66

While proceeding on that premise led logically enough to 

the need for a policy of restraint, Mr. Clay continued, it did 

not indicate the particular monetary policy action to be taken 

at this time. Recent developments in both the commercial banks 

and the money and capital markets caused uncertainty on that point.  

Recent evidence did suggest that it would be appropriate to avoid 

added restraint on the commercial banks, but such short-run devel

opments would not seem sufficient basis for a turnaround in policy.  

Perhaps the best course at this time would be a general goal of 

continuing the current monetary policy with a guide of "maintaining 

firm but orderly conditions in the money market." Higher interest 

rates would not be a target under such a policy, but rates would 

be permitted to rise if credit demands increased substantially.  

The draft economic policy directive appeared satisfactory 

to Mr. Clay.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that current discussions of economic 

prospects by Seventh District businessmen often included references 

to the sharp drop in housing starts, the reduced rate of auto sales, 

the continued decline in the stock market, further escalation in 

Vietnam, and "tight money." Nevertheless, no convincing evidence 

could be mustered in the District to indicate that demands were 

pressing less vigorously on the region's facilities and manpower.  

Labor markets had tightened further, Mr. Scanlon said, and 

in recent weeks new claims for unemployment compensation had been

-61-



10/4/66 -62

well below the reduced level of a year earlier. He had been 

unable to uncover any evidence that construction workers had been 

idled as a result of the decline in housing starts. Such workers 

apparently had been absorbed in nonresidential construction or in 

industry. Order backlogs of producers of machinery and equipment 

continued to rise in August, with defense orders helping to boost 

the total. He saw no evidence that orders had been reduced signif

icantly as a result of the proposed suspension of the investment 

tax credit. A large Chicago area steel producer reported that 

demand from all major customer groups--including the auto industry-

remained excellent, in contrast to some newspaper and trade journal 

accounts of a slower order trend.  

Demands for credit by businessstill appeared strong, 

Mr. Scanlon observed. Expansion in business loans, after slowing 

markedly in August, continued at a moderate pace in September at 

major District banks, but whatever slackening had occurred seemed 

mainly a reflection of the restrictive loan policies of the banks.  

Responses to the September 15 lending practice survey indicated 

that most of the large District banks felt loan demand was stronger 

now than three months ago, and the majority expected that demand 

to show at least moderate increases in the fourth quarter. Most 

of the respondents stressed their lack of liquidity, uncertainty 

about their ability to replace CD money, and anticipated strong



10/4/66 -63

loan demand as the major reasons for their firmer lending practices.  

Reserve positions of the Chicago banks were showing some additional 

pressure, with purchases of Federal funds up substantially and 

moderately greater use of the discount window.  

With large prospective demands for credit both by Government 

and by private business through the fourth quarter, the pace of 

credit and monetary growth seemed likely to Mr. Scanlon to accelerate 

in the period ahead--again posing for policy a problem of maintaining 

adequate restraint within an acceptable range of interest rates.  

Recent data continued to show evidence of a general slowing in 

monetary and bank credit expansion since mid-year. It was apparent 

now that at least part of the recent increase in interest rates 

could be attributed to the cutback in the rate of growth in supply 

of loanable funds as a result of System actions. Given the current 

and prospective price and employment conditions, it appeared appro

priate to undertake to maintain very slow rates of monetary and 

credit expansion. Therefore he favored a policy of maintaining the 

recent posture but with the proviso that the Committee undertake 

to offset the effects of any strengthened credit demand.  

The draft directive was satisfactory to Mr. Scanlon, 

although he continued to have concern about the phrase "current 

expectations." It seemed to him that somewhere along the line the 

System might have to define that phrase, in retrospect. Whether



10/4/66 -64

that meant reading into the record the contents of the blue book 

and, if so, whether the Committee's actions were consistent with 

those "current expectations" he was not certain, but it did cause 

him some concern.  

Mr. Galusha reported that last week witnessed the establish

ment, in the Twin Cities area, of a new pattern of share and deposit 

rates. Area savings and loan associations, taking advantage of 

the recently announced Federal Home Loan Bank Board policy, introduced 

six-month savings certificates which paid the ceiling rate. Also, 

the one large savings bank in the Ninth District raised its rates 

on passbook and time deposits. And last Friday the largest bank 

in the District announced a 5 per cent small-denomination CD rate.  

Almost certainly, all the other reserve city banks in the District 

were going to follow, so it would seem that the implementation of 

the new rate-ceiling legislation had had the effect of raising rates.  

He need not tell the Committee, he supposed, that District bankers 

outside the Twin Cities were unhappy. Whether the savings and loan 

associations were going to fare better under the new rate structure 

than they did under the old was not something he as yet had any idea 

about. Also uncertain was the real impact a reflow in their direction 

might have on the depressed residential construction industry.  

Mr. Galusha noted in passing that there had been very few 

member banks paying more than 5 per cent on time deposits, so dealing



10/4/66 -65

with the distortions induced by a roll-back would not be a quan

titatively significant problem.  

Mr. Galusha said that large District banks seemed to have 

gotten through September fairly well and, whether rightly or 

wrongly, did not seem to be panicky about an October run-off of 

CD's. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank had been moderate and very 

much in the pattern of the past several months. The banks continued 

very reluctant to borrow under the new program of discount window 

administration.  

Turning to the issue of policy, Mr. Galusha remarked that 

the GNP account projections contained in the green book seemed 

entirely reasonable to him. He certainly agreed that a highly 

probable increase in Federal defense purchases "dominates the 

economic outlook," but would add that, at the moment, relatively 

large increases in Federal civilian and State and local purchases 

also had to be expected. For a while to come, at any rate, State 

and local governments were going to be enjoying relatively high 

tax flows.  

Accordingly, Mr. Galusha saw no strong case for forcing-

or even permitting, in the face of temporarily reduced credit 

demands--generally lower interest rates. But neither could a 

strong case be made, it seemed to him, for forcing generally higher 

interest rates. Almost certainly the coming few months would witness



10/4/66 -66

higher income tax rates--unless, of course, they witnessed a de

escalation in Vietnam, a possibility that only the most extravagant 

optimist could expect. Even if a tax rate increase were not in 

the offing, there would still be reason enough for waiting. It 

was not known as yet what the effect of suspending the tax credit 

and accelerated depreciation was going to be. Then, too, embar

rassing as it might be to Committee and staff members, it was not 

known what effect current monetary stringency was having on the 

demand for plant and equipment. He sensed that it was appreciable; 

but he could not prove or even be highly confident about that.  

Like Mr. Mitchell, he, too, felt an uneasiness. In soundings taken 

with businessmen he sensed a common concern with the civilian side 

of the economy. But again, except for retail sales in the Twin 

Cities and residential construction, there were no clear signs 

visible to him. That was why he was an advocate of a cautious 

approach. And since the time until the new plant and equipment 

surveys would be available was short, waiting would seem to be 

prudent.  

Mr. Galusha thus favored maintaining "firm but orderly 

conditions in the money market," and aiming not, perhaps, for 

last week's average of money market rates but for a slightly higher 

average. He would expect a slight firming of money market rates 

to be consistent with a rather considerable decrease in average



10/4/66 -67

net borrowed reserves. But if events were to prove that expectation 

wrong, he would not back off from his rate objective. The market 

could easily be persuaded that a greater average net borrowed 

reserve figure did not mean the System had changed its mind about 

policy. The directive, as drafted, seemed fine to him.  

Mr. Swan said that more complete figures confirmed the 

impression he had reported three weeks ago--that in the Twelfth 

District in August there had been no increase in nonagricultural 

employment and another small rise in the unemployment rate. August 

housing starts were above July but still well below the levels of 

each of the first six months of 1966. Perhaps some encouragement 

for the longer-run could be found in the fact that the rental 

vacancy rate was down in the second quarter from a year earlier.  

However, that rate remained higher in the west than in other areas 

of the country.  

The most significant recent development in the banking 

sector, Mr. Swan continued, seemed to be the very small growth, 

both absolute and relative to the rest of the country, in business 

loans of District weekly reporting banks during the first three 

weeks of September. The increase had been only 1/3 of 1 per cent, 

compared with a rise of 2-1/4 per cent at weekly reporting banks 

outside the District. While the survey of lending practices in 

the District continued to show increases in the strength of business



10/4/66 -68

loan demand, he wondered whether there were not some reporting 

lags in that area, as there were in others. Banks had tightened 

their business loan policies somewhat, but he would hesitate to 

ascribe the extraordinarily small increase in business loans solely 

to that factor.  

On the other side of the balance sheet, Mr. Swan remarked, 

the major District banks had had their share of CD losses in the 

past three weeks--both corporate CD's and, more particularly, time 

deposits of States and political subdivisions. In the three weeks 

ending September 21, Twelfth District weekly reporting banks lost 

5 per cent of their State and local government deposits, compared 

with a corresponding decline of 1/3 of 1 per cent outside the 

District; since mid-year the decline in the District had been 

17-1/2 per cent, compared with 11 per cent elsewhere. Borrowings 

from the Reserve Bank were still quite low. Following the recent 

high reached in the week ending September 7, borrowings had declined 

each week both absolutely and relative to the rest of the country.  

As the Committee knew, Mr. Swan said, the new ceiling rates 

on savings and loan passbook accounts were somewhat higher in 

California than elsewhere. The ceiling rates of 5-1/4 per cent on 

passbook accounts and 5 per cent on bank CD's under $100,000 were 

about in line with existing patterns. However, California associa

tions could no longer offer 5-3/4 per cent on new bonus accounts,



10/4/66 -69

in which there had been considerable growth during the past several 

months. As far as banks were concerned, a few smaller banks that 

had been offering 5-1/2 per cent on consumer-type certificates 

might suffer losses, but the great bulk of such deposits had been 

earning no more than 5 per cent. A number of banks had argued 

that the ceiling rate on CD's under $100,000 held by States and 

political subdivisions should have been left at 5-1/2 per cent 

rather than being reduced to 5 per cent. That was related in part 

to one kind of reaction that had occurred to the Board's earlier 

action with respect to multiple-maturity deposits; to some extent 

multiple-maturity deposits of governments had been replaced by a 

series of fixed maturity deposits, each of which was less than 

$100,000, and substantial losses of such deposits were now feared.  

As to policy, Mr. Swan said, like Mr. Mitchell he shared 

Mr. Partee's concern about some of the recent developments in the 

private sector. Given the probable levels of defense expenditures, 

however, he saw no basis for an easing of policy, and he would 

continue about as at present for the next few weeks. While one 

might hope for additional fiscal action if defense expenditures 

continued to rise, such action was still in the future, and the 

Committee could not make any particular assumptions as to its form 

or intensity. Accordingly, it seemed to him that the Committee



10/4/66 -70

should continue to maintain the policy of caution, with exceptions 

allowed for unforeseen developments under the proviso clause of 

the directive.  

As to the wording of the directive, Mr. Swan would support 

the changes Mr. Mitchell proposed in the first two sentences. How

ever, he would retain the phrase "to resist inflationary pressures" 

in the last sentence of the first paragraph, particularly in view 

of the statement earlier in the paragraph that inflationary pressures 

were persisting. But he was disturbed by the second part of the 

last sentence, reading "and to strengthen efforts to restore rea

sonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments." Whose 

efforts were to be strengthened was not clear; one might infer that 

it was the Committee's efforts. But that would imply additional 

firming, which was not consistent with the rest of the directive.  

Perhaps the word "continue" should be substituted for "strengthen." 

With respect to the second paragraph, he agreed that some reference 

to the Treasury financings should be included, but it should be 

worded to avoid implying that the financings were the primary factor 

in the policy decision.  

Mr. Irons reported that economic conditions in the Eleventh 

District had been strong recently, with inflationary overtones, but 

they were not surging. Nonagricultural employment had risen a bit, 

as it had for the past several months. The District industrial



10/4/66 -71

production index continued at a high level and showed a year-to

year gain of 9 per cent. Construction activity varied from month 

to month, but for the year to date it was up about 10 per cent 

from the same period last year. Retail sales remained strong--thus 

far in 1966 they were 7 per cent above 1965--but new car registrations 

were relatively unchanged this year from last year. Agriculture 

was enjoying highly favorable conditions; moisture was good and 

the outlook was excellent. Cash farm receipts were up appreciably 

from the comparable period in 1965.  

In the financial area, Mr. Irons continued, over the past 

three weeks loans at District weekly reporting banks were up about 

$90 million, with two-thirds of the rise occurring in commercial 

and industrial loans. Investment portfolios were reduced a bit, 

with most of the reduction in holdings of Treasury securities.  

Demand deposits in District banks were up substantially but time 

deposits were down a little, perhaps reflecting CD experience.  

Borrowings averaged $77 million as against $42 million in the preced

ing three weeks. Only one bank had evidenced any interest in the 

special program of discount administration, and apart from that 

bank borrowings in the District were relatively low. Average net 

purchases of Federal funds had been running a bit higher recently 

and there was a relatively wide use of the funds market, even among 

smaller country banks. There were indications, although slight as



10/4/66 -72

yet, that some intermediate-size banks would shift from the Federal 

funds market to the discount window for liquidity purposes if the 

Reserve Bank would permit them to do so. Some banks had indicated 

that they interpreted the special program as involving a less 

tight administration of the window and they almost implied that 

if funds were to be made available more readily they would be 

interested in getting some of them.  

Mr. Irons observed that the money and capital markets had 

been influenced by a variety of factors during most of September, 

including rumors as well as actual events, as had already been 

reported. The result was sharp and varying movements of rates 

and conditions in the market. He had been more satisfied with the 

conditions prevailing in the later part of the period than in the 

earlier part, but he noted that the markets had come through the 

difficult earlier time with much less of a problem than had been 

anticipated.  

On the basis of observations in his District, Mr. Irons 

felt that bankers were now taking a somewhat different view than 

they had three or six months ago of the System's program for 

restraining bank loans. Earlier, the situation had been one of a 

scramble for funds to lend. Now, while the banks were not nec

essarily turning down every loan application they received, they



10/4/66 -73

were clearly accepting the fact that it was necessary for them to 

carry out their part of the program.  

As to policy for the coming period, Mr. Irons recommended 

maintaining firm but orderly conditions in the market. Inflationary 

pressures continued strong despite the fact that monetary policy 

was biting; he recognized the forces working in the other direction 

but still felt that the balance was on the inflationary side. Perhaps, 

however, the Committee should attempt at this point to achieve a 

little more stability in the market than had existed at times in 

the past month. The Treasury would be in the market, and their 

operations would have rate effects; and it was not possible to say 

what would happen in connection with the short-term CD's that would 

mature in October.  

In sum, Mr. Irons favored continuing the policy of the past 

few weeks while trying to bring about more stable conditions and 

attitudes in the market generally. Any effort to ease policy would 

risk losing some of the recent gains, and any effort to firm would 

threaten to produce other undesirable conditions in the financial 

markets. The directive as drafted was acceptable to him; in partic

ular, the second paragraph specified the proper objectives. Certainly, 

at this time the Account Manager had to have a great deal of flexibil

ity to meet the situations that could arise from day to day--or even



10/4/66 -74

from hour to hour, as had been clear during the recent period 

when he (Mr. Irons) had participated in the daily call. He would 

not favor any change in the discount rate at this time.  

Mr. Ellis said that again he had to confess that the 

fundamental aspects of employment, production, and income in the 

First District fell into a more comprehensible pattern than did 

the financial counterparts of those activities. Measured in real 

terms, seasonally adjusted employment had continued rising in the 

latest available data. Factory output, paced by year-to-year gains 

of 20 per cent in machinery industries, had recorded a 13 per cent 

twelve-month gain. The Reserve Bank's fall survey of capital 

investment plans of New England manufacturers was nearly completed, 

and it indicated that 1966 outlays would exceed those of last year 

by more than one-third. Carry-over into next year of uncompleted 

programs would account for almost twice the normal 10 per cent 

recorded in previous surveys.  

In the financial area, Mr. Ellis continued, like Mr. Hayes 

he found the data perplexing. In the past three weeks, business 

loans in New England leveled off on a plateau 17 per cent above 

last year's level. Other loans and investments continued to grow, 

however, as did both time and demand deposit totals. On balance, 

the large banks found themselves in a somewhat easier position than 

contemplated earlier. As a result, at least partially, borrowing



10/4/66 -75

at the discount window in Boston declined by 35 per cent between 

August and September, at a time when borrowing in the nation rose 

by 4.7 per cent.  

In good conscience, Mr. Ellis remarked, he had also to 

report that that regional variation in borrowing might trace to 

some differences in administration of the discount window. Follow

ing the September 1st letter, he had held face-to-face conferences 

with the District's eight largest banks, and he had discussed 

discounting in five area conferences including officers and directors 

of 41 per cent of member banks and 32 per cent of nonmember banks.  

Nowhere did he find any disposition to seek extended borrowing 

privileges as an assist in reserve adjustement during curtailment 

of business loans. But the Bank did receive queries reflecting 

the belief that Mr. Irons had mentioned, that discount administra

tion had been eased.  

Concerning the need that Mr. Hayes had noted for avoiding 

the concept of two discount windows, Mr. Ellis suggested abandoning 

the effort to tabulate statistics on the special discounting program.  

First, the intended use of the data was not clear to him, and he 

was not convinced that they would have any significant meaning.  

Secondly, the requirement that discount officers report on the 

program inevitably affected both the timing of their calls and



10/4/66 -76

what they said when they talked with borrowing banks. Those aspects 

of the program could have undesired consequences.  

Recently, Mr. Ellis said, a large life insurance company 

had advised the Reserve Bank that policy loan expansions in July 

and August each absorbed the equivalent of their present holdings 

of cash and short-term Governments. Their sales of stocks and 

bonds to meet that drain were quite painful in present markets.  

While they had a bank loan commitment of $25 million, they had not 

yet had to draw on it. They had requested an appointment with the 

Reserve Bank to discuss possible sources of liquidity if their 

pinch worsened. To date, he had learned of only one savings bank 

that was borrowing any significant amounts from commercial banks, 

and that was to forestall sale of near-maturity Governments.  

On the national scene, Mr. Ellis continued, probably the 

most notable and salutary development had been the interruption of 

bank credit expansion in September. While it was tempting to 

conclude that monetary policy was now--at long last--biting enough 

to slow down the credit boom, he was disinclined to suggest any 

change in policy based on such a short-term development. He noted 

the projections for October indicated a resumption of credit expan

sion and run-up in reserves. The Committee should be careful to 

distinguish between inflection points, which it sought, and down

turns into actual decline, which it did not seek.



10/4/66

Mr. Ellis viewed the Committee's principal problem today 

as one of usefully defining to the Manager a workable concept of 

"no overt change in policy." Unfortunately, the one week in which 

net borrowed reserves dropped below $200 million, in company with 

declining bill rates, did suggest to some bankers that policy was 

being eased. He agreed with Mr. Hayes that now was not the time 

to raise the discount rate. Unfortunately, however, the magnitude 

of the difference between the discount rate and rates on other 

reserve adjustment instruments threw into question the meaning of 

any given level of borrowing. In effect, the level of borrowing 

was a measure of how high and leakproof the System had built the 

dikes against borrowing by its discount administration.  

Mr. Ellis commented that the staff projections of October 

growth rates in bank credit of 5.6 per cent, in required reserves 

of 9.9 per cent, and in the money supply of 7 per cent, were all 

premised on net borrowed reserves averaging $450 million, although 

such a level had not been attained in any month in the present period 

of tight money. Such rates of growth were clearly adequate if not 

excessive. Accordingly, he would conclude a net borrowed reserve 

target of $450 million was an entirely feasible starting point in 

setting policy objectives for October.  

Mr. Ellis agreed with the staff comment in the blue book 

that "The outlook for the coming month is consistent with a tendency

-77-



10/4/66 -78

not only for short-term markets to tighten but also for long-term 

rates to rise." However, he felt some inclination to challenge 

the usefulness of the subsequent and concluding paragraph, where 

it was suggested that "...a failure of (money market) rates to 

tend upward may mean that banks are under less loan pressure than 

we currently foresee..." Instead, he would anticipate that a 

failure of money market rates to rise would more likely result from 

the Committee's failure to re-establish the tightness experienced 

in August. He foresaw a danger, out of concern for Treasury 

financing, of repeating the December 1965 experience. By over

concern with the levels of rates the Committee could easily lose 

its grip on required reserves, and find them flowing out even more 

rapidly than the 9.9 per cent rate that the staff projected as 

likely if the Committee were to be successful in achieving a net 

borrowed reserve figure of $450 million.  

As to the draft directive, Mr. Ellis said, the majority 

view expressed around the table was that it was appropriate, which 

he took to mean that it was vague enough to be acceptable. But he 

thought the Committee owed it to itself to determine what the 

language meant to it. The proviso clause began, "operations shall 

be modified in the light of unusual liquidity pressures..." He 

understood that to mean that operations should be modified toward 

ease in the event of severe liquidity pressures. The clause also



10/4/66 -79

said that operations should be modified in light "of any appar

ently significant deviations of bank credit from current expectations." 

Underscoring the words "apparently" and "significant," he reflected 

that while the phrase was vague he understood it to mean that 

operations should be modified toward tightness if bank credit 

growth exceeded expectations. He agreed with Mr. Scanlon that the 

reference to expectations posed a problem. He thought the Committee 

should attempt to define its current expectations in the course of 

its deliberations; presumably the intention of the directive wording 

was to refer to the projections given on pages 4 and 5 in the blue 

book. He shared Mr. Swan's concern about the use of the word 

"strengthen" in the last sentence of the first paragraph and sugges

ted use of the word "support." 

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

Everything I have read and heard in connection 
with this meeting seems to me to argue for a policy of 

very watchful waiting over the weeks ahead.  
On the one hand, the signs of slowdown in credit 

expansion and promise of more fiscal restraint make 

me disinclined to any further tightening of monetary 
policy just now. On the other hand, continued cost 

and price increases and the absence of any evidence of 
abatement in the strong upthrust of public and private 

spending make me wary of any shift toward monetary ease.  
While I do not want to be premature in the matter 

of easing, I most certainly do want us to be prepared 
to act promptly and at the right time. With as much 

cumulative restraint as we have built up within the 

System, and with all the lagged effects that will result 

from it in the quarters ahead, I think we have to be very 

much on our guard against staying too tight too long, but



10/4/66

we are just beginning to attain the goal we have been 
working toward and I am not yet convinced that the 
time for change has arrived.  

The staff expects money market conditions to 
tighten a little as Treasury bill financing and 
corporate borrowing for tax purposes come into the 
picture in October. Consequently, a little firming 
would be appropriate if bank credit and particularly 
business credit run as strong as expected, or stronger.  
But if they turn out to be appreciably weaker, then 
I would want the Manager to begin to moderate reserve 
pressures somewhat, and not to have to wait for the 
next meeting to obtain a Committee authorization for 
doing so. Hence, the "proviso" clause in the directive 
can prove to be particularly helpful during the next 
few weeks.  

The actions outlined are consistent with the 
substance of the directive as adopted at the last 
meeting, and I would favor adopting it again with 
the few language suggestions made by the staff; how
ever, I would favor Governor Mitchell's suggested 
additions to the first two sentences of the directive.  

Chairman Martin observed that the views on policy of 

Committee members appeared to be closer together today than they 

had been for some time. He would make just one observation. On 

the basis of reading he had done since returning to the office 

after his absence this summer, he was of the view that if it were 

not for defense spending the economy might well be experiencing a 

little downturn right now, and he did not think defense spending 

was a very strong prop for an economy. That led him to the view 

that monetary policy had done about all it should be expected to 

do at present. The proper course for Government policy at this 

juncture was clear; any substantial increase in defense expenditures

-80-



10/4/66 -81

should be covered by a tax increase. He believed that that was 

recognized by the Administration, and if there was a supplemental 

budget request of any size it would be accompanied by a proposal 

for fiscal policy action.  

The Chairman went on to say that the recent legislation 

relating to deposit interest rate ceilings had been handled as 

well as might have been expected. The legislation enacted 

probably was the least objectionable of the available means for 

solving the problems at which it was directed.  

The present was a difficult period, Chairman Martin 

continued, with dislocations and disruptions in markets. Like 

Mr. Robertson, he was inclined toward a policy of "watchful 

waiting." He thought the Committee should seek to attain as much 

stability as possible, particularly in view of the prospective 

Treasury financings.  

As to the directive, the Chairman suggested that the 

Committee accept the changes in the first two sentences of the 

staff's draft recommended by Mr. Mitchell, the substitution 

proposed by Mr. Swan of "continue" for "strengthen" in the last 

sentence of the first paragraph, and the inclusion of the ref

erence to forthcoming Treasury financings in the second paragraph 

recommended by Mr. Daane. He did not favor Mr. Mitchell's sugges

tion that the first-paragraph phrase "to resist inflationary



10/4/66 -82

pressures" be replaced by other language. Inflationary pressures 

were continuing, whether they were of the demand-pull or cost

push variety. He asked whether there were any objections to a 

directive formulated in the manner he had described.  

Mr. Solomon commented that citing "a sharp increase in 

business inventories" among the signs of weakness, as Mr. Mitchell 

had suggested, might mislead readers of the policy record if they 

were not aware that a good part of the increase was involuntary.  

It might be better to say "despite slower growth in final demand 

than in output." 

Mr. Mitchell said he would be willing to refer to an 

"involuntary" increase in inventories.  

Chairman Martin commented that if the phrase was likely 

to be misleading it might be better to omit it.  

Mr. Partee observed that of the two signs of weakness for 

which Mr. Mitchell had proposed adding references, he felt the 

inventory increase was more significant than the uncertainties in 

equity markets. He thought it would be understood from the context 

that much of the inventory rise was considered likely to have been 

involuntary and, in any case, the text of the policy record entry 

prepared for today's meeting undoubtedly would make that point clear.  

There was general agreement with Mr. Partee's observations.



10/4/66

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee,to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity is expanding vigorously, despite the substantial 
weakening in residential construction, uncertainties in 
equity markets, and a sharp increase in business inventories.  
Inflationary pressures are persisting and aggregate credit 
demands still remain strong. The balance of payments 
continues to show a sizable liquidity deficit. In this 
situation, and in light of the new fiscal program announced 
by the President, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to resist inflationary pressures and to continue 
efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of forth
coming Treasury financings, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining firm but orderly conditions in 
the money market; provided, however, that operations shall 
be modified in the light of unusual liquidity pressures 
or of any apparently significant deviations of bank credit 
from current expectations.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, November 1, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-83-



CONFIDENTIAL (FR) ATTACHMENT A 

October 3, 1966 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on October 4, 1966 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 

meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is expanding 

vigorously, despite the substantial weakening in residential construc

tion. Inflationary pressures are persisting and aggregate credit 

demands remain strong. The balance of payments continues to show 

a sizable liquidity deficit. In this situation, and in light of the 

new fiscal program announced by the President, it is the Federal Open 

Market Committee's policy to resist inflationary pressures and to 

strengthen efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's 

balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations until 

the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 

maintaining firm but orderly conditions in the money market; provided, 

however, that operations shall be modified in the light of unusual 

liquidity pressures or of any apparently significant deviations of 

bank credit from current expectations.



ATTACHMENT B 

SELECTED MEASURES OF MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS 
COMPOUNDED ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE

June 1965 
to 

June 1966

Money Supply 
Demand Deposit Component 
Currency Component 
Time Deposits 
Money Plus Time Deposits

Bank Reserves 

Total Reserves 
2 / 

Reserves Available for Private 
Demand Deposits* 

Federal Reserve Holdings of 
U.S. Government Securities*2 / 

Interest Rates 

4-to 6-Month Commercial Paper 
3-Month Treasury Bills 
3-5 Year Governments 
Long-Term Governments 
Corporate Aaa Bonds 
Municipal Aaa Bonds 
25-Year FHA Mortgages 
FHLB Average of Conventional 

First Mortgage Loans Including 
Fees and Charges

5.8 % 
5.5 
6.9 

12.8 
9.0

+ 3.9 

+ 3.8 

+ 7.2

25.8 
18.4 
22.5 
11.8 
13.7 
14.3 
19.9

+ 6.2

1/ September figures are estimates.  
2/ Adjusted to include effects of changes in 

on time deposits.  
a June to August, partially estimated.  
* Seasonally adjusted by this Bank.

June 1966 
to 

September 1966 1/

1.4 % 
3.5 
5.5 
8.6 
3.2

- 2.1 

- 3.8 

+ 6.7

+ 30.6 
+101.3 
+ 58.3 
+ 13.6 
+ 37.5 
+ 39.2 
+ 1 5 .7a 

+ 2 2 .7a

reserve requirements

Prepared by Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis 
October 3, 1966

Money


