









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 10, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Easthurn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, and Tow, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors



5/10/66 -2

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, Senior Attorney, Legal 
Division, Board of Governors 

Mr. Furth, Consultant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. MacDonald and Kimbrel, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Cleveland and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Baughman, 
Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
held on April 12, 1966, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

April 12 through May 4, 1966, and a supplemental report for May 5 

through 9, 1966. Copies of these reports have been placed in the 

files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs said 

that a reduction of perhaps $75 or $100 million in the Treasury gold 

stock probably could not be delayed much longer. The Stabilization Fund



5/10/66 -3

had only $39 million of gold on hand and there was a prospective 

order from the French approaching $90 million.  

The London gold market had been quiet recently, Mr. Coombs 

remarked, with the price ranging around $35.11. The very tight 

money situation prevailing in all European markets appeared to be 

having pronounced effects on the gold market. High short-term 

interest rates were not only discouraging new purchases of gold but 

might even be stimulating dishoarding in some volume. A number of 

European commercial banks and industrial corporations usually kept 

some part of their cash in gold, and with the Light money conditions 

individual concerns tended to reduce their holdings somewhat from 

time to time. The effect, of course, was not a lasting one; but 

for the moment, at least, it was keeping the market under a minimum 

of pressure. There still were no signs of Russian gold sales despite 

the fact that the Russians now were in process of buying a substantial 

volume of wheat from Canada. At the same time, there was no evidence 

that the mainland Chinese were buying gold.  

Sterling continued to be the main focal point on the exchange 

markets, Mr. Coombs continued. In April, Britain experienced a 

genuine reduction in its reserves of $53 million which was reflected 

in the published figures. In addition, $150 million of short-term 

central bank debt fell due at the end of the month. That debt was 

covered by borrowings of $50 million from the Bundesbank, $50 million



5/10/66 -4-

from the U.S. Treasury, and $50 million from the Federal Reserve under

the standby swap line. The borrowings from the Bundesbank and the U.S.

Treasury were virtually over-night arrangements, and had already been

paid off. The $50 million from the Federal Reserve was on the customary

three-month basis but might be paid off before maturity.

Mr. Coombs went on to say that the initial market reactions to

the British budget announcement on May 3 were unfavorable, and there

was a risk that sterling might drop sharply. The New York Reserve

Bank bought two million pounds for Treasury account, and that seemed

to put a floor under the price of sterling. Subsequently another two

million were bought for Bank of England account, pushing the sterling

rate up somewhat. Those operations seemed to have a stabilizing

effect on expectations, and bridged the few hours required for the

market to digest the real significance of the budget. As the details

became understood--particularly with respect to the payroll tax--the

market stabilized on its own.

It was Mr. Coombs' impression that the British budget did provide

for a rather strong restrictive effect on the economy, particularly in

the first year, although there were a good many unknowns regarding the

manner in which it would be administered. Perhaps the most hopeful

sign was that the Bank of England people seemed reasonably satisfied;

as the Committee would recall, they had been acutely dissatisfied with

last year's budget. However, there still remained the key problem of



5/10/66 -5-

price and wage stabilization, which had been the quid pro quo for

the package of international assistance of last September.

Elsewhere in the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs said, the mark

and guilder still remained under pressure. Both central banks con-

cerned seemed determined to resist that pressure to their full

ability, through tight money and other restrictive policies. Neither

was making much progress in getting their Governments to take action

in the fiscal area. The French franc and Italian lira continued

strong. He had a feeling that the Italian surplus would gradually

disappear, and that such an event might be hastened by political

developments in Italy. At any rate, the surplus that the Italians

had built up would prove to be a useful cushion against future

adversities. The outlook in the case of the French franc was somewhat

different. France's policy seemed to be geared to producing regular

and substantial monthly surpluses, and there was no indication on

their part of a willingness, such as was evidenced by other friendly

countries, to engage in swap operations or other technical operations

to cushion the impact of their surpluses. As long as the French

continued that policy there would be attrition in the U.S. gold stock

and pressure on the U.S. generally.

Mr. Galusha asked Mr. Coombs to amplify his comments regarding

Russian purchases of wheat.



5/10/66 -6

Mr. Coombs replied that the Russians were buying wheat, 

especially from Canada, as a result of the failure of the Russian 

wheat crop. The timing of the shipments was related to the opening 

of the ship canals; shipments in volume began in April and were 

scheduled to hit their peak in May. Since the Russians were paying 

cash, presumably there would be considerable inroads on their cash 

position during that period, and they might have to replenish their 

cash before long by selling gold. As he had mentioned, however, 

there still were no signs of such sales. At the time of the previous 

harvest failure the Russians had sold an amount of gold on the order 

of $350 to $400 million, and it was hoped that their current purchases 

would force the sale of an equivalent amount. Of course, gold sales 

would be required only if there was a net deficit in the over-all 

Russian balance of payments position, and no information was available 

on that subject.  

In answer to a question by Mr. Ellis, Mr. Coombs said that 

the Communist Chinese had bought roughly $150 million of gold in 

1965. There was no evidence of current purchases, and while they 

might be buying secretly through Swiss banks, information on such 

transactions ordinarily leaked out.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
April 12 through May 9, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.



5/10/66 -7

Mr. Coombs then recommended renewal of two standby swap 

arrangements that were scheduled to mature soon: the $750 

million arrangement with the Bank of England, having a term of 

twelve months, and maturing on May 31, 1966; and the $100 million 

arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, having a term of three 

months, and maturing on June 15, 1966. He noted that a $50 

million drawing by the Bank of England was presently outstanding, 

and that there were no drawings at present on the arrangement 

with the Netherlands Bank, 

Renewal of the two swap arrange
ments for further periods of twelve and 
three months, respectively, was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that a so-called "third currency" 

swap with the Bank for International Settlements of sterling 

against Italian lira, in the amount of $50 million, had been made 

on February 25, 1966, and would mature on May 25, 1966. He 

recommended renewal of that swap for another three months, noting 

that it would be a first renewal.  

In reply to Mr. Shepardson's question regarding the purpose 

of the transaction, Mr. Coombs said that it had been a means of 

clearing up swap drawings under the regular line with the Bank of 

Italy. The Account had acquired sterling on a guaranteed basis, 

and it appeared desirable to make multilateral use of that sterling 

by swapping it for another European currency with respect to which 

the dollar was clearly under pressure.



5/10/66

Mr. Shepardson noted that it was the intention of the 

Committee to have any swap drawings cleared up within a relatively 

limited time. He would be concerned if the transaction in question 

was a device to avoid clearing up a drawing by changing the form 

of the obligation to some other currency.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he did not think the Committee 

should consider itself imprisoned in bilateral patterns; rather, 

if the System held a strong position in one currency it should use 

it to offset a deficit in another currency. Other countries 

accomplished the same result by transactions in dollars. While 

there was no single foreign currency in which the U.S. could repay 

debts to any of a number of other countries, the technique of 

third-currency swaps gave the System an equivalent flexibility.  

That technique had been employed successfully on a number of 

occasions and he considered it highly useful. Without it, the 

System would be handicapped in its foreign currency operations.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether the System had a contingent 

liability on the swap, and Mr. Coombs replied that since the 

sterling was guaranteed by the Bank of England the System would 

not suffer any loss in the event of a devaluation of sterling.  

Renewal of the sterling-lira 
swap with the Bank for International 
Settlements for a further period of 
three months was noted without objection.



5/10/66

Chairman Martin then noted that at its preceding meeting 

the Committee had held a preliminary discussion of the new 

foreign currency instruments that had been proposed by the 

Secretariat, and of the memorandum by Mr. Baker, of the Board's 

staff, reviewing System foreign currency operations in the period 

1962-65. A memorandum by Mr. Coombs, commenting on Mr. Baker's 

paper, had been distributed at that meeting, and subsequently 

the discussion had been continued in a memorandum by Mr. Furth 

dated April 27, 1966. Also, on April 28, 1966, the Secretariat 

had distributed revised drafts of the proposed new instruments, 

taking account of suggestions advanced at the April 12 meeting 

of the Committee; and today a memorandum noting certain suggestions 

by Mr. Mitchell for substantive revisions in the proposed new 

foreign currency directive had been distributed.1/ In the 

Chairman's judgment the various documents represented much useful 

work, and the Committee was indebted to Mr. Maisel for his original 

suggestion, at the meeting of November 23, 1965, that the staff 

undertake an examination of the foreign exchange operations.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Maisel to open the discussion.  

Mr. Maisel said he agreed that the several recent papers 

constituted a useful review of the System's foreign exchange 

1/ Copies of the documents referred to have been placed in the 
Committee's files.



5/10/66 -10

operations. He personally had no changes to suggest in the 

proposed new authorization and directive, and he was prepared 

to vote to approve them in the form submitted by the staff.  

He hoped the dialogue begun in the recent memorandums would 

be continued; in discussions with members of the Committee and 

staff he found a good deal of uncertainty with regard to the 

Committee's position on some issues. For example, the Committee 

had both long-run and short-run objectives, but its foreign 

currency instruments tended to be formulated in terms of the 

latter and it was not clear how they were related to the longer

run objectives. The uncertainty on that issue was evident at 

several points in the staff papers.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Mitchell to comment on 

the substantive revisions in the proposed new directive that he 

had suggested.  

Mr. Mitchell said that his suggestions were not very 

complicated. First, he proposed that a paragraph be added at 

the end of the directive for the purpose of making explicit a 

position that had been implicit in the Committee's operations.  

The paragraph was as follows: 

5. The Committee, in authorizing the foregoing 

operations, does not seek to conceal or distort the 

real effects of underlying economic forces on the 

currency of any country. When the magnitude or 

duration of operations are presumptive evidence to



5/10/66 -11

the contrary the full extent of support shall be 
made known promptly.  

Secondly, Mr. Mitchell continued, he would strike the 

reference to foreign official reserves in paragraph 2(A) of the 

directive; in his judgment cushioning operations should be 

authorized only if payments flows had potentially destabilizing 

effects on U.S. official reserves. With the deletion, the para

graph would read as follows: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the 
flows of international payments, if such fluctuations 
(1) are deemed to reflect transitional market unsettlement 
or other temporary forces and therefore are expected to 
be reversed in the foreseeable future; and (2) are deemed 
to be disequilibrating or otherwise to have potentially 
destabilizing effects on U.S. [strikeout] or foreign [/strikeout] official reserves 
or on exchange markets, for example, by occasioning market 
anxieties, undesirable speculative activity, or excessive 
leads and lags in international payments; 

Mr. Mitchell's third suggestion reflected a conclusion he 

drew from Mr. Baker's memorandum; namely, that there was a risk 

that operations undertaken to deal with situations originally 

considered to be temporary might be permitted to persist for 

undesirably long periods. He suggested rephrasing paragraph 2(B) 

of the directive as follows: 

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in 
spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums 
and discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever 

supply or demand persits in influencing exchange rates 

in one direction FOR A PERIOD OF THREE MONTHS, System 
transactions should be modified, OR curtailed, [strikeout] or



5/10/66 -12

eventually discontinued pending a [/strikeout]UNLESS UPON REVIEW 
AND reassessment OF THE SITUATION by the Committee [strikeout]of 
supply and demand forces [/strikeout] DIRECTS OTHERWISE; 

In Mr. Mitchell's judgment the proposed new language for paragraph 2(B) 

was consistent with the Committee's present practice. He thought, 

however, that the burden of proof that a development persisting for 

more than three months was still appropriately considered temporary 

should be placed on the Special Manager, and his objective was to 

make that point explicit.  

Finally, Mr. Mitchell said, he would amend paragraph 2(C) 

by inserting "short-term" before the reference to interest rate 

differentials, as follows: 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions in 
exchange markets. Special factors that might make for 
exchange market instabilities include (1) responses to 
short-run increases in international political tension, 
(2) differences in phasing of international economic 
activity that give rise to unusually large SHORT-TERM 
interest rate differentials between major markets, and 
(3) market rumors of a character likely to stimulate 
speculative transactions . . .  

The language of the affected clause had always been somewhat obscure 

to him, Mr. Mitchell said, but if the interest rate differentials 

mentioned related to long-term rates he thought the statement would 

be fundamentally inconsistent with the Committee's announced 

intention of dealing only with short-term fluctuations.  

In response to Chairman Martin's request for comments on 

Mr. Mitchell's proposed changes, Mr. Coombs noted that he had not



5/10/66 -13

yet had an opportunity to study them carefully, but could give 

his initial reactions. He though that if the proposed new 

paragraph 5 was given a liberal interpretation it would not pose 

a problem most of the time. Under certain circumstances, however, 

it might prove extremely restrictive. For example, along with 

the U.S. Treasury and other central banks, the System had rendered 

substantial assistance in support of sterling over an extended 

period, in an effort to counter strong underlying forces. If the 

proposed language had been in effect it could have been interpreted 

to require making known the full extent of that support promptly.  

But it had been deemed necessary to keep details of the support 

secret for a time, because prompt disclosure might well have defeated 

the whole purpose of the assistance given. Similar emergencies could 

arise in the future, in connection not only with sterling but with 

other currencies as well, and perhaps the dollar; and the language 

might be considered to call for prompt public disclosures of a type 

that would be undesirable. Accordingly, he would not recommend 

adding the paragraph.  

The suggestion to delete the reference to foreign official 

reserves from paragraph 2(A), Mr. Coombs continued, raised a question 

of principle: were the System's arrangements with foreign central 

banks intended to be reciprocal, or were they unilateral? In his 

view the arrangements would work only on a reciprocal basis; the



5/10/66 -14

System had to be willing to cooperate with its partners to the 

arrangements if it was to expect cooperation from them.  

As to the suggested revision of paragraph 2(B), Mr. Coombs 

thought that three months often would prove to be a rather short 

period in which to determine whether a problem was of a long-run 

nature. As Mr. Mitchell had recognized, drawings on the swap 

lines were reviewed by the Committee every three months, at which 

times the Special Manager presented his judgments on the prospects 

for clearing them up. Such judgments were necessarily rough since 

it was not possible to forecast accurately the balance of payments 

positions of both the other country and of the U.S., and since 

international flows were strongly influenced by national policies 

that were subject to change. He did not think it would be fruitful 

to impose an additional "burden of proof" on the Special Manager, 

since the Committee now got his best judgment on the prospects for 

reversals of drawings. He continued tothink that the Committee's 

best insurance lay in the fact that, despite the many unknowns in 

each situation, the record showed that swap drawings had not been 

allowed to run on for extended periods. The risk existed, of 

course; but it was always in the thinking of the Account Management, 

and when the duration of drawings began to approach the one-year 

mark some other mode of financing had always been arranged. Further 

insurance was provided by the fact that the view of the swap network



5/10/66 -15

as providing only short-term facilities was shared by the other 

parties to the arrangements.  

Mr. Coombs saw no problem with Mr. Mitchell's suggested 

amendment to paragraph 2(C). The description of the interest rate 

differentials referred to in that paragraph as "short-term" was 

consistent with the interpretation he had been placing on the 

passage.  

Chairman Martin commented that the changes Mr. Mitchell had 

suggested appeared in large part to involve matters of language 

only.  

Mr. Wayne said he did not feel that was the case with 

respect to the proposed new paragraph 5. On first reading the 

statement seemed to serve a useful purpose, but on reflection he 

was not sanguine that the Committee would be able to hold to it 

in a true emergency affecting some major foreign currency or the 

dollar. If that judgment was correct he would question the 

desirability of including the paragraph.  

Mr. Daane agreed with Mr. Wayne regarding the proposed new 

paragraph. Nor did he favor the proposed revision of paragraph 2(B).  

The question of what constituted a "temporary" situation was a 

difficult one to answer, and he thought it was easy to ask too much 

of the Special Manager in the way of forecasts of developments. In 

his judgment that criticism could be applied to Mr. Baker's memorandum



5/10/66 -16

and to some of the other documents that had been distributed.  

It was recognized, not only in the Federal Reserve but at the 

Treasury and at other central banks as well, that the System's 

foreign exchange operations had made a useful contribution to the 

international monetary system. To impose an arbitrary three-month 

time limit would run counter to the spirit of the operations and 

would reduce their usefulness. Emphasis should be placed on purposes, 

and the Special Manager should be given maximum flexibility to achieve 

the stated purposes. He had no strong objection to adding the phrase 

"short-term" to paragraph 2(C), but he saw no real need for doing so, 

particularly after Mr. Coombs had indicated that he so interpreted 

the present language. Moreover, the Committee had assured its foreign 

partners both by word and by deed that it had no intention of using 

the swap arrangements to meet long-run problems. In sum, he would 

leave the directive in the form in which it was drafted by the staff.  

Mr. Swan commented that he also did not favor revising para

graph 2(B) to specify a three-month time period. He would, however, 

eliminate the word "eventually" in the phrase in that paragraph that 

read ". . . System transactions should be modified, curtailed, or 

eventually discontinued pending a reassessment by the Committee of 

supply and demand forces." In his judgment that word carried 

implications that were not consistent with the Committee's intentions.  

Mr. Hayes said he agreed fully with Mr. Daane. He also 

concurred in Mr. Coombs' view that the record showed the System had



5/10/66 -17

done remarkably well in clearing up drawings within a short time.  

The Committee, in effect, had been experimenting on the question 

of what constituted the best interpretation of "short-term"; 

whether it was three, six, or nine months in a particular case 

seemed to him to depend on the facts of that case, and he favored 

a more flexible interpretation than three months. He also agreed 

that the suggested paragraph 5 could be very damaging in major 

crises. There had been two or three crises in the past few years 

and there might well be others, 

While he, too, felt the dialogue had been highly useful, 

Mr. Hayes continued, he would repeat the point he had made at the 

preceding meeting--he hoped the Committee would not overlook the 

extremely useful character of the operations to date. In his 

judgment the Committee could be proud of its foreign currency 

operations.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that if there was any question on 

the point he wanted to make clear that he had not intended to imply 

any criticism of the Special Manager. On the contrary, he had felt 

that his suggestions were in line with the policies the Special 

Manager had been pursuing and had been recommending. He was con

cerned with the possibility that the Committee might eventually 

come under attack from critics charging that it was distorting 

market conditions and concealing facts. If the directive contained



5/10/66 -18

language of the sort he had suggested for paragraph 5, it would 

strengthen the Committee's position in meeting such charges. He 

had no particular pride of authorship in the specific wording and 

was not wedded to it, but the substance seemed to him to be consist

ent with the way in which the Committee was trying to operate.  

Mr. Wayne agreed with Mr. Mitchell's observation, but 

thought that the purpose would be served by including the first 

of the two sentences. He would omit the second sentence, which 

was where the problem lay.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee defer 

action on the proposed new instruments until the next meeting, to 

give the members more time to consider Mr. Mitchell's suggestions 

and the various points raised in the discussion today. He thought 

that discussion had been valuable, and that further consideration 

would be constructive from the viewpoints of both internal operations 

and the System's public posture.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government 

securities and bankers' acceptances for the period April 12 through 

May 4, 1966, and a supplemental report for May 5 through 9, 1966.  

Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



5/10/66

The period since the Committee last met has been 
highlighted by generally firmer money market conditions, 
by rising interest rates in the face of strong credit 
demand, and by an exceptionally apathetic reception to 
a--fortunately--routine Treasury refunding operation.  
Over much of the period, market participants tended 
towards a consensus that the chances for a tax increase 
had diminished. But there was still a general element 
of uncertainty, fed in part by events in the stock 
market. At the moment both the bond and equity markets 
appear to be trying to sort out conflicting public 
statements, and their implications for the possible 
future course of fiscal and monetary policy. While 
markets appear to be discounting some further gradual 
tightening of monetary policy, expectations as to the 
future course of long-term interest rates are still 
in a state of flux, and will be strongly influenced 
by developments in the stock market and by specific 
developments in the fiscal policy debat,.  

Day-to-day open market operations were complicated 
to some extent over the period by changing bank responses 
to the shifting pattern of reserve availability within 
individual statement weeks, and by the general problem 
of reducing net reserve availability just before a 
period of Treasury refunding. While I will not try 
to recount the day-by-day problems that emerged, I 
might note that an accumulation of reserve needs 
necessitated very heavy bank borrowing from the Reserve 
Banks on April 19 and 20--amounting to nearly $1.6 
billion on the latter day, the last day of the state
ment week for reserve city banks. Dealers had a great 
deal of difficulty in meeting their financing needs 
on that day, and market participants generally 
interpreted the tight money conditions as further 
evidence that the Federal Reserve was keeping bank 
reserve positions on a taut rein. Partly as a result 
of this atmosphere, banks over-borrowed over the fol
lowing weekend, and as the statement week ending 
April 27 progressed it became apparent that even with 
high net borrowed reserves the funds market was almost 

certainly bound to ease up as the excess reserves 

accumula ted earlier came into the money market. As 

the money market did in fact begin to ease on Tuesday, 
April 26, a token sale of $100 million Treasury bills 
was made as a psychological reminder to the market

-19-



5/10/66

that easy conditions would be resisted. On Wednesday, 
April 27, it was learned that there had been a 
substantial reserve shortfall on Tuesday, and that 
net borrowed reserves were estimated at $376 million 
for that statement week. Although even such a level 
of net borrowed reserves probably would have been 
consistent with a comfortable money market on that 
one day, the level was too high to be consistent 
with an even keel policy at the very time that the 
Treasury was announcing the terms of its refunding 
operation. Consequently, a substantial volume 
($420 million) of reserves was injected that day-
despite the easier money market. Borrowing was 
light early in the week ended last Wednesday, but 
the money market firmed substantially after the 
weekend with Federal funds trading at 5 per cent 
for the first time and dealer loan rates rising 
sharply. By last Friday the effective Federal 
funds rate reached 5 per cent and there had been 
some trading at 5-1/8 per cent.  

I believe market participants have generally 
interpreted System open market operations during the 
period as designed to put as much pressure on bank 
reserve positions as possible in the context of even 
keel considerations. The very cautious attitude of 
both bank and nonbank dealers in the Treasury refunding 

reflected this interpretation. Market participants 

now appear to feel that they have a crystal clear 
reading of the System's views on fiscal policy, and 
while they would not be surprised to see some further 

reduction in reserve availability and some additional 
firming of interest rates, they would not expect any 
major monetary moves until it became virtually certain 

that no fiscal action would be forthcoming.  
As everyone knows, the Treasury refunding operation 

met with an unusually apathetic response. It was indeed 

fortunate that the February advance refunding had reduced 

the public's holding of maturing issues to only $2-1/2 

billion and that the Treasury's cash position is such 

that the attrition can be handled without strain. The 

issue was considered to be fairly priced in the market, 
and although prices of the when-issued securities 

dropped to below the Treasury offering price there were 

few repercussions on the market for outstanding issues.  

Dealers wound up with a net position of only $130 million

-20-



5/10/66

in the new 4-7/8 per cent notes and, while they had been 
expecting a heavier than usual attrition, the actual 43 
per cent of public holdings to be turned in for cash is 
without precedent. Nevertheless, the results were taken 
in stride in yesterday's trading, with market participants 
focusing on other factors affecting the demand for 
securities.  

Despite substantial market demand for Treasury bills, 
rates moved higher over most of the period since the 
Committee last met, as did other rates on short-term 
instruments such as finance paper and bankers' acceptances.  
Selective increases in posted rates on negotiable CD's 
have also been reported during the interval, with banks 
in New York and Chicago finding it more difficult to 
roll over maturities, apparently largely because of 
increased competition from other instruments as well as 
from rates being paid on CD's by other banks. Demand 
for Treasury bills picked up appreciably over the past 
few business days, however, and was particularly strong 
yesterday. Dealers are anticipating making sizable sales 
of bills over the next several days as reinvestment demand 
appears from a recent secondary stock sale and from the 
funds obtained through attrition in the Treasury refunding.  
In this atmosphere bidding was quite aggressive in yesterday's 
auction, with average issuing rates set at about 4.63 per 
cent on the three-month bills and 4.82 per cent on the 
six-month issue, up 1 and 6 basis points, respectively, from 
the rates set in the auction just prior to the last meeting 
of the Committee.  

Dealer loan rates at current levels, up about 1/4 to 
3/8 per cent from four weeks ago, will, as the blue bookl/ 
indicates, tend to work against any seasonal tendency for 
rates to decline. In fact, dealer financing could become 
a serious problem in the weeks ahead. As you know, several 
of the large money market banks have acted virtually as 

lenders of last resort at penalty rates relative to those 

paid by dealers on corporate RP's or to out-of-town banks.  

Given the pressure on the money center banks and their 
anxiety to avoid use of the discount window except in 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-21-



5/10/66

rare emergencies, there is a risk that at some point 
they may decide to withdraw entirely from what has 
been an extremely useful market function. While an 
abrupt withdrawal may be unlikely, we shall have to 
be alert to avoid a panicky situation that could ensue 
if normal channels of dealer financing were to be 
disrupted.  

In the Treasury bond market, rates also moved 
higher over most of the past four weeks, although the 
strength in the market over the past few days has 
reduced the net changes in yields over the period as 
a whole to small proportions. Activity in the market 
was unusually quiet during the period. Surprisingly 
little swap activity was generated by the Treasury's 
refunding, with day-to-day fluctuations in prices 
depending mainly on how the market interpreted the 
most current statement on fiscal policy. The sharp 
decline in stock prices following the series of cut
backs in automobile production was paralleled by a 
rally in Governments over the past several days with 
gains yesterday ranging up to half a point.  

In the corporate market, a number of syndicates 
formed early in the period had to be terminated with 
concessions of 10-15 basis points in order to move 
securities, but later on new issues were priced more 
generously and were readily sold, leaving the market 
in a better technical position. The calendar is 
expected to grow, however, and we hear talk of a 
large number of private placements that are getting 
underway. Municipal bond yields have also risen, 
under the weight of dealer inventories, while the 
calendar remains quite large.  

The Treasury has completed its financing activity 
for the 1966 fiscal year, but will be raising cash in 
July--presumably through an issue of tax anticipation 
bills--with an announcement likely in late June.  
However, a very heavy schedule of Government agency 
financing and asset sales before the end of June is 
apt to exert a great deal of pressure on the markets.  
New money needs have been swollen by the heavy secondary 
market mortgage activity of the Federal National Mortgage 
Association and by the build-up of saving and loan 
association borrowing from the Home Loan Banks--both of 
which are further evidence of the general pressure of 
credit demand and of bank competition in financial

-22-



5/10/66 -23

markets. The FNMA last night priced a new issue of 
13-month notes carrying a coupon of 5.45 per cent, 
designed to raise $400 million new money, at a discount 
to yield about 5.50 per cent. Later this week the 
Export-Import Bank will be announcing an issue of $500 
million 7-year participation certificates, expected to 
carry a 5-1/2 per cent coupon, which will be placed 
through a number of the larger banks throughout the 
country. While it is impossible to estimate precisely 
the total amount of agency issues to be brought to 
market before the end of the fiscal year, the new 
money need estimated in the blue book is apt to fall 
near or above the upper end of the range cited--that 
is, somewhere around $3 billion.  

Mr. Ellis noted that all of the draft directives prepared 

by the staff 1/ included references to the "current Treasury 

financing" but in his report the Manager had indicated that the 

Treasury had completed its financing activity for this fiscal 

year. He asked whether Mr. Holmes thought the reference was 

needed in the directive.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the Treasury would not make delivery 

on the new securities until May 16, and customarily the even-keel 

period was considered to include the date of delivery. The market 

reception of the current financing had been apathetic from the 

outset, however, and there certainly were no strong even-keel 

considerations at this point.  

Mr. Scanlon asked whether the Manager interpreted "even 

keel" to mean relatively stable net borrowed reserve figures.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



5/10/66 -24

Mr. Holmes replied that the reserve figures were not the 

only factor. However, the Account Management had to be alert to 

how the market would interpret the marginal reserve figures. The 

market might well have been seriously upset if net borrowed reserves 

of, say, $400 million had been published for the week ended April 27.  

Including the operations on that day, the Management had expected 

the figure to be about $315 million--which, in his view, was just 

about as high as was desirable.  

Mr. Wayne asked whether the announced attrition rate of 

43 per cent in the financing reflected operations by the Treasury 

trust accounts. Mr. Holmes replied that it did not. Taking account 

of such operations would have raised the figure for the attrition 

rate to about 50 per cent.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the open market transactions 
in Government securities and 
bankers' acceptances during the 
period April 12 through May 9, 1966, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions:



5/10/66

There is somewhat more uncertainty about the 
likely course of domestic economic developments today 
than there was a month or six weeks ago. This is due 
to a number of factors, topped perhaps by the continuing 
doubt about the course of the war in Vietnam. Political 
unrest in that country plus the absense to date of 
additional requests for larger defense appropriations 
have given some support to the idea that the rise in 
military spending may taper off after mid-year.  

In addition, there is a growing feeling that the 
recent sharp rate of recent economic expansion cannot 
be sustained. Both industrial production and retail 
sales, for example, rose at about a 12 per cent 
seasonally adjusted annual rate in the six-month period 
ending with March, and the personal savings rate fell 
to an abnormally low level in the first quarter. Both 
industrial production and retail sales appear to have 
expanded less rapidly in recent weeks. In the auto 
industry, with dealer inventories high, some slackening 
in sales in April has led quickly to a moderate reduc
tion in output.  

Other factors tending to make some people feel 
that future expansion is likely to be at a less frantic 
pace than earlier have been the sharp drop in stock 
prices, the growing complaints of those concerned with 
housing and mortgage financing about the depressing 
effects of tight money and higher interest rates, and 
some slackening in the pace of the over-all price 
advance. Industrial prices have continued to rise at 
the earlier rate but there has been a turn-around in 
farm and food prices from sharp rise to moderate 
decline.  

Granting all this, the over-all domestic economic 
outlook still seems to me to be for further substantial 
expansion in the foreseeable future. Indeed, some of 
the doubt about likely future developments is due to 
fears about the excessive rapidity of the recent rate 
of advance and the maladjustments in resource allocation 
that have already arisen in the current boom.  

Moreover, the tapering off in expansion in activity 
that has occurred thus far this quarter has been selective 
and all in the consumer area. Federal Government spending, 
both for defense and other purposes, continues to run 
above earlier expectations, and business spending on fixed

-25-



5/10/66

investment and inventories has been in line with the 
upper range of estimates for these types of spending 
made earlier in the year.  

Estimates of business expenditures on plant and 
equipment in the first quarter, for example, were more 
in line with the 19 per cent increase projected for the 
year as a whole by McGraw-Hill recently than with the 
16 per cent projected earlier by Commerce-SEC. To me, 
a most significant finding of the McGraw-Hill survey 
of business investment plans was that planned spending 
for 1967 through 1969 is already very large as these 
early estimates go.  

The tapering off in the earlier unsustainable rate 
of economic expansion has probably meant some plateauing 
in the rate of over-all utilization of plant capacity.  
The unemployment rate has also been at or near the 3-3/4 
per cent level now for the past three months. Unemploy
ment of adult males, however, has dropped to the lowest 
level since World War II, with teenage unemployment 
drifting up again.  

An important development in wage, price, productivity, 
and profit relationships in recent months has been a 
moderate pickup in wage increases. With some decrease 
in the rate of productivity gains, unit costs have 
increased on the average. Prices have risen relatively 
more than costs, however, and as a result profit margins 
have continued to widen.  

This development poses some potential problems. In 
the first place, it has a tendency to stimulate what 
already is a type of current spending whose pace of 
advance cannot be sustained at current rates of expansion-
namely, business investment. And, along with rising 
consumer prices, it will add fuel to labor's demands for 
more generous wage settlements.  

In addition to the situation in Vietnam and the 
current high level of business investment, the development 
that would most likely threaten the sustainability of the 
current economic expansion would be excessive wage 
increases. This makes the current course of the cost of 
living and the forthcoming labor negotiations in the 
electrical and communications industries of considerable 
importance. Concern over forthcoming wage negotiations 
is also a prime reason for the Administration's continuing 
opposition to unwarranted price increases. Much of the 
price rise so far is reversible--so long as cost levels 
are not generally raised.

-26-



5/10/66

In conclusion, two schools of thought have 
developed as to the relationship of current and 
likely prospective domestic economic developments 
to current stabilization policy. What might be 
termed the "economic doves"--still by far the 
minority group--put considerable emphasis on the 
fact that likely future developments in military 
spending and in business investment, in and of 
themselves, will soon provide some dampening 

influence on expansion in total economic activity.  
They also feel that we have not yet seen the full 
effects of fiscal and monetary measures already 
taken. Therefore, they feel that little or no 
further restraint is appropriate, particularly in 
view of long lags in the effects of such restraint.  
They feel that the risk of a policy that would weaken 
demands in 1967--just when market forces may also be 
operating in that direction--outweighs the risk of 
inflation this year.  

The "economic hawks," on the other hand, emphasize 

just the opposite course of events. They feel that 
the continuing risk of a serious ratcheting and 
acceleration of wage and price increases because of 
excessive over-all demands that are likely to occur 
if further fiscal and/or monetary restraint measures 
are not taken outweighs the risk that such additional 
restraint might contribute to recession later on. The 

large first-quarter rise in GNP with its striking price 

component certainly supports this point of view.  
Peace-loving as I normally am, I still count myself in 

the camp--or should I say the nest--of the hawks.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Conditions in the money market over recent weeks 

have shown substantial and continuing firmness, as 

discussed by Mr. Holmes and reported in detail in the 

written material prepared for this meeting. And growing 

pressure on bank reserve positions--at least at the margin-

is indicated by the rise in borrowings consistently above 

the $600 million level and the deepening in net borrowed 

reserves toward $300 million. Yet, in the face of these 

pressures, all of the aggregate banking measures--money

-27-



5/10/66

supply, credit, and reserves--grew markedly faster 
in April than in the earlier months of this year.  
March to April annual rates of increase, on a 
daily average basis, amounted to 13.5 per cent for 
money supply, 17.5 per cent for total reserves, 
and 18 per cent for the member bank credit proxy.  

What do these aggregate measures, sharply at 
variance with money market developments, tell us 
about the posture of monetary policy? The answer 
is, I think, not very much. First is the fact that 
there is no necessary or dependable short-run 

relationship between marginal and aggregate monetary 
variables. In fact, a major reason for framing the 
Committee's directive in money market and marginal 
reserve terms, as I have understood it, is to permit 
unusual and unpredictable variations in demands for 
credit and liquidity to be accommodated initially 
by the banking system. As demands fluctuate in the 
short-run, the associated reserves are permitted to 
be created or absorbed in order to avoid destabilizing-
and, at times, possibly critical--changes in market 
conditions.  

April appears to me to have been just such a 
period. In particular, the speed-up in corporate 
tax payments brought an unusual demand for liquidity-
one, incidentally, that is not yet provided for in 
our seasonal adjustment factors, so that the "true" 
seasonally adjusted expansion was probably less than 
that reported. This demand was accommodated by the 
banks, not so much through direct lending to the 

taxpayers as through purchases of securities and an 

upsurge in loans to security dealers and finance 
companies as corporations liquidated their holdings.  

Presumably this credit and deposit bulge at the banks 
will now be reversed, if the pressure on bank reserve 
positions is kept up. Privately-held demand deposits 
are indicated to have declined slightly on balance 

over the last three weeks, though the banks have not 

yet been forced to curtail asset purchases since 

Treasury deposits have built up.  

A second problem in judging the aggregate banking 

statistics is the need to take account of changes in 
banking's share of total credit and savings flows. Pre

liminary flow-of-funds estimates for the first quarter 

show a substantial reduction in credit flows through

-28-



5/10/66

banks and other financial institutions, from $55 billion 
in 1965 to an annual rate of $45 billion in the first 
quarter of this year. This decline was more than offset 
by a very sharp rise of security sales in the market, 
which at the higher yields prevailing attracted direct 
investment of funds that otherwise might have gone 
through the financial institutions. Thus, deposit growth 
diminished markedly, not only at the banks but also at 
the specialized savings institutions.  

In late March and April, however, the competitive 
position of the banks improved abruptly. Higher offer
ing rates on CD's, posted after the prime rate increase, 
widened the spread as against other market instruments, 
and the banks were able not only to replace heavy 
maturities but to add $1 billion to the amount outstanding.  
And more vigorous competition for the savings balances 
of individuals and smaller businesses--in rates, terms, 
and instruments offered--produced a large net inflow of 
funds in recent weeks for the banks, partly at the 
expense of the savings institutions but probably also 
reflecting diversions of funds from direct market 
investment. The recent rapid rates of deposit inflow 
from these sources will probably diminish as the initial 
impact of higher bank rates wanes and also possibly as 
rate differentials tend again to narrow. But to the 
extent that more rapid bank deposit growth has simply 
represented a diversion from other channels--and the 
associated bank credit expansion merely a substitution 
for credit expansion elsewhere--it seems to me that there 
is little cause for concern.  

If we look through the recent banking aggregates, 
on the grounds that they have been influenced strongly 
by temporary liquidity needs and a substitution of bank 
for other credit sources, then I believe that the picture 
that emerges for recent weeks is one of substantial 
monetary restraint. The money markets are tight, and 
they have been trending irregularly in the direction of 

greater tightness for some time now. Long-term bond 

yields have been moving up again in all categories, and 

have now retraced about half of their corrective declines 

from the extraordinary anticipatory peaks reached in 

March. The price firmness of recent days seems directly 

associated with the turbulence in the stock market.  

Bank business loans rose at only a 10 per cent annual 

rate in April, partly reflecting refinancings

-29-



5/10/66

in the capital market, and there are increasing 
indications of tightening in bank lending standards 
and other non-price rationing measures. Finally, 
in the mortgage field a marked tightening appears 
to be in process, reflecting both the shift in 
funds flows away from savings institutions and also 
apparently reduced participation in new mortgage 
commitments by banks and insurance companies.  

Nevertheless, in view of continued rapid 
economic expansion and mounting strains on labor, 
resources, costs, and prices, it seems to me 
essential to keep the pressure on in financial 
markets. Indeed, continued gradual tightening 
appears warranted, given the strength of demands 
for goods and services and associated credit needs.  
If the Committee decides that further firming in 
monetary policy is required, however, there are 
several factors arguing for a "go slow" approach.  
First is the very large volume of Federal agency 
issues and asset participation sales in prospect 
over the next two months, which could put con
siderable pressure on markets even in the absence 
of Treasury cash financing. Second is the unsettled 
state of the markets, particularly for equities; any 
marked monetary tightening, given present uncertainties, 
could bring unduly severe market repercussions. Third 
is the problem of the current funds position of the 

savings institutions and the related difficulties of 
the mortgage market; further diversions of savings 
flows should not be encouraged, at least for the 
time being, in the interests of financial stability.  

There is also the question of how much further 
tightening can be induced in the money market without 
putting severe pressure on the discount rate and 
current Regulation Q rate ceilings. As for the 

discount rate, it would appear that primary reliance 
already rests on the discipline of the window, with 

Federal funds trading as high as 5 per cent or above; 

further market firming would serve to increase that 
reliance, but this appears to me operationally 
feasible. And Regulation Q ceilings are not really 

under much pressure now, reflecting the fact that 

permissible time deposit rates were raised a point 

or more last fall. With prime bank quotes of 5 to 

5-1/4 per cent for CD's in the 60-90 day range, there

-30-



5/10/66 -31

would seem to be room for banks to compete to retain 
funds even if the 3-month Treasury bill yield were 
to rise close to the 5 per cent level.  

Mr. Hickman noted that Mr. Partee had described the recent 

fairly substantial increase in time deposits at banks as being 

partly at the expense of savings institutions. He (Mr. Hickman) 

thought that was true with respect to developments in April, and 

he agreed that the shift in the channels of flows was not in 

itself a cause for alarm. However, the money supply had increased 

at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 13.5 per cent in April, and 

private demand deposits at a rate of 16.3 per cent. Those were 

extraordinarily large increases, and he would not want to see them 

continue. He asked whether Mr. Partee was concerned about those 

developments.  

Mr. Partee replied that such large increases might often 

provide grounds for concern. He had tried, however, to make 

several points in connection with the recent money supply increase.  

First, there was an extraordinary demand for liquidity in April 

because of the speed-up in corporate tax payments, and in the past 

the Committee had operated in a manner that accommodated such 

unusual bulges in demands to avoid disrupting markets. Secondly, 

the seasonal adjustment factors currently used did not make 

adequate allowance for the tax speed-up, and presumably when the 

factors were revised the increase in the seasonally adjusted



5/10/66 -32

figures would be less. Third, the money supply was among the 

series that tended to show sharp short-run fluctuations--there 

were large rises in June and December 1965, for example. Given 

the nature of the series, he thought one should not overemphasize 

developments in any one month. As indicated in the blue book, 

the staff estimated that there would be little net change in 

private demand deposits over the two months of May and June taken 

together. If that estimate proved correct, the annual rate of 

increase for the first half of 1966 would be on the order of 4.5 

per cent, which was not very different from the earlier rate.  

Mr. Hickman agreed that the money supply often showed 

sharp monthly changes. However, its annual rate of increase over 

the December-April period was about 8 per cent, which to him 

appeared to be far above the desirable rate. He would much prefer 

a growth rate on the order of 4 or 5 per cent.  

Mr. Partee commented that the 8 per cent rate was obtained 

by including two periods of peak growth--December and March-April.  

If one considered a longer time span the rate would be less-

although, of course, it might still be considered too high.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

Before I go to my main subject, I might mention 
the recent indications of activity of the large banks



5/10/66

in making foreign loans. As you know, we had a 
resumption of short-term bank credit outflow in 
March. Also, new commitments for term loans, 
which had become very small in February, were 
somewhat bigger in March and April, and this 
increase in commitments was not in the high
priority category of credits for export 
financing. These facts warn us against 
assuming that present monetary policy will 
necessarily generate further net reflows of 
bank credit like those of January and February.  

In what I say this morning I want to focus 
on monetary policy in relation to the long-run 
development of the balance of payments. The 
long-run outlook for our balance of payments 
is dimmer now than it was a year ago, in my 
opinion, because of the gradually accelerating 
rise in U.S. industrial prices.  

The real news about the balance of payments 
is that there is no really good news to report.  

In the last three calendar quarters the 
deficit has averaged nearly $2 billion annual 
rate on the liquidity basis and about $1-1/2 
billion on the official reserve transactions 
basis. Although exports recovered in March 
from their previous dip, the quarter-to-quarter 
increase was not so great as the rise in imports.  
The trade balance therefore shrank further: it 
had been over $6-1/2 billion in 1964 and about 
$5 billion in 1965, and it was down to $4-1/2 
billion annual rate in the first quarter of 
1966.  

For many years we have been taking palliative 
measures to help the balance of payments in the 
short run, and these measures have made sense as 
ways of gaining time while deeper adjustments 
slowly got made. But thus far any evidence that 
adequate adjustments are being made in international 
competitive positions is scanty. If inflation is 
now going to take hold in the United States, even 
so mild an inflation as a 2 or 3 per cent rise a 
year in the general price level might make nonsense 

of our hopes of an adjustment.

-33-



5/10/66

In the past several years, the timing of most 
of the main changes in open market policy has been 
dictated by domestic considerations. The need for 
price stability, for the sake of the balance of 
payments, gave a steady tilt toward a greater 
firmness of policy than might have seemed necessary 
otherwise, but this did not call for frequent 
changes of policy on the basis of external 
developments.  

This approach was absolutely right, so long as 
the tilt in policy in favor of price stability was 
strong enough. But I think we should ask now 
whether the time has perhaps come to bring more 
sharply into the foreground the long-run need for 
price stability for the sake of the balance of 
payments.  

If we were concerned only with the domestic 
situation, the range of defensible diagnoses and 
prescriptions right now could be rather wide, 
leaving wide scope for judgment. For example, 
one position could embody four propositions as 
follows. The objective of sustainable economic 
growth is being undermined by too much bunching 
of business investment in the short run. Excess 
demand is leading to a spread of price inflation, 
and there is danger that a self-reinforcing spiral 
of wage and living cost escalation lies ahead. It 
is urgent to deal with these threats by tighter 
policies that would cut excess demand, because 
expansionary pressures will continue to be strong.  
In the absence of any tightening of fiscal policy, 
monetary policy must move vigorously to put a 
squeeze on the liquidity of the large banks, along 
with the rest of the economy.  

If we were concerned only with the domestic 
situation, a case might be made for a very different 
analysis, highlighting the following four points.  

Much new productive capacity is being created this 
year. Lags in the impact of fiscal or monetary 
policy are long. Until we can see clearly what the 
effects will have been of measures already taken, 
monetary policy should proceed by cautious steps.  
The American economic and political system can 
tolerate a good deal of price and wage inflation, 
so long as expansion is maintained.

-34-



5/10/66 -35

If this second view seems indefensible today, it is 
because it gives no weight to the problem of external 
equilibrium. Price inflation has very different meanings 
for the domestic economy and for the balance of payments.  
In the modern world there is no such thing as a rollback 
of an inflated cost-and-price level. Domestically, 
tolerable adjustments can be reached if and when enough 
prices and incomes can be brought into line with each 
other at the higher level. The process may be painful 
and disruptive, but when it's over, it's over. Inter
nationally, we cannot rely on foreign inflations to 
accelerate along with ours. Maladjustments, once created, 
are very difficult to remedy. Every step we take upwards 
on the price scale is so much lost ground.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to comment on the 

recent meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten, 

Mr. Daane said that the meeting had been held in Washington 

on April 19-22. However, discussion actually began on Monday, April 18, 

in a session involving four or five key Deputies, including Under 

Secretary Deming, devoted to developing an outline for the Deputies' 

report. As the Committee would recall, the Deputies had been 

charged with reporting back in late spring of this year, although it 

now appeared that it might be early summer before a report could be 

agreed upon. The outline developed on Monday in effect served as the 

agenda for the meeting on subsequent days of that week.  

The first item, Mr. Daane continued, was the introduction to 

the report. A draft introduction had already been prepared by the 

Canadian delegation which mainly quoted the original communique and 

had little substantive content. It was decided at the meeting to add 

some substance, pointing up both the need to strengthen the stability



5/10/66 -36

of the existing international payments system and the inadequacy 

of the supply of new gold for meeting the needs for secular growth 

of reserves.  

The second section of the outline was entitled "general 

improvements in the international monetary system," Mr. Daane said, 

and included items on the adjustment process and on multilateral 

surveillance. Nothing really new developed in connection with the 

first item, but there was a clear thrust on the part of the Europeans 

for putting more bite into the surveillance process. They laid quite 

a bit of stress on the need to go beyond the expression of judgments 

to the application of those judgments to countries' policies, in

cluding the coordination of reserve policies. The U.S. delegation 

did not subscribe to that view, but the increased emphasis on multi

lateral surveillance by the Europeans--which was related to some 

extent to the skeptical view they took regarding recent U.S. balance 

of payments developments--was significant. The System's short-term 

credit facilities came up for discussion, and received general 

approbation. The report probably would note the usefulness of those 

facilities and look forward to their fuller development, but no 

specific recommendations regarding them were likely to be included.  

The third section of the outline, Mr. Daane continued, 

concerned future reserve creation. The U.S. delegation stressed the 

wisdom of going forward with contingency planning, emphasizing the



5/10/66 -37

inadequacy of gold and foreign exchange for meeting the needs for 

secular growth in reserves. The U.S. representatives also made the 

obvious point that the report had to be positive on the score of 

reserve creation in order to reassure the world that the international 

monetary system could be made viable. The French view, an isolated 

one, was directly opposite; they held that there was no need at the 

moment for contingency planning, and that the real need was for a 

demonstration that the U.S. and Britain could solve their balance of 

payments problems. Such a demonstration was described as a precondition 

before the French would be prepared to go into contingency planning.  

However, they were willing to give analytical consideration to 

individual elements of a contingency plan, if not to a complete plan.  

The discussion then turned to the form of the new assets 

envisaged, Mr. Daane said, covering new units, drawing rights, and a 

dual approach. The views of the Europeans seemed to be coalescing 

around a dual approach involving a new unit for a limited group of 

countries and automatic drawing rights for the rest of the world. In 

his press conference on Friday, Chairman Emminger referred to a dual 

approach, but what he had in mind was quite different from the U.S.  

proposal.  

There was a general awareness at the meeting that all countries 

had needs for reserves, Mr. Daane said. The real question was how 

those needs should be accommodated. Another major issue was who would 

activate any new arrangement, under what circumstances, and how.



5/10/66 -38

With respect to procedures, Mr. Daane remarked, it was agreed 

that a draft report should be prepared by Chairman Emminger, and in 

fact Mr. Emminger's draft had just been received. It would serve as 

the basis for discussion at the next meeting of the Deputies, to be 

held in Rome on May 17-18. That meeting, in turn, would be followed 

by a session in the latter part of June, hopefully to put the report 

in final form, and the report would be considered by the Ministers and 

Governors of the Group in July.  

Mr. Daane observed that Chairman Emminger was trying, with 

U.S. support, to develop a report that had a positive emphasis. There 

was, indeed, a wide area of agreement, and the French were relatively 

isolated. Thus, it was agreed that a new unit ought to be a part of 

any scheme developed; and that the needs of other countries had to 

be taken into account in reserve asset creation. But when one got 

down to some important details, such as whether there should be a 

rule of unanimity in the activation process, and whether the new asset 

should be linked to gold, the questions were unresolved at this stage.  

Mr. Daane noted that Mr. Robert Solomon of the Board's staff 

had attended the meeting as a member of the U.S. delegation and might 

want to add some observations.  

Mr. Solomon commented that Mr. Daane had noted, quite rightly, 

that almost everyone at the meeting looked toward some sort of dual 

approach. At the same time, there had been an IMF proposal put forth



5/10/66 -39

by Mr. Schweitzer that would, in effect, involve a unitary approach, 

with a new unit created for all countries. The new unit would come 

into being as the second step in a two-step procedure, the first of 

which involved automatic drawing rights. There was some chance that 

the IMF proposal would prove to be a compromise more acceptable than 

any of the proposals on the table now, including that of the U.S., 

and it might turn out to be more satisfactory than the European 

proposals for a new unit. A new unit along the lines of the IMF 

proposal could not be linked to gold.  

Mr. Daane added that the IMF proposals, as such, had not 

received extensive consideration thus far. They had been presented 

originally at the March meeting by Mr. Polak on behalf of Mr. Schweitzer, 

but had not come under discussion.  

Chairman Martin noted that copies of the IMF proposal had been 

circulated to the Committee early in April. He thought the members 

also would be interested in a speech made by Mr. Schweitzer at Kronberg, 

Germany, on April 25, and he asked the Secretary to arrange for 

distribution of copies.  

Mr. Daane remarked that today's Washington Post carried a 

report on an extemporaneous talk made by Mr. Schweitzer in Mineapolis 

yesterday which might also be distributed for the information of the 

members.



5/10/66 -40

Mr. Ellis asked whether the Group of Ten Deputies were 

planning to make a single report or whether separate majority and 

minority positions would be set forth.  

Mr. Daane replied that the Deputies had not yet arrived at 

the point at which that issue was faced. They were working hard to 

reach agreement. It was likely that the report would take a positive 

stance, stressing the areas of agreement and noting the remaining 

issues.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Hayes to comment on develop

ments at the latest meeting in Basle.  

Mr. Hayes said the Basle meeting was not particularly 

eventful. The subject of international liquidity was on everyone's 

mind but was hardly discussed; and what discussion there was indicated 

that the situation was confused. A sad atmosphere was created by Lord 

Cromer's imminent retirement as Governor of the Bank of England. A 

farewell dinner was held for him, and everyone felt keenly the prospec

tive loss of a person who had battled for firm policies and was deeply 

respected by all. Lord Cromer felt sure that the new team at the 

Bank of England would take as firm a line as he had, and he thought 

there was some advantage in having a team that did not have a heritage 

of dispute.  

In the discussion of the U.K. situation, Mr. Hayes continued, 

the Basle group seemed to be willing to give the British the benefit



5/10/66 -41

of the doubt on the probable effectiveness of the budget, although 

they were puzzled by the new payroll tax, which was a technique strange 

to all. Lord Cromer himself thought it was quite a strong budget that 

would have rather significant deflationary effects. He went so far 

as to say that the credit squeeze--which was considerable, since the 

banks had reached the limits of loans they could make--might have some 

undesirable consequences, and that there might be some disposition 

toward selective relaxation--for example, in connection with export 

credits. However, there was no disposition toward a general relaxation.  

Removal of the surcharges on imports in November undoubtedly would 

tend to raise imports but by that time, it was thought, the new budget 

measures would be having a strong bite.  

Mr. Hayes went on to say the Germans had reported that their 

credit restraint was working more and more strongly. Dr. Blessing 

was impressed by the inflationary problem in Germany. He noted that, 

although the Federal Government had its finances under control at the 

moment, local governments were borrowing substantially and the capital 

market was in bad shape. The Federal Government had agreed to stay 

out of the market for the rest of the year. The Germans had a 

considerable balance of payments deficit on both capital and current 

account but the deficit probably would not continue as high over the 

rest of the year. Dr. Blessing regarded the deficit as an assist in 

his restrictive policy, and he did not mind having it as a warning to



5/10/66 -42

the country that it had to get its policies under control. He did not 

object to the loss of reserves Germany was experiencing currently but 

he did not want to see that loss continue indefinitely. Dr. Blessing 

also pointed out that higher interest rates in the U.S. and in the 

Euro-dollar market had been a distinct help to Germany because they 

had virtually checked German companies from borrowing abroad.  

As to the French, Mr. Hayes said, their internal situation 

was good--with little inflation--and their balance of payments was 

highly favorable. Both their imports and exports were up sharply, 

and their trade balance was quite favorable this year. As Mr. Coombs 

had pointed out, the French showed no disposition to help by offsetting 

their reserve accumulations. He (Mr. Hayes) had taken the liberty of 

asking Mr. Brunet if it was not time to eliminate the restrictions on 

long-term foreign borrowing in France, and had received the interesting 

answer that Mr. Brunet thought so, and perhaps the Minister himself, 

but there were others who did not think so.  

There was some undertone of concern about the U.S. balance 

of payments at the meeting, Mr. Hayes remarked. Some cynicism was 

evident on the part of certain central bank governors about the 

credibility of U.S. assurances, since statements that balance or 

near balance in U.S. payments would be achieved soon were followed 

by statements that balance did not seem to be in sight as yet.



5/10/66

Mr. Hayes concluded by noting that some progress was being 

made on the negotiations for short-term credit assistance to the U.K.  

to cover run-downs of sterling balances. Although there still were 

some open issues raised by a few parties to the negotiations he 

believed that the remaining details would be worked out. Mr. Coombs 

might have something to report to the Committee on the subject at 

the next meeting.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Mr. Hayes, 

who began the go-around, made the following statement: 

The economy is increasingly displaying the charac
teristics of a typical cyclical boom aggravated by the 
influence of Vietnam developments. The data that have 
become available in the meantime suggest a stronger outlook 
than at the time of the last meeting. The business reports 
continue to picture an economy operating under conditions 
of sharply expanding demand and progressively greater 
resource limitations. We begin to see signs of a wage 
drift rooted in spreading labor shortages. At the same 
time industry is operating at close to capacity. It 
would be comforting if one could anticipate a rise in 
capacity and productivity sufficient to meet growing 
demands. As it is, rising demands, supported by a bank 
credit expansion of hardly diminished strength, are 
clearly adding to price and wage pressures. We may say 
that the patient is already running a low fever, and there 
is a very big risk that the fever will rise, even though 
recent stock market developments may provide some of the 
much-needed dampening influence.  

This would be bad enough from a purely domestic point 
of view. But I am increasingly impressed by the implications 

of rising costs and prices for our balance of payments 
prospects this year. I had an opportunity in Basle to 
observe the effect on European central bankers of the 
change on our domestic scene from an orderly but vigorous

-43-



5/10/66

expansion to an atmosphere where everything is straining 
at the seams. Frequent contacts with commercial bankers 
and financial and business leaders of various countries 
confirm the impression that this is going to be a critical 
year for the dollar. There is no need to stress in this 
group the importance of maintaining a fully competitive 
position in world markets and to avoid excessive demand 
pressures which tend to stimulate imports and to discourage 
exports. After last fall's ringing assurances by the 
highest authorities in the Administration that payments 
equilibrium will be achieved in 1966, our entire inter

national bargaining position--and not only in the economic 
sphere--will be seriously hurt if 1966 shows a deterioration.  
New reports on the probable size of direct investment abroad 
are discouraging. Unless we make strenuous efforts to 

redress this unfavorable prospect, we may find ourselves 
in an even worse position than a few years ago, when the 
dollar was subject to grave suspicion abroad. This time, 
with several years of additional deficits in back of us, 
our leeway in the form of potential foreign credit to the 
U.S. will be considerably more limited.  

Under these circumstances, the need for restraint 
is clear. The classic methods for exercising restraint 
under present conditions involve fiscal and monetary 
policy. The latter has, of course, moved quite a distance 
since last November toward tighter restraint, but our 
policy moves have not as yet put a sufficient damper on 
inflationary pressures. April credit figures, which reflect 
a number of special factors and thus are not necessarily 
indicative of the underlying trend, suggest nevertheless 
that the economy continues to be supplied with credit at 
a rate considerably in excess of the possibilities for 
expanding real output. Restraint takes some time to 
affect the various parts of the financial structure. Gradual 
tightening has already produced some retrenchment and 
moderation, but also some anticipatory borrowing as well as 
strains and stresses on financial markets. While we could, 
and probably should, move somewhat further in the direction 
of greater monetary restraint, I think that caution is 
called for. With many key interest rates higher than 
at any time in the postwar years, the risks of forcing 

monetary policy to carry the burden alone are not 
inconsiderable. I would also stress that it is hard to 

think of any further action on the monetary side that 
could have an important immediate effect in dampening

-44-



5/10/66

the inflationary atmosphere without undesirable and 
perhaps somewhat unpredictable effects on financial 
markets.  

The obvious need is for a significant and prompt 
assist in the form of greater fiscal restraint. I 

have been very much disappointed to observe the great 

reluctance of the Administration, probably in large 

part for political reasons, to embrace the widespread 

proposals for a tax increase. I am glad that the 

Chairman made such a forthright statement a few days ago 

on the need for a prompt and adequate tax increase. We 

probably all agree that restraint on Government spending 

must be part of any move on the fiscal side, but it seems 

fairly clear that sufficient restraint on spending is 

not so far in the making. I feel that the conscious use 
of fiscal policy to affect general business conditions 

represents a big advance in public policy, but if this 

new weapon is to be used effectively it must be resorted 

to in both directions.  

Meanwhile, as I have already indicated, we should be 

doing what we can in the monetary area to restrain the 

rate of bank credit expansion, by pressing a little harder 

on the availability of bank reserves. This might, of 

course, mean somewhat higher interest rate levels, although 

some degree of further tightening may have already been 

discounted by the market.  

After an appropriate short interval following the 

delivery of Treasury securities on May 16, we should aim 

at somewhat deeper net borrowed reserves. Given recent 

market gyrations, it is more than ever difficult to 

pinpoint a level of net borrowed reserves that would avoid 

a sharp rise in open market rates and consequent expectations 

of an imminent increase in the discount rate. But I believe 

that a figure centering around $350 million would be 

appropriate, with borrowings around $700 million. The 

Manager should be given enough leeway to make adjustments 

if market pressures threaten to become too intense. Even 

a moderate and orderly upward movement in rates is likely 

to push the Federal funds rate occasionally to, or even 

above, 5 per cent, as banks are forced to make fairly 

substantial adjustments in their assets position, in 

particular if loan demands continue strong even though 

some demands for funds have been rechanneled into the 

capital markets.

-45-



5/10/66 -46

While I realize that conditions might develop which 
would lead us to consider a further discount rate action, 
I do not feel that we have reached the point as yet.  
Clearly, such an increase would raise the complex question 
of the proper action with regard to Regulation Q ceilings.  
In the meantime, the contemplated goal of open market 
operations for the next policy period does not seem to 
require any change in the directive, and I therefore 
favor alternative B.  

Mr. Francis said that total demand for goods and services 

had been rising excessively. Gross national product, in current 

dollars, had risen at a 10 per cent annual rate since the third 

quarter of last year compared with a 7 per cent rate in the previous 

year. With the economy operating at virtual capacity, growth in 

real output had not kept pace. Since the fourth quarter real GNP 

had risen at a 6 per cent annual rate compared with an 8 per cent 

rate in the previous quarter. As a result, prices as measured by 

the implicit price deflator rose at a 3.6 per cent rate in the most 

recent quarter, double the rate of the previous quarter. That was 

the largest quarter-to-quarter increase in prices in many years.  

The rise was probably understated since the standard price measures 

did not take fully into consideration elimination of discounts and 

deterioration of quality. There were indications that prices would 

have risen even more without the Presidential guidelines, which were 

becoming increasingly difficult to maintain.  

The contribution of monetary policy to total demand for 

goods and services had continued to be very great, Mr. Francis said.  

pending had been facilitated by a continued rapid flow of bank funds.



5/10/66 -47

Total commercial bank credit, which rose about 10 per cent in 1965, 

had continued to expand at about that same rapid rate in early 1966.  

Since the expansion in bank credit had exceeded the volume 

of saving in the form of time deposits, demand deposits had continued 

to rise at a very fast pace, Mr. Francis noted. Demand deposits had 

risen since early February and also since last November at more than 

three times the average rate of increase since 1956. The money 

supply of the country, reflecting primarily the jump in demand deposits, 

had risen at an 8 per cent annual rate since early February and since 

last November, and at a 6 per cent rate since a year ago. Money had 

not risen so rapidly over any other twelve-month period in twenty 

years; the next highest rate of growth for a year was 5.6 per cent 

during the Korean War. It seemed inappropriate to add to the stock 

of money so rapidly at a time when total spending was excessive.  

The great increases in bank credit and the cash balances of 

the public might have been fostered by a strong demand for credit, 

Mr. Francis noted. Yet, he felt the System had to assume responsibility 

for the banking system's rapid expansion, since member bank reserves 

to support the growth had increased at an advanced rate. Net System 

purchases of securities had been a chief factor adding to reserves.  

Since February the System had not offset gains of reserves from other 

factors, particularly Treasury operations. In short, for almost a 

year it had been feeding the extraordinary demand for loan funds at



5/10/66 -48

a rapid rate by a policy of permitting only slightly firmer money 

market conditions.  

Not only had monetary actions been expansive but the fiscal 

situation was now in the fourth quarter of the most stimulative 

high employment budget of the past 13 years, Mr. Francis continued.  

The outlook was for continuation and possible intensification of 

fiscal stimulation during the rest of the calendar year. That was 

a highly expansive policy when the need was for public policy 

restraint on total demand. He believed cuts in Government outlays 

and/or an increase in taxes would be appropriate.  

At the same time, irrespective of what might be done fiscally, 

there seemed to Mr. Francis to be no justification for continuing 

monetary expansion at extraordinarily high rates. A necessary step 

in cutting back on the excessive monetary demand for goods and 

services was to reduce substantially the rates of increase of total 

member bank reserves, of bank credit, and of the money supply.  

The Committee could control the quantity of those magnitudes 

by appropriate purchases or sales of Government securities, Mr. Francis 

observed. He believed it should pursue such a course, with only 

secondary consideration given to other objectives such as day-to-day 

money market stability. Preoccupation with such other objectives for 

the past ten months had let the Committee to substantial monetary 

expansion that he interpreted the directive to have said it did not



5/10/66 -49

want, and the Committee had thereby continued to contribute to 

excessive total demand.  

The wording of the directive might have been partly 

responsible for the unintended monetary expansion, Mr. Francis 

remarked. There had now been ten or eleven months when the directive 

had continuously called for a moderation or restriction of expansion 

in bank reserves, bank credit, and money, and at the same time had 

called for only slightly firmer money market conditions. Those 

instructions had been inconsistent in the face of the unusually 

strong demands for credit, and there had been very rapid increases 

in bank reserves, bank credit, and the money supply.  

Mr. Francis suggested that the directive now clearly state 

that the primary objective of the Committee was to obtain a slower 

rate of growth in member bank reserves, bank credit, and money. To 

attain those goals, the Committee should be willing to accept the 

levels of short-term interest rates, net borrowed reserves, or other 

money market conditions that were necessary.  

It seemed strange to Mr. Francis that some analysts had 

implied that monetary policy had done about all it could to resist 

inflation when the banking system had been expanding at record rates.  

Also, fears of financial panics or other disruptive consequences of 

a further rise in interest rates seemed exaggerated in view of the 

fact that rates in foreign countries had been much higher and on



5/10/66 -50

occasion had risen faster than U.S. rates without serious consequences.  

Any resultant higher interest rates might be beneficial to the U.S.  

balance of payments.  

If the Committee should now achieve restriction of monetary 

expansion, and if that should lead to excessive difficulty in 

administering the discount window, the System could then consider 

raising discount rates, Mr. Francis said. Of the three alternative 

directives submitted for consideration, alternative C seemed to fit 

best his idea of what policy should be.  

Mr. Patterson reported that evidence of tightening financial 

conditions in the Sixth District seemed to be concentrated in the 

mortgage market and at related financial institutions. Since the 

South was a net importer of mortgage funds, the effects of the changes 

in the availability of funds in the national markets were quickly 

transmitted to the Sixth District. Earlier in the year the inflow 

of new mortgage funds was practically cut off. Now that flow seemed 

to have been restored somewhat, partly because of the raising of the 

contract rate ceiling on FHA and VA mortgages. Nevertheless, so far 

as he had been able to determine, no mortgage bankers were originating 

loans without specific commitments. The chief local source of 

mortgage funds, savings and loan associations, had also been reduced.  

Net new savings growth at savings and loan associations in the District 

States was about 12 per cent lower through the first three months of



5/10/66 -51

1966 than in the corresponding period last year, and loan repayments 

were down 7 to 8 per cent. Unofficial figures for April indicated 

a much deeper decline with the outstandings at some associations 

down from the end of last year.  

The slowdown in the inflow of funds to the savings and 

loan associations reflected, of course, competition for time deposit 

funds by the District's commercial banks, Mr. Patterson said. In 

the large cities advertising campaigns were being pursued vigorously, 

and it was understood that more of the banks in the smaller cities 

were entering the competition by posting higher rates on savings 

certificates.  

More of the expansion in business loans this year was 

accounted for by loans to trade concerns and manufacturers of 

nondurable goods than was the case last year, Mr. Patterson noted.  

That development, together with the high rate of consumer spending 

that characterized the first quarter of this year and the growth in 

consumer loans, suggested that the consumer might be exerting a 

stronger influence on the demand for credit than formerly. Banking 

figures pointed to one conclusion. They gave little evidence of 

any slowdown in bank credit growth in response to a more restrictive 

credit policy.  

Behind those District financial developments was a continuing 

high level of economic activity, Mr. Patterson continued. With the



5/10/66 -52

insured unemployment rate in the District down to 1.8 per cent 

and with the scarcity of skilled workers, however, manufacturers 

might find it more difficult to increase their production in the 

coming months in accordance with the usual seasonal pattern in the 

District.  

Despite the generally rosy tone of the statistics, Mr. Patterson 

remarked, a few businessmen saw some difficulties ahead. Such straws 

in the wind had not assumed major proportions and were generally 

confined to possible slowdowns at individual businesses or types of 

business. For the District the picture remained one of buoyancy, 

with demands pressing on resources and available credit.  

When it came to the national scene, Mr. Patterson saw nothing 

to show that the description found in the first paragraph of the 

directive adopted at the last meeting of the Committee no longer 

held. The domestic economy was still expanding vigorously, industrial 

prices were continuing to creep upward, and credit demands remained 

strong. Thus, the policy of restricting the growth in the reserve 

base, bank credit, and the money supply still seemed to be appropriate.  

What bothered Mr. Patterson was that the Committee had not 

been at all successful in restricting the growth of the reserve base, 

bank credit, and the money supply, even though it had moved toward 

larger net borrowed reserve figures. In the meantime, borrowing had 

increased substantially and the reserve base, bank credit, and the



5/10/66 -53

money supply had gone on expanding--indeed, at accelerated rates.  

Total reserves, which rose at seasonally adjusted annual rates of 

4.6 and 3.3 per cent in February and March, respectively, rose at 

a 17.9 per cent rate in April. Other reserve measures and the 

money supply behaved in a similar fashion.  

If the demand for credit continued strong and member banks 

continued to go to the discount window as they had in recent weeks, 

operating to produce a net borrowed reserve figure of aroung $300 

million would do nothing to prevent an accelerated rate of expansion, 

Mr. Patterson believed. At the very least, the Committee should 

operate so as to return to the rate of reserve expansion that 

prevailed in early 1966. That would, of course, imply a much 

deeper net borrowed reserve position than that of the last few weeks.  

He favored alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Bopp said that, with no let up in the pressures of demand 

and with hopes for a tax increase slowly dwindling, it appeared to 

him that decisions on monetary policy assumed even more critical 

importance than in the recent past. It was especially important for 

current policy to try to ascertain insofar as possible the impact 

of measures already taken.  

Five months had now passed since the increase in the discount 

rate, Mr. Bopp noted. During that time, a progressive tightening of 

marginal reserve availability had occurred and significant upwar



5/10/66 -54

pressures on interest rates had developed. Evidence had also been 

seen of a change in bank attitudes toward lending, occasional 

postponements of issues slated for the capital markets, and an 

increasingly slim margin--indeed, in many cases a disappearance of 

the margin--between commitments of life insurance companies and 

inflows of lendable funds.  

A significant tightening had also been seen in the home 

mortgage market, Mr. Bopp continued. A survey just completed at 

the Philadelphia Reserve Bank of Third District mortgage lenders 

showed a dramatic change recently in both the cost and availability 

of money. Mortgage rates had jumped from a January range of 5-1/4 

5-3/4 per cent, depending on downpayment, to 6 per cent generally 

for all conventional home mortgages. On FHA and VA insured loans, 

the average discount was now 3 points, and by mid-summer FHA 

expected the average discount to be 4-1/2 points. So far lenders 

had not made changes in percentage downpayments for mortgages; 

however, lenders were more critical of credit standings, ability to 

pay, and other obligations.  

Mr. Bopp commented that money tightened during 1966 primarily 

because insurance companies and savings and loan associations had 

less to lend for home financing. Half of the savings and loan 

associations contacted no longer accepted mortgage applications from 

non-depositors. Many of those had recently experienced net deposit



5/10/66 -55

outflows for the first time in memory. The association officials 

blamed the high rate of interest and the small denomination feature 

of commercial bank CD's for their plight.  

Insurance company funds for home mortgages were reduced in 

early 1966, Mr. Bopp said. Among surveyed companies, three large 

institutions had bowed out of home mortgages since January. None 

of the insurance companies foresaw a return to the home mortgage 

business in the next couple of years. One large institution was 

over-committed for industrial loans through 1968 and now accepted 

applications for 1969 delivery only. Another was committed into 1967.  

Yet, Mr. Bopp observed, despite those various examples of 

credit tightening, the fact remained that bank credit, bank reserves, 

and the money supply had continued to grow at a rate in excess of that 

desirable in the present business environment. Of course, the 

Committee did not really know all it should about the linkages and 

lags of monetary action and it did not know precisely how far it 

could go in cumulating tightness without undesirable effects on the 

capital markets. However, in his judgment, some gradual move toward 

further restraint was desirable to curb the excessive flows of money 

and credit. If the Committee moved gradually now, it might be able 

to avoid sharper action sometime in the future and thereby prevent 

a rapid shift in the credit environment and in market sentiment that 

could be particularly unsettling. Additional restraint should be



5/10/66 -56

imposed gradually and in a probing fashion. He favored alternative B 

of the draft directives.  

Mr. Hickman observed that the latest information on the 

business situation showed that excess demand continued in all major 

sectors of the economy: business, government, and consumer. So 

long as demand pressed on capacity, prices would continue to rise.  

The latest rise in industrial prices between mid-March and mid-April 

was simply another illustration of fundamental imbalances that now 

existed in supply-demand relationships.  

Despite widespread evidence of overheating, Mr. Hickman said, 

several straws in the wind suggested some possible cooling off of 

the situation, as Mr. Koch had indicated. Painful as they were to 

some, the weaker stock market and some slackening of auto sales and 

output were highly desirable under present circumstances. A serious 

weakening of auto demand would have a retarding influence on steel 

output--which, incidentally, showed no increase in April on a 

seasonally adjusted basis, for the first time in many months. If 

defense spending leveled off, if capital spending moderated, and if 

Congress held the line on nondefense spending, it might be that the 

Committee would find in retrospect that the economy had already passed 

the inflationary crest. But he had been disappointed on that score 

many times before; the weight of the evidence at the moment still 

pointed to inflationary overheating.



5/10/66 -57

In that situation, and in view of the weakening U.S. balance 

of payments situation, Mr. Hickman felt monetary policy should move 

further toward restraint. Since higher income taxes seemed unlikely 

in the foreseeable future--whatever might be their economic logic-

monetary policy had to fill the void. In so doing, the Committee 

should be willing to go as far as was needed to eliminate excess 

demand and price inflation. Unfortunately, the Committee had not 

been too successful since the date of the last discount rate increase.  

The rates of expansion of bank reserves, bank credit, and the money 

supply that occurred in December and again in April were simply too 

high to be tolerated.  

The problem, as Mr. Hickman saw it, was that the Committee 

had been paying too much attention to net borrowed reserves and 

money market conditions, and not enough to aggregate reserve measures.  

An attempt to maintain limited variations in net borrowed reserves 

and interest rates had resulted in undue expansion in all key monetary 

variables. Given what was known about the relationship between money 

and prices--which, despite the Chicago school, was far too little--it 

would seem appropriate at this time to allow total reserves to expand 

with real output at an annual rate of no more than about 5 per cent, 

rather than the 8 per cent annual rate of increase that had occurred 

since January or the 17.5 per cent increase of April.



5/10/66 -58

Mr. Hickman recommended that in the weeks ahead the Committee 

try to hold the rate of increase in total reserves to 5 per cent or 

less, even if that should mean further deepening of net borrowed 

reserves to the $500 million or $600 million levels. On the other 

hand, the Board's staff suggested during last Friday's telephone 

hookup, in which he participated, that roughly the desiredrate of 

reserve growth might be achieved in May with net borrowed reserves 

around the $300 million level. In any event, the Committee should 

seek to moderate reserve growth rather than to stabilize net borrowed 

reserves. The course of action he preferred seemed to be best 

expressed in alternative C proposed by the staff, although he would 

not vote against alternative B if that was the consensus of the 

Committee. The situation was so serious that he would forget the 

current Treasury financing, and would get on with the main job of 

trying to check price inflation.  

Mr. Brimmer remarked that he would not comment extensively on 

the strength of the current economic situation, which already had been 

discussed at some length. He would say, however, that he hoped the 

Committee would not over-react to any dissatisfaction with the rate 

at which it was exerting restraint. He certainly would not want to see 

the Committee attempt to make up now for whatever deficiencies there 

may have been in its recent operations.  

Mr. Brimmer shared the concern of Messrs. Hayes and Hersey 

about the balance of payments situation. Those working with the



5/10/66 -59

Cabinet committee on the balance of payments were extremely disappointed 

by recent developments, and saw nothing in the policy tool kit that 

would lead to much improvement over the rest of 1966. If anything, 

the situation had deteriorated in the last few weeks; as the evidence 

came in, it looked as though the 1966 deficit might well be closer 

to $2 billion than to $1-1/2 billion, although the figure could not 

be pinned down firmly as yet.  

The results of the voluntary restraint program by the business 

community were particularly disappointing, Mr. Brimmer continued. It 

had been anticipated that the program, which began in 1965, would 

result in a saving of $1 billion in 1966 in direct investments abroad.  

While a clear reading was still not possible, it appeared that corporations 

had saved substantial parts of their two-year quotas in 1965, and that 

if they used their remaining quotas in 1966 the net gains through that 

part of the voluntary restraint program would be disappointing. The 

results of the voluntary restraint program of banks warranted some 

optimism, although, as Mr. Hersey had indicated, there were reasons 

for not being overly-optimistic in that area. However, he remained 

rather optimistic about bank flows because he felt that the domestic 

pressures on banks would hold down their outflows over the rest of 

the year. Other parts of the Government's present program did not 

appear particularly powerful, although the Cabinet committee was 

continuing to work on the problem and might well come up with some



5/10/66 -60

effective proposals. In general, it was important that sight not 

be lost of the developing seriousness of the situation.  

With respect to credit policy and the directive, Mr. Brimmer 

thought the Committee should not be insensitive to the conditions 

now prevailing in financial markets. He agreed that the condition 

of markets should not be made a primary objective, but it was 

necessary to recognize that--even aside from developments in the 

stock market--the pressures on some financial institutions were 

already severe. The Committee should not overlook the parade of 

agency issues that already was taxing the market and would tax it 

further. Those issues might well be disorderly as well as sizable.  

Moreover, the Committee should remain sensitive to the situation of 

Government security dealers who, after all, were an essential element 

in the process of open market operations. Personally, he would not 

favor instructing the Manager to dump a large amount of securities 

into the market, because it might be well beyond the capacity of the 

dealers to absorb them. The Committee members all had a sense of 

history, and while it would not be desirable to be overly-concerned 

with the possibility of a financial panic the members should remain 

alert to the extremely sensitive situation in some markets.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed that the Committee should proceed further 

with tightening. He was willing to suggest a net borrowed reserves 

objective to the Manager, on the understanding that it would not be



5/10/66 -61

viewed as a rigid target for operations. While there was no way 

of knowing whether a net borrowed reserve figure of $350 million 

would lead to a sufficient degree of restraint, it might be a 

good proxy and he suggested that it be kept in mind. Member bank 

borrowings might well rise to $750 million or $1 billion. He 

thought the Manager should press ahead with those figures in mind, 

on the assumption that the current Treasury financing was just 

about completed.  

Mr. Maisel agreed with previous speakers that the 

Committee had to carefully examine its record for the past five 

months. It should decide whether it was or was not satisfied 

with the manner in which it had shaped its open market operations 

The question the Committee had to answer, Mr. Maisel said, 

was how close its actual operations had come to meeting its over

all policy objectives. He was not questioning the manner in 

which the Desk had carried out its instructions. He was concerned 

with the sub-goals the Committee seemed to have adopted because 

of a failure to specify its goals more completely; with the manner 

in which the Committee had instructed the Desk; and with the 

results of its actions. In December the Committee chose to restrict 

credit growth. Since January 11, 1966, its policy directive at 

each meeting had called either for moderating, maintaining low, 

or restricting growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and money 

supply.



5/10/66 -62

What had the facts been? Had the Committee been kidding 

itself? In place of moderate or restricted growth, each monetary 

or credit index showed a much sharper growth rate in the past five 

months than it had in the previous five. With the exception of 

future mortgage funds, interest rates--which were not included in 

the Committee's directive--were the major items that were tighter 

and those, it was recognized, were a function of market expectations 

even more than of the Committee's own action. He disagreed rather 

completely with Mr. Partee's analysis and he agreed with the 

previous speakers. The Committee had to differentiate between 

moves caused by shifts in demand and those it allowed, or caused, 

in supply. It was not an answer to the claim that the Committee 

alloweda very rapid credit expansion to say it rose only 70 or 

90 per cent as fast as banks and businesses wanted it to expand.  

He believed Mr. Partee's analysis led to a complete abdication of 

the System's role in determining monetary policy. Such analyses 

and stress on marginal rather than total reserves led to the 

conclusion that if businesses wanted loans and if banks wanted to 

lend, the Committee had to go along with their desires.  

Mr. Maisel said he hardly thought that the Committee 

could conclude that it had done much toward combatting inflation 

during the past five months. Au contraire, when members looked 

at total reserves or nonborrowed reserves, either of which he took 

to be the principal measure of the Committee's actions, they must



5/10/66 -63

all be appalled at the Committee's results. He found it difficult 

to believe the figures but, if he read them correctly, in the five 

months since December 1 the Committee had poured more reserves 

into the banking system than were furnished in the entire previous 

year. In fact, if the figures were correct, since December 1 the 

total increase in reserves had been larger than in any full year 

since 1951. The growth in the money supply, bank credit, and 

business loans had been equally large.  

In Mr. Maisel's view, those results did not accord with 

either the Committee's intent, its statements, or sound policy.  

While all members recognized that there might be a considerable 

lag between changes in money and credit and changes in the world 

of production and prices, the Committee had stressed that monetary 

policy was flexible and therefore was able to move at least the 

monetary variables in a fairly rapid manner. Now that did not 

seem to be the case. The fifth month after the System's policy 

change saw the largest growth of any in most of the money and credit 

variables. The Committee apparently had followed sub-goals such 

as feel of the market, net reserves, or the need to offset shocks, 

and as a result it had moved in a direction opposite to its real 

policy aim.  

Mr. Maisel believed that if the reserve picture were not 

turned around at once, the point might well have been passed where 

it made sense to talk of and use monetary policy as a method of



5/10/66 -64

restraining demand. The System might well have generated all of 

the costs of a publicized policy shift without gaining any of the 

benefits expected from such a change in policy. Since more than 

a record year's supply of reserves had already been furnished, it 

seemed clear to him that it was no longer sufficient to talk about 

moderating growth. The Committee should press for a reduction in 

total reserve availability on a seasonally adjusted basis, even 

if that meant a very sharp increase in net borrowed reserves. He 

would support alternative C for the directive. If there was suffi

cient sentiment around the table, and there seemed to be, he would 

be willing to try to redraft it in a considerably more emphatic 

form and with stress on total reserves rather than with the present 

emphasis on the marginal measures.  

At the same time, Mr. Maisel urged again that the Committee 

give more information to the market. Since any real effort to 

correct the present situation was going to have to be made obvious 

to all, he thought that the use of a change in reserve requirements, 

with its resultant publicity, might be a simpler and more certain 

procedure than searching again for a level of net borrowed reserves 

that would bring the Committee to its ultimate goal. However, if 

there was no agreement on a change in the reserve ratio, he thought 

it should be made clear by official statements that the Committee 

was trying to restrain credit through open market operations and



5/10/66 -65

that it did not think that either a change in the discount rate 

or in Regulation Q need accompany such a decrease in reserves.  

He did not think the Committee should feel constrained, as he 

thought the Manager indicated it had been, to furnish reserves 

because the market might misinterpret the published free reserve 

figures in any week. The Committee ought to improve its 

communications instead.  

Mr. Daane said he agreed essentially with the positions 

of Messrs. Hayes and Brimmer and would not take the time to repeat 

their analyses. He thought the domestic economy was still over

heating, and he was perhaps even more pessimistic than Mr. Hersey 

and Mr. Brimmer regarding the outlook for the balance of payments 

this year. He remained hopeful that fiscal policy action would 

be taken, and he shared Mr. Brimmer's concern about the sensitive 

state of financial markets and the implications of some existing 

rate relationships. He favored alternative B for the directive, 

reminding the Committee that the Treasury had just completed an 

unsuccessful financing that had yet to be digested.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that for the most part he shared 

the concern others had expressed in the discussion today and agreed 

that it was important for the Committee to get control over the 

rate of monetary expansion. He did think, however, that the 

Committee had accomplished a little more than had been acknowledged.



5/10/66 -66

There was a little evidence that the economy was getting some 

tranquilization, and that was due partly to the efforts of the 

System. The psychological environment was much better at present 

than it had been in February or at the end of January, and it 

would be helpful to the Committee's objectives if the present 

tone continued in the stock market and if additional auto companies 

cut back their production schedules.  

Mr. Mitchell still thought it might be possible to achieve 

the necessary degree of restraint without a change in the discount 

rate, but if a discount rate increase was required he would be 

agreeable to it. However, he was not in favor of any action that 

would result in increasing the Regulation Q ceilings. The System's 

policy actions had already put so much pressure on the housing 

industry that it was writhing in anticipation of a serious cut

back later this year, and it would not be desirable to put additional 

pressure on that sector at present.  

As to the directive, Mr. Mitchell said, the modest steps 

implied in both alternatives B and C seemed consistent with the 

present discount rate. Of the two, he preferred alternative C.  

However, if he were to put his preferences in his own language 

they would be, first, to keep bank lending conditions firm--to 

discourage backsliding in the tight policies at many banks, and 

to encourage the spread of such policies to other banks. Secondly,



5/10/66 -67

he thought that growth in bank credit and the money supply as 

projected by the staff was larger than desirable, and that another 

bulge such as occurred in March-April should be avoided. He was 

sympathetic to the staff's view that the seasonal adjustments were 

inadequate, and he thought Mr. Maisel might be interpreting the 

figures too literally. Nevertheless, he would make a slowing of 

money supply and bank credit growth in the next few months the 

overriding consideration. He was uncertain about the level of net 

borrowed reserves that would be consistent with that objective; 

it might be $350 million, but if a deeper figure was required he 

would not be concerned. Nor would he be worried about the level 

of the Federal funds rate. If banks were willing to pay 5-1/2 per 

cent for deposits they would not balk at paying even more, if 

necessary, for Federal funds.  

It seemed to Mr. Mitchell that a good deal of what had 

been accomplished in restraining bank credit growth had been the 

result of discount window administration, and he thought the 

System's discount officers should be congratulated on their work.  

The informal talks that the Reserve Bank Presidents had held with 

bankers also were helpful. Hopefully, by these means the System 

might at least temporarily keep a considerable degree of restraint 

on banks of a type that might not even show up in the banking 

statistics.



5/10/66 -68

In Mr. Mitchell's judgment the present was an extremely 

critical period. The economy might be at or near a turning point, 

and it was quite likely that there would be developments soon 

that would make a change in the Committee's policy desirable. For 

that reason he wondered whether the Committee should not consider 

scheduling another meeting in Washington in two weeks. Telephone 

conference meetings were useful when some narrow action required 

consideration, but they were not very satisfactory for purposes 

of more general deliberation.  

In concluding, Mr. Mitchell noted that he favored as firm 

a policy as possible at present without a change in the discount 

rate.  

Mr. Shepardson said he also thought it unnecessary to 

repeat views that had already been expressed. He was particularly 

impressed--and concerned--with the point made by Mr. Hersey and 

implied by Mr. Koch that when ground was lost with respect to 

prices and wage rates the situation might be irreversible. Food 

price increases ordinarily were reversible, since the country's 

agricultural capacity was large and production could be expanded 

rapidly. Rises in food prices thus were not critical except as 

they contributed to the cost of living and the latter was one of 

the bases on which wage rates were determined. But increases in 

industrial prices were not as easily reversible; and, accordingly, 

they should be prevented if possible.



5/10/66

Also, Mr. Shepardson continued, like others he was 

concerned that despite the Committee's statement in successive 

directives that its policy was to restrict growth in reserves, 

bank credit, and the money supply, the increases in all three 

continued to be greater than desirable. In his judgment the 

Committee should be watching total reserve availability, which 

was rising too rapidly.  

Mr. Shepardson favored alternative C of the draft 

directives. He noted that Mr. Maisel had mentioned the possibility 

of modifying the language of the draft. He (Mr. Shepardson) would 

replace the phrase "with a view to attaining some further gradual 

reduction in net reserve availability," with the phrase, "with a 

view to attaining a reduction in reserve availability." The 

staff's language implied that some reduction already had occurred 

in reserve availability, and he did not think that was the case.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business continued to show 

considerable vigor in the Fifth District although there was some 

evidence in the Reserve Bank's latest survey and in the statistical 

record that the rate of advance might have slowed somewhat. Declining 

growth rates, for instance, appeared in both nonfarm employment and 

factory man-hours in the two most recent months for which figures 

were available. The survey showed further increases in manufacturers' 

new and unfilled orders, but fewer respondents reported gains than

-69-



5/10/66 -70

in surveys taken one and two months earlier. Reports of higher 

wages and prices, however, were more numerous than before.  

Regarding general expectations, Mr. Wayne continued, the 

survey showed some diminution of optimism among bankers but not 

among businessmen. Materials shortages had been reported with 

increasing frequency by manufacturers and contractors, while 

shortages of skilled labor had become an acute problem for some 

of the District's principal industries. Textile producers cited 

their difficulties in retaining experienced workers, along with 

low existing pay scales, as evidence that the 3.2 per cent wage 

guidepost had questionable validity in their case. Certain wage 

increases to textile workers were mentioned in the press over the 

past weekend. He expected that that movement would spread through

out the industry rather quickly and that, including fringe benefits, 

the effective increase would be nearer 5 per cent than 3.2 per 

cent. Furniture manufacturers reported that hardwood shortages 

were forcing use of substitute materials to maintain production.  

The evidence, briefly, suggested that output growth was being 

slowed by resources limitations.  

As for the national economy, Mr. Wayne said, fairly complete 

statistics seemed to bear out the widely held impression that the 

first-quarter rate of advance was not sustainable and that its



5/10/66 -71

persistence even into the near-term future would confront the 

economy with serious overemployment problems.  

It was disturbing to Mr. Wayne to consider the preliminary 

figures on aggregate reserves and reserve related measures for 

April. According to those preliminary figures, the growth of 

reserves, bank credit, and money, after allowance for seasonal 

factors, was of the order of the unusual expansion that occurred 

last December. He was aware of the problems of seasonal 

corrections in those data and he would not like to make too much 

of a single month's figures. Yet it might be appropriate to note 

that such rates were hardly compatible with a declared policy of 

restraint.  

With respect to current policy, Mr. Wayne saw little 

reason to interpret the fragmentary April figures as a reason for 

any relaxation in restraint. About one-third of the first-quarter 

increase in GNP was attributable to higher prices, and pressures 

of such a magnitude would not be quickly dissipated. Moreover, 

the prospect of any contribution toward restraint from fiscal 

policy struck him as distinctly dimmer now than it was a month ago.  

On the other hand, he would be eager to avoid stepping on the brakes 

too hard. He could readily agree that it was necessary to keep the 

market under pressure and to hold reserve availability in check.



5/10/66 -72

Yet he wondered about the meaningfulness of free reserves and 

market tone targets in the present booming business environment.  

It seemed to Mr. Wayne that the present situation required 

that the Committee take whatever action might be necessary to 

keep the rate of growth of total reserves, credit, and money at 

considerably more moderate levels than those prevailing last month.  

In February and March the Committee succeeded in tightening, both 

in terms of the marginal and of the aggregate measures, and those 

tightening moves were wholesome. He had a suspicion that April 

might have unraveled some of the Committee's work, primarily 

because of basic weaknesses in its policy criteria. He believed 

the Committee would be on firmer grounds if it observed the 

movement of required reserves more closely and accepted a 

relatively higher level of net borrowed reserves if required 

reserves moved up more rapidly than normal for this time of year.  

The approach suggested recently by Mr. Robertson appeared 

particularly appropriate in the weeks ahead, Mr. Wayne said. He 

would be prepared to accept the risks of higher rates that such 

a course might involve. He emphasized, however, that he did not 

refer to higher ceilings under Regulation Q for he feared that 

some banks, including the money market banks, had failed to show 

due prudence in shaping their current policies.  

As to the directive, alternative C with the amendment 

proposed by Mr. Shepardson appeared preferable to Mr. Wayne.



5/10/66 -73

Mr. Clay reported that business activity in the Tenth 

Federal Reserve District was continuing to expand at a rapid rate.  

Employment was growing, unemployment was low, and skilled labor 

was very scarce. Employment growth was particularly strong in 

defense-oriented industries, such as aircraft, ordnance, and 

explosives.  

Agriculture was providing a substantial impetus to income 

growth in the Tenth District, Mr. Clay said. Cash receipts from 

farm marketings continued well above year-ago levels, and the 

District increase was much greater than for the country as a 

whole. Agricultural prospects for the current year in the District 

continued distinctly favorable, despite the possibility that the 

wheat crop might have suffered severe freeze damage in southcentral 

and southwestern Kansas, northwestern Oklahoma, and southeastern 

Colorado.  

In the commercial banking field, Mr. Clay continued, both 

loans and investments at District weekly reporting banks declined 

more during the first 4 months of this year than in 1965. Deposit 

experience had been stronger, with demand deposits down only about 

half the seasonal decline shown in 1965 but with time deposits 

rising more slowly. At the same time, however, member bank 

borrowing had been in larger volume than last year, and reporting 

banks had been net purchasers of Federal funds more regularly.



5/10/66 -74

On the national scene, despite recent developments in the 

auto industry and the stock market, the resource-price squeeze 

appeared to intensify rather than lessen, and the price inflation 

problem was becoming more severe. Accordingly, Mr. Clay felt that 

further restraint was needed on the growing aggregate demand for 

goods and services. Additional fiscal restraint would be highly 

desirable. In fact, that was the action that should be taken, but 

that could not be done by the Federal Reserve. Within the limits 

permitted by the maintenance of the present Federal Reserve discount 

rate, the Federal Reserve should continue to apply pressure on the 

commercial banking system and the financial markets in line with 

the current directive's provision for "restricting the growth in 

the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply." 

Unless economic pressures did lessen, it appeared highly 

doubtful to Mr. Clay that a combination of such a monetary policy 

and current fiscal policy would provide the necessary restraint 

on inflationary pressures. Unless additional fiscal policy action 

was taken, the Federal Reserve System would probably face the very 

difficult decision as to whether credit restraint should be 

increased substantially further--balancing the need for restraint 

on the growth in aggregate demand for goods and services against 

the repercussions on the financial structure from substantial credit 

tightening from present interest rate levels.



5/10/66

The draft economic policy directive with alternative C 

for the second paragraph appeared satisfactory to Mr. Clay for 

the period immediately ahead.  

Mr. Scanlon remarked that, despite some reassuring signs 

that the excessive growth of demand might be moderating somewhat in 

some sectors, the evidence, over-all, indicated that inflationary 

pressures remained dominant and should be subjected to somewhat 

greater restraint. Order backlogs continued to rise. Most 

businesses continued to report that they were paying higher prices 

and receiving slower deliveries. Labor stringencies were reported 

from almost all Seventh District centers, large and small. Virtually 

all consumer goods remained in good supply and retail markets 

appreared to be competitive although merchants reported that orders 

for replacement stock often were at somewhat higher prices and had 

to be placed with longer lead time.  

Construction projects continued to utilize available 

resources fully, Mr. Scanlon said. In the first quarter, construction 

contracts in the Midwest were up 32 per cent from last year, compared 

with an 11 per cent rise for the U.S. All major categories of 

construction in the area, except public buildings, showed gains 

ranging upward from 14 per cent.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that farmers were buying machinery and 

equipment at a rapid pace, well above that expected by most

-75-



5/10/66 -76

manufacturers. Farm land values in the District showed a larger 

increase in the first quarter than in any quarter of recent years.  

Good farm land was now up about 10 per cent over a year ago, with 

increases reported for all District States.  

The growth of total loans appeared to Mr. Scanlon to have 

slowed in April at District banks, especially at the largest banks 

in Chicago and Detroit. At most other banks expansion continued 

at a fairly rapid pace. Some net repayment of business loans at 

the large banks was in keeping with the usual seasonal pattern.  

It might reflect a more restrained lending posture on the part of 

those banks, but repayment of bank loans by firms that had recently 

raised funds in the capital market was also a factor. All things 

considered, the evidence did not suggest any easing of over-all 

demands for funds.  

Reserve positions of the major Chicago banks had shown 

marked improvement over the past month reflecting both loan 

reduction and deposit inflows, Mr. Scanlon observed. In late April 

both the number of banks and the amount of borrowing at the discount 

window declined, but that now appeared to have been temporary. The 

figures on reserves, money, and credit for April all indicated a 

substantial rise in the rate of expansion compared with either 

March or the first quarter as a whole. Part of that rise could be 

attributed to temporary factors, seasonal adjustment difficulties,



5/10/66 -77

and reduction of Treasury deposits to an abnormally low level, as 

Mr. Partee had pointed out. Nevertheless, in his (Mr. Scanlon's) 

judgment, under current conditions of resource utilization, recent 

rates of expansion in money and credit were clearly too high and 

should be reduced.  

The recent period illustrated strikingly, Mr. Scanlon said, 

that tighter conditions in the money market had not been sufficient 

to avoid a sharp acceleration in monetary growth. Nonborrowed 

reserves had been supplied at a rapid rate and increased borrowings 

had added further to reserve aggregates. While some short-term 

money rates had increased, other yields were still well below 

early-March levels. It seemed clear that if the Committee was 

serious about slowing money and credit expansion to rates more 

consistent with the growth of physical capacity to produce goods 

and services, and, hence, with stable prices, and given a continua

tion of strong credit demands, it would be necessary to cut back 

much more sharply on reserves provided through open market operations.  

Such action probably would push interest rates up further and increase 

borrowing pressure at the discount window, and it might well 

necessitate another discount rate increase.  

In Mr. Scanlon's view the large reserve expansion in March 

and April resulted in part from the Committee's inability to foresee 

the strength of credit demand and continued heavy reliance on free



5/10/66 -78

reserves and interest rates in setting policy goals and formulating 

directives. Viewed in retrospect, Committee policy might have 

been better if total reserves or possibly some other aggregative 

reserve measure had been given priority in policy guides and 

directives. He believed the growth rate of total reserves should 

be cut back to a rate no greater than, say, 3 per cent, so long as 

the economy continued to operate with fairly clear evidence of an 

inflationary gap.  

As to the directive, Mr. Scanlon was not entirely clear on 

the reasons for the use of the term "net reserve availability" in 

alternative C and "reserve availability" in alternative B. But he 

believed alternative C as amended by Mr. Shepardson came closest 

to the policy he would like to see adopted.  

While he would like to avoid an increase in the discount 

rate, Mr. Scanlon would not resist such a move at any time it was 

evident that the administration of the discount window was being 

seriously complicated by the low rate.  

Mr. Galusha commented there was little if anything that 

needed saying this morning about economic conditions in the Ninth 

District. The District economy continued to grow very much in 

the pattern of the national economy. Recently a few reports had 

been received of a rather sharp slowdown during April in the rate 

of growth of retail sales. But he could not at this time be sure



5/10/66 -79

how general the slowdown was and, in any event, he would not want 

to read too much significance into it--any more than he would 

want to read too much significance into the much publicized 

temporary layoff by General Motors. The business community was 

becoming apprehensive about the pending minimum wage proposals, 

which would have a significant impact on wage structures in the 

Ninth District.  

If there was a problem in the Ninth District, Mr. Galusha 

said, it was in the continuing unhappiness of the country bankers-

an unhappiness which not infrequently found expression in notifica

tion of withdrawal from the System. The situation was not a good 

one and he would urge again that the Board give further consideration 

to a reserve requirement "break" for small banks. It might be, as 

he had pointed out at the previous meeting of the Committee, that 

now would be a good time to announce an increase in the average 

reserve requirement and, in the same breath, a change in the 

structure of reserve requirements.  

With what might be parochial concern, Mr. Galusha continued, 

he was very pleased to see the Board, in its Annual Report, 

reiterate its desire for a reserve requirement structure based on 

bank size and ask for the power to set reserve requirements for 

all insured banks. Possibly that was the way the problem should 

be solved. Still, some interim relief for small banks would be



5/10/66 -80

most helpful. In passing, he would also compliment the Board on 

its statement--again, in its Annual Report--on non-par banking.  

Would that it had the desired effect, for that was not the least 

of the obstacles to the millenium Mr. Mitchell had described in 

recent public statements.  

It was in part the problem of small banks, mutual savings 

banks, and the politically powerful influential savings and loan 

associations that made Mr. Galusha think now was a time for 

proceeding cautiously in the direction of further monetary 

restraint. Of course, there were additional reasons, domestic 

and international--most of which had been mentioned in Committee 

meetings at one time or another--for believing that the overly 

exuberant economy would be better checked by a tax increase than 

by further monetary restraint. That, it seemed to him, was 

ultimately why the Committee should go slowly now. A dramatic 

move toward great restraint--involving increases in discount rates 

and Regulation Q ceilings--could sharply reduce the likelihood of 

a tax increase.  

There might still, though, be room for increase in interest 

rates and in the rationing of credit, Mr. Galusha remarked. There 

were indications in the Ninth District, at least, that System 

policies were biting deeper. Curtailment of the Minneapolis Reserve 

Bank's discount window had forced the big banks into paying rates



5/10/66 -81

for funds in the 5 per cent area, and that in turn had a spill

over to their lending policies--there were indications that they 

were making efforts to ration credit.  

Mr. Galusha believed the Committee's goal, specifically, 

should be a modest increase in open market interest rates over 

the coming four weeks. Possibly that could be achieved without a 

further increase in net borrowed reserves; but if not, then, in 

his opinion, the Desk's target ought to be on the other side of 

$300 million. Perhaps the $350 million figure mentioned by 

Mr. Hayes was appropriate.  

In sum, Mr. Galusha felt this was a time for applying 

gradual further restraint. And he would underscore the word 

"gradual." Accordingly, he favored alternative B of the draft 

directives.  

Mr. Swan reported that employment in the Twelfth District 

rose further in March, although at a slightly lower rate than in 

January and February. Unemployment edged down one-tenth of a 

percentage point to 4.5 per cent. Aerospace companies again 

added substantially to the number of their employees. In lumber 

markets, which had been under considerable pressure recently, new 

orders declined in April but with substantial order backlogs prices 

held firm. Residential construction, however, posed substantial 

problems. Housing starts were up slightly in March but great



5/10/66 -82

concern was being expressed by builders and lenders about shortages 

of funds and rapidly rising interest rates, resulting from competing 

demands and the reduced availability of funds from savings and loan 

associations.  

In the four weeks ending April 27, Mr. Swan said, District 

weekly reporting banks expanded their outstanding credit sharply-

at a much higher rate than in the same period last year. That 

expansion was based on a very substantial increase in both demand 

and time deposits. The time deposit increase was due to a rise in 

public deposits; the decline in savings deposits was greater than 

the rise in other time deposits of individuals, partnerships, and 

corporations. As a result of the rise in total deposits, District 

banks remained in a relatively easy reserve position during April 

despite the increase in bank credit. Banks maintained or increased 

their net sales of Federal funds and did not borrow substantially 

from the Reserve Bank. However, that situation might be changing; 

in early May Federal funds sales were down somewhat in the District 

and there had been a slight increase in borrowings at the discount 

window.  

As to the national situation, Mr. Swan said he had little 

to add to the comments already made regarding the strength in 

demand and the price pressures existing. In terms of policy, he 

had felt that the February and March results were not at all



5/10/66 -83

unsatisfactory, given the unusual situation in January following 

the discount rate increase. As some others,however, he was 

disturbed--and somewhat confused--by the April developments. He 

had to say that the discussion this morning had not lessened his 

confusion, and he was at a loss as to how to interpret those 

developments. Consequently, he drew some hope from the conclusion 

in the blue book that more gradual rates of growth in bank credit 

and deposits were likely in May if pressures on banks continued 

about as at present. He joined those who would like to see some 

further gradual deepening in net borrowed reserves, perhaps to 

the $350 million level, with some recognition at the same time of 

developments with respect to total reserves. He favored alternative C 

of the draft directives, both because he thought it was appropriate 

in terms of the current situation and because, as a matter of 

principle, he thought some account should be taken of total reserves 

in the second paragraph of the directive. He would prefer the 

version of alternative C proposed by the staff rather than as 

amended by Mr. Shepardson.  

Mr. Swan said he would not favor an increase in the discount 

rate, if one could be avoided, until it was clear that the action 

was following rather than leading market developments. But he was 

not as sanguine as some about the possibility of maintaining the 

existing discount rate, given the current levels of the Federal



5/10/66 -84

funds rate. Sooner or later high Federal funds rates were likely 

to lead to pressures at the discount window that would require the 

System to raise the discount rate.  

Mr. Irons commented that conditions in the Eleventh District 

were somewhat typical of national conditions, with strength apparent 

throughout the economy. Such major indexes as employment, production, 

construction, department stores sales, and new car sales were 

continuing to move up more or less steadily or were maintaining 

high levels. The employment situation remained tight, with a very 

strong demand for labor by the electronic and defense industries.  

The most recent data for residential construction showed a little 

improvement, but whether that would be lasting or not remained to 

be seen; the District had the same problems in the mortgage area 

that were being reflected in other parts of the country.  

During the past few weeks, Mr. Irons continued, there had 

been growing evidence of some firmness at District banks, similar 

to the national situation. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank tended 

to increase from time to time, depending on conditions in the 

Federal funds market. Recent city bank borrowing usually was in 

the $6-$8 million range and country bank borrowing in the $6-$9 

million range, but the total would go up to $50 or $55 million 

when some large city banks came in for a day or so. It was 

reasonable to assume that there would be continued pressure placed



5/10/66 -85

on the discount window by the larger banks if conditions in the 

market firmed and the Federal funds rate rose further. The 

larger banks in the District had been net purchasers of Federal 

funds recently, with their average weekly purchases running about 

$800 to $850 million, and their sales about $200 to $250 million.  

Demand deposits and time and savings deposits had both 

increased during the past three or four weeks, Mr. Irons noted.  

There was a net decline in savings deposits about equal to the 

increase in time deposits, possibly indicating a shift of funds 

into CD's. Despite the fact that bank credit was increasing, 

bankers said that they were being more selective in granting loans.  

Most of the loan increase during the period was not in commercial 

and industrial loans but in loans of a financial character and 

other types. On the whole, there was no change in the steady up

ward movement in theeconomic situation in the District, and some 

evidence of firmer conditions in banking.  

Nationally, Mr. Irons observed, the Committee recognized 

that boom conditions were prevailing and that deterioration was 

occurring in the balance of payments. Thosecircumstances pointed 

to the need for a firmer and more restrictive policy. But he 

thought the firming should be gradual; there should not be a 

crash program, or a drastic change in policy. Some attention also 

should be given to the levels of interest rates and to the pressures



5/10/66 -86

and stresses in financial markets. He would like to avoid an 

increase in the discount rate as long as possible, but he thought 

that if the Committee continued to tighten pressures would increase 

for discount rate action as interest rates rose.  

Mr. Irons agreed with those who had suggested that it would 

be desirable to look to the aggregate reserve figures and not to 

net borrowed reserves alone. One reason for considering aggregate 

as well as marginal reserves was that more restraint was exerted 

on banks in the course of a transition to a deeper level of net 

borrowed reserves than in maintaining that deeper level once it 

was achieved. He personally preferred alternative B for the 

directive but would not object to alternative C. Indeed, there 

might be some psychological advantage to alternative C in that 

it introduced a reference to required reserves.  

Mr. Ellis said that three highlights might serve to 

illustrate the taut conditions in the New England economy. Of 

pervasive importance was the tightness in the labor market. The 

March unemployment rate reached 3.5 per cent and insured unemploy

ment continued to decline in April. In Boston, the Reserve Bank 

participated with 36 firms in a group survey of the local labor 

market. In presenting the Bank's budget to its directors 

yesterday, he had reported the possibility that the wage 

projection incorporated might have been outdated by changes within



5/10/66 -87

the past two weeks. Seven of the 36 participating firms had 

increased starting rates for inexperienced personnel by $2.00 to 

$5.00. Five of the seven had also raised salary structures 4 to 

6 per cent, and all seven had granted general or modified across

the-board forms of salary increases.  

Undergirding the general strength, Mr. Ellis continued, 

were both high volume operations and sharp expansion rates in the 

durable goods industries, particularly those affected by defense 

production. The index measuring the region's electrical machinery 

industry in March stood 15 per cent higher than a year ago.  

Durable goods producers had reported plans to expand their capital 

outlays by 38 per cent this year and to concentrate more on plant 

expansion.  

In reflection of those trends, Mr. Ellis said, loan expan

sion at District banks had been pervasive and violent if not 

explosive--at an annual rate of 19 per cent in the past year and 

25 per cent in the last six weeks. First District banks as a 

group had been net buyers in the Federal funds market since last 

November. Country banks had come to the discount window for 

amounts running four and five times above year-ago levels. City 

banks had also become more frequent borrowers but were satisfying 

most of their reserve needs by borrowing in the markets for 

negotiable CD's, Federal funds, and short-term notes. The bank



5/10/66 -88

that pushed the Federal funds rate to 5-1/8 per cent last Friday 

(May 6) borrowed 207 per cent of its total required reserves in 

those markets during April. The average for eight New York City 

banks for the same period was only 202 per cent.  

Whichever way the Committee looked, Mr. Ellis said, 

there were ominous aspects in the staff analysis presented in the 

green book 1/ prepared for this meeting. Looking backward, the 

Committee was advised that: (1) a third of the first-quarter GNP 

increase represented higher prices; (2) industrial commodity 

prices were rising at a rate between 3 and 3.5 per cent and 

threatening to block any long-run improvement in the balance of 

payments; (3) labor costs per unit of output in manufacturing had 

been edging up; and (4) in spite of longer hours, the real weekly 

spendable earnings of factory workers with three dependents had 

not increased in the past year.  

Still looking backward, Mr. Ellis found that despite the 

slight stiffening in reserve availability represented by higher 

Federal funds rates and deeper net borrowed reserve positions, 

nonborrowed reserves ballooned during April. In effect, the 

Committee lost ground in its long-run objective of moderating the 

expansion of total credit and the money supply.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



5/10/66 -89

The forward-looking observations, Mr. Ellis said, were equally 

ominous: (a) unfilled orders continued to rise in all major industry 

groups; (b) resurveyed capital spending plans suggested even larger 

expansion plans than earlier reported; (c) defense needs translated 

into rising outlays beyond budgeted levels, and Congress was expanding 

nondefense spending beyond Administration requests; (d) the U.S.  

balance of payments experience seemed more likely to worsen from the 

weaker position in the first quarter than to improve.  

Facing those prospects, Mr. Ellis found the arguments for a 

tax increase to be overwhelming. Yet a Presidential request at this 

moment for such action might result in a self-defeating general 

loosening of the purse strings in subsequent Congressional voting.  

Tactics possibly called for delay in requesting a tax increase until 

major Congressional actions were complete and Congress sought to 

adjourn for campaigning. On that line of reasoning, if business 

conditions remained as inflationary in June as they were now, he would 

consider it likely that the President would request and obtain a tax 

increase.  

In that context, Mr. Ellis said, the central issue of monetary 

policy became a choice as to how far to proceed in further tightening 

pending a decision on increased taxes. For the past several meetings, 

and especially yesterday, the Boston Bank's directors requested that 

Mr. Ellis express in this forum their sense of urgency that monetary 

policy was not adequately restrictive in view of lagging fiscal



5/10/66 -90

restraints. While agreeing with them in analysis, he had persuaded 

them that, in view of the present pressures on savings institutions 

a further increase in discount rates, with a subsequent attendant need 

to reconcile Regulation Q ceilings, should be postponed until a tax 

decision was reached. Meanwhile, it was appropriate to explore what 

leeway remained for continued gradual lessening of reserve availability 

in order to achieve the Committee's basic objective of restricting 

growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

Experience last month demonstrated that if credit demands swelled 

sharply they would overwhelm any modest barrier and reserves would 

flood out--as they had in April, at a 17.5 per cent annual rate. It 

was attractive, therefore, to contemplate a directive such as alter

native C under which reserve availability would be somewhat conditioned 

by the extent of demand for reserve expansion.  

Employing the "phrases of art" identified by Mr. Holland at 

the Committee's last meeting, Mr. Ellis remarked, he would define 

alternative C to encompass a net borrowed reserve target of $350 

million as a floor if reserves continued their sharp expansion; and 

he would expect borrowings to consistently exceed $650 million on a 

weekly average basis, and the Federal funds rate to ride in the 4-7/8 to 

5 per cent range. Since the use of Treasury bills in reserve adjust

ments had lessened the bill rate seemed less sensitive to reserve 

positions, but he would still expect some stiffening of 3-month bill 

rates, to 4.75 per cent and higher.



5/10/66

Mr. Ellis observed that he wished the staff had expressed 

alternative C in terms of pressure on bank reserve positions, noting 

that Mr. Partee's analysis today had been expressed partly in those 

terms. He (Mr. Ellis) urged the adoption of alternative C, however, 

because it called for considering the movements of required reserves 

as well as net borrowed reserves. He would omit the reference to the 

Treasury financing because he thought it gave more than the intended 

emphasis to even keel considerations.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

Once again the materials presented to us by the staff, 

and the comments around the table this morning, describe an 

economy that is under even more upward pressure than was 

foreseen a month or two ago. While the automobile industry 

may be undergoing a bit of an adjustment at the moment, it 

is clearly the exception. The general picture is one of high 

demand growth, mounting pressure upon labor and plant capacity, 

and continued industrial price advance.  
This is the kind of situation in which we should be 

using monetary policy to generate as much restraint as we 

think it is reasonable and prudent to apply. All of us know 

this is an easier objective to state in theory than to apply 

in practice. We thought we were taking actions to firm up 

conditions gradually in March and April--and probably we did 

get some firming of bank lending conditions--but at the same 

time over-all demand was so strong that bank credit expanded 

rapidly and this gave rise to large additional reserve-injecting 

operations by the System. The growth in bank loans, investments, 

and deposits must be reduced to more modest proportions, and 

the very recent signs of slowdown are not enough, in my own 

judgment, to assure such a reduction in the absence of further 

gradual tightening of bank reserve positions by System open 

market operations.  

Accordingly, I would direct the Manager to press net 

borrowed reserves gradually deeper, beginning as soon as the 

current Treasury refunding operation is concluded. In 

giving a directive to the Manager, I think we should take 

pains to guard against such developments as took place last

-91-



5/10/66

month, when we had much higher rates of expansion in bank 
credit and money than we would willingly have sanctioned 
ahead of time. The staff noted that April would see rapid 
rates of growth in the reserve and monetary aggregates, but 
the growth rates turned out to be even more rapid. Economic 
prediction is an art--not quite yet a science--and our staff 
has, I believe, developed the art close to its outer limits.  
I have only praise for their efforts in the green and blue 
books and elsewhere, and hope their efforts continue.  

All that being said, the fact remains that if we want 
to be sure that growth in credit and money slows from its 
recent rate, we should express our wishes more definitely 
in the operative second paragraph of the directive. For 
instance, although the staff analysis in the blue book notes 
that growth in bank credit will slow over the next two months, 
I would want the Account Manager himself actively to contribute 
to this result if it does not appear that the market will do so.  

To help slow down credit growth, I would want to deepen 

the net borrowed number gradually by around $25 million a week 

so that it would rise from $300 million to $400 million over 

the next four weeks. If required reserve growth proves larger 

than expected, I would hasten the rise in the net borrowed 

reserve number and even let the number rise above $400 million.  

On the other hand, if there were a definite weakness in 

required reserves, I would let the net reserve position of 
banks fall somewhat short of the aforementioned weekly goals.  

I realize the Manager will have a difficult time making 

the judgments involved in such an instruction. There are 

two pieces of advice that might be helpful to him, however; 

first, at the moment there is more danger in being too easy 

than too tight; and second, if bank credit looks as if it is 

rising noticeably above a 6 per cent annual rate, the banks 

should be forced to borrow the additional required reserves, 

even if borrowings turn out to have risen only temporarily, 

unless this pushes net borrowed reserves above $500 million.  

I assume that this kind of policy may foster a continued 

upward adjustment in bond market rates, and I would not mind 

seeing most of the effects of the March-April bond market 

rally wiped out in the process. I would also expect that it 

would gradually step up pressure in the money market, and I 

hope we will not be too deterred by that kind of manifestation 

of market restraint either.  
I recognize that my net borrowed reserve suggestions 

involve driving banks considerably deeper in debt at the dis

count window, and I regard that as part of the process of 

restraint. I recognize further that this might trigger



5/10/66 -93

speculation about a possible discount rate increase, and I 
am prepared to face up to such a change eventually if the 
circumstances become compelling. What I am not prepared to 
countenance is a further increase in the Regulation Q 
ceiling on time deposits; indeed, it may only be by holding 
the line on Regulation Q that we finally calm down the 
bank credit expansion.  

It appears to me that alternative C of the draft 
directives might accomplish the ends I seek, although 
it should be read to permit some flexibility on the 
down side of net borrowed reserves as well as the up. The 
market virtues of operating with a net reserve target can 
thereby be combined with the anti-cyclical virtues of paying 
close attention to the related aggregates--which means, in 
the current environment, at least seeing that potentially 
inflationary credit demands are not fully accommodated.  

Mr. Robertson added that he favored the amendment to alternative 

C proposed by Mr. Shepardson. He had no strong view as to whether or 

not the reference to the Treasury financing should be deleted. He 

would suggest an amendment to the final sentence of the first paragraph 

of the draft directive; in the phrase, "and to help restore reasonable 

equilibrium in the country's balance of payments," he would replace 

the word "help" with the words "strengthen efforts to." He suggested 

that change because he thought the time had come at which monetary 

policy had to take a more active role in the effort to improve the 

payments balance.  

Chairman Martin said that the views of Committee members did 

not seem very far apart today. He would like, however, to sound a 

note of caution. There was real turbulence in financial markets at 

present--perhaps more than generally realized--and recent monetary 

policy had been a major factor in bringing it about. He did not



5/10/66 -94

think the Committee should be too dissatisfied with monetary policy 

because of the recent trends in banking aggregates. In his judgment, 

the Committee should not press too hard in an effort to get more 

precise results; it would take time to iron out conditions such as 

existed at present in the stock market, at savings and loan associa

tions, with respect to the balance of payments, and with respect to 

the current dislocations in the money market. Although he did not 

like the recent banking figures any more than others did, he felt 

that patience was needed in getting the results desired. Over the 

weekend he had re-read the Committee's minutes for the period 

subsequent to the 1957 reduction in the discount rate. He noted 

that for a long time then the Committee had sought actively to ease, 

but the money supply figures had failed to respond. Now the Committee 

was trying to firm, and perhaps it was seeking to make the figures 

respond more actively than the course of events would permit. The 

money stream was swollen now, as it had been in the latter part of 

1965. At that time, in his view, conditions in financial markets 

had reached the point at which it was almost impossible to navigate; 

the prime rate existing then had been a boulder in the stream. The 

flow of funds was better now, but there still were many dislocations.  

For example, while according to a recent report the difficulties of 

savings and loan associations in the Twelfth District were not as 

great as had been feared, they were quite serious in one or two 

cases.



5/10/66 -95

In sum, Chairman Martin said, he thought the Committee should 

not press too hard now in the belief that monetary policy alone could 

achieve price stability; it was just one important element in the 

picture. Perhaps all members of the Committee--and he included himself 

tended to think at times that monetary policy could do more than it 

in fact could. He was not in disagreement with the policy that the 

majority favored today, but he hoped that the System would not find 

itself in the position of having raised the discount rate after the 

crest of the cycle had been passed. If it did, it was likely to bear 

all the blame for subsequent developments. The System had been through 

that experience several times before and he hoped it would not be 

repeated. He thought the System had to brake the inflation in 1957, 

and in his judgment the price stability that prevailed from 1961 to 

1965 would not have been possible if the earlier inflationary psychol

ogy had persisted. Nevertheless, the business decline then had been 

attributed to the Federal Reserve. He thought the Committee should 

bear that in mind--although he did not suggest that it should shirk 

its responsibilities.  

Chairman Martin said he did not know what the Administration 

would do with respect to fiscal policy. In his judgment there had 

been a good deal of progress in the past six months in public under

standing of the problem of inflation; the current dialogue in the 

press about policies to deal with inflation would have been impossible



5/10/66 -96

6 months ago. Some real gains had been made, and he would repeat 

that the Committee should not press too hard on monetary policy 

alone.  

The Chairman observed that he was agreeable to either alter

native B or alternative C for the directive. He would be somewhat 

concerned about Mr. Shepardson's proposal that the words "further 

gradual" be deleted before "reduction in net reserve availability," 

because he favored a gradual approach. He thought it was quite 

important at this juncture that the Committee not move in an abrupt 

way.  

Mr. Shepardson said he had not intended to suggest an abrupt 

move. He had taken exception to the word "further" because he did 

not think there had been a reduction in reserve availability. He 

proposed deleting the word "gradual" because, as he had noted at 

previous meetings, he thought that word had been overemphasized.  

Mr. Koch drew attention to the fact that in alternative C 

the staff proposed to introduce the word "net" before "reserve 

availability." The phrase could then be taken to refer to net 

borrowed reserves, which had been deepened over the past few months.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that he had had total reserve avail

ability in mind in stating that no reduction had occurred, 

Mr. Mitchell commented that Mr. Shepardson's criticism of the 

word "further" was valid if applied to the Committee's previous



5/10/66 -97

directive. He agreed with Mr. Koch, however, that the word did not 

pose a problem in alternative C as drafted for this meeting.  

Mr. Maisel said that as he understood the sentiment of the 

members today the variable with which the Committee was concerned was 

total reserves. The references to "reserve availability" in recent 

directives were ambiguous, and he thought the staff had tried to 

formulate alternative C in a manner that removed that ambiguity.  

Mr. Daane indicated that he was not sure the Committee 

intended total reserves to be used as an operational target.  

Mr. Hayes said he did not think the Committee could discard 

net borrowed reserves as an operational guide. Granting that total 

reserves should be used to the extent practicable, one could not be 

sure that the short-run observations of that variable were meaningful.  

He asked the Manager whether he thought there would be problems in 

operating under the instructions contained in alternative C.  

Mr. Holmes said he would note first that except for its final 

clause the language of alternative C was close to that of B; he would 

read both to call for some deepening of net borrowed reserves, perhaps 

to around the $350 million area. The final clause implied that if 

required reserves were higher than seasonally projected the marginal 

reserve figure should be deepened further by some amount--Mr. Robertson 

would have them go as deep as $500 million. Present projections indicated 

a decline in required reserves over the next few weeks. Thus, if required



5/10/66 -98

reserves did not decline along the projected lines, he would understand 

alternative C to call for net borrowed reserves deeper than $350 million.  

Mr. Daane commented that Mr. Holmes' statement illustrated the 

problem he had with alternative C. The view that a reduction in reserve 

availability was called for was widely held today, but if the Committee 

required the Manager to deepen net borrowed reserves below $350 million 

it inevitably would cause a considerable readjustment in market rates 

that could lead to a discount rate change. He had not suggested any 

particular figure as a target for operations, and he thought the 

Committee had to be wary of the danger of precipitating the kind of 

wholesale market adjustment that he did not think was called for at 

present.  

Chairman Martin then said he wished to make his position clear 

with respect to a discount rate increase. He thought that if such an 

action were to be taken it should follow market developments and not be 

forced by the Committee. That was why he felt the Committee should not 

press too hard in deepening the net borrowed reserve figures, and that 

conditions should be allowed to tighten gradually.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed with the Chairman but felt nevertheless that 

the recent experience with total bank credit and the money supply was 

somewhat disheartening. If the staff projections should prove faulty 

he thought the Manager should move in the direction suggested by 

Mr. Robertson. He would rather not see a discount rate increase, but



5/10/66 -99

would prefer such an increase to a repetition of the March-April 

developments.  

Mr. Maisel said there seemed to be a conflict today between 

the members who thought that the Committee had set money market rates 

as its primary goal, and those who thought that the goal had been 

formulated in terms of total reserves. Members in the two groups had 

different views of the monetary policy that would be appropriate for 

the next period. The problem, as he saw it, was that in the past five 

months the Committee had used money market conditions as a sub-goal, 

with the result that there had been a substantial expansion in bank 

credit.  

Chairman Martin thought that Mr. Maisel's observation involved 

an element of judgment. He did not feel there was any difference 

between his own position and Mr. Maisel's except with respect to timing 

In his opinion considerations of cost and availability of money could 

not be kept separate indefinitely; the question was how moves should 

be timed. Personally he did not feel that he had had a money market 

sub-goal in mind, but different people measured things differently.  

Mr. Hayes said he would inject a cautionary note on the subject 

of the sensitivity of market conditions. He did not believe the Com

mittee could completely ignore the effects of its actions on the market 

He would remind the members that there had been occasions, even in the 

past year or two, when conditions in the market had suddenly become 

rather critical. It was important that the Committee do what it could



5/10/66 -100

to prevent disorderly conditions. Perhaps the matter was a side 

issue, but the members should not lose sight of the possibility of 

rapid market disruption. To him that argued for acting gradually 

rather than precipitously.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed with Mr. Hayes, and said he would not 

favor deleting the word "gradual" from the second paragraph of the 

directive. He had been inclined toward alternative B but would be 

willing to accept alternative C provided that the word "gradual" 

was retained. He also would favor using the word "net" before 

"reserve availability," and on that basis he would consider it 

appropriate to retain "further" since there had been a deepening of 

net borrowed reserves.  

Chairman Martin said he thought alternatives B and C as 

drafted by the staff were substantially the same from the standpoint 

of the Manager's operations. He wondered, however, whether the 

amendment to C suggested by Mr. Shepardson would not require the 

Manager to deepen net borrowed reserves below $350 million.  

Mr. Holmes observed that most of those favoring alternative B 

seemed to be more concerned about possible disruption in financial 

market conditions, while those who favored C were more concerned 

about the movements in the aggregate statistics. That appeared to 

be one significant difference between the two groups, although neither 

of the draft alternatives mentioned market conditions specifically.



5/10/66 -101

Mr. Robertson remarked that no one around the table wanted 

to disrupt the market; what the majority desired was a gradual but 

steady reduction in the availability of reserves. It should never 

be assumed that the Committee would overlook the possibility of 

disruption in market conditions. That possibility was a reason for 

the degree of latitude that would be given to the Manager in instruc

tions of the type he (Mr. Robertson) proposed. At the same time, he 

thought that the rate at which reserve availability was being reduced 

should be speeded up, although it should still be gradual.  

Mr. Hickman said that he would endorse Mr. Robertson's statemen 

To summarize his own position briefly, he favored alternative C for the 

directive, retaining the word "gradual"; he would be very much concerne 

about any actions that disrupted the money market; he would want attent 

paid to aggregate reserve availability as well as to net borrowed 

reserves; and he would not want to see interest rates rise so high that 

the discount rate would have to be increased immediately.  

The Chairman commented that he thought Mr. Robertson had made 

the point well--no one wanted to disrupt the market. How to achieve 

the results the Committee desired was a problem that had to be left to 

the Manager.  

Mr. Daane observed that he would be concerned about a deepening 

of net borrowed reserves beyond the $350 million level, an area which 

he thought might be a danger zone. As he had indicated, he would prefe 

alternative B for the directive.



5/10/66 -102

Mr. Hayes said that he also would prefer alternative B. If 

the members considered the language calling for "some further gradual 

reduction in reserve availability" to be too mild, the word "some" 

might be deleted.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that while a net borrowed reserve 

target might be meaningful in a period of transition to a deeper 

target level, to hold net borrowed reserves at any particular level 

would mean meeting whatever demands for reserves arose and thus would 

not necessarily imply restraint. The Committee had been applying 

some restraint recently, but the movement had been overly gradual 

relative to the expansion in demands, and for that reason the Committee 

had failed to accomplish its objectives.  

Chairman Martin commented that no one could say with assurance 

how strong the demand for reserves would be in the coming period.  

Mr. Shepardson agreed. He added, however, that he thought 

the additional clause of alternative C, calling for a greater reduction 

in net reserve availability if growth in required reserve did not 

moderate substantially, was intended to meet that problem.  

The Committee then turned to the suggestions that had been made 

regarding revisions in the draft directive language submitted by the 

staff. After further discussion, it was agreed that the reference to 

the Treasury financing should be retained and that Mr. Robertson's 

suggested revision of the phrase relating to the balance of payments 

in the last sentence of the first paragraph should be adopted.



5/10/66

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding 
vigorously, with industrial prices continuing to rise and 
credit demands remaining strong. Our international pay
ments continue in deficit. In this situation, it is the 
Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist inflationary 
pressures and to strengthen efforts to restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by 
restricting the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, 
and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account 

the current Treasury financing, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to attaining some further gradual 
reduction in net reserve availability, and a greater 

reduction if growth in required reserves does not moderate 

substantially.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, June 7, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting then adjourned.  

Secretary

-103-



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 9, 1966 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on May 10, 1966 

First paragraph 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding vigorously, 
w: h industrial prices continuing to rise and credit demands 
remaining strong. Our international payments continue in deficit.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy 
to resist inflationary pressures and to help restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by restricting 
the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

Second paragraph 

Alternative A (preserving about the current degree of firmness) 

To implement this policy, while taking into account the 

current Treasury financing, System open market operations until the 

next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 

maintaining firm conditions in the money market and continuing to 

exert pressure on bank reserve positions.  

Alternative B (continued gradual firming) 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to attaining some further gradual reduction in reserve availa
bility, while taking into account the current Treasury financing.  

Alternative C (degree of firming conditioned by movement in required 

reserves) 

To implement this policy, while taking into account the 

current Treasury financing, System open market operations until the 

next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 

attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve availa

bility, and a greater reduction if growth in required reserves 

does not moderate substantially.


