









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 12, 1966, at 

9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee, 

Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors



4/12/66 -2

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, Senior Attorney, Legal Division, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Heflin, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Black, Brandt, 
Baughman, Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Deming and Meek, Managers, Securities 
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on March 22, 1966, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions 

and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign 

currencies for the period March 22 through April 6, 1966, and a 

supplemental report for April 7 through 11, 1966. Copies of these 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this week.  

The Stabilization Fund had about $100 million of gold currently 

on hand, but the French would probably be making a purchase of



4/12/66 -3-

nearly $70 million before the end of the month. So a further

sizable reduction in the gold stock would be required within

the next few weeks unless sizable sales of gold were made by

the Russians or by other central banks. The gold market continued

to expect such Russian sales, and that--in combination with a

heavier flow of new gold from South Africa and sales of $30 or

$35 million by a still unidentified central bank--had managed

to keep the London gold market in rough balance.

Sterling still remained a problem, Mr. Coombs reported.

During March the Bank of England experienced reserve drains of

$225 million, of which $150 million represented debt repayments

to the Bank of Italy and the Bank for International Settlements,

while the remaining $75 million was probably accounted for by a

runoff of forward contracts. At the month-end the U.S. Treasury

provided a $150 million overnight swap, enabling the British to

show a reserve reduction of only $75 million. For the month of

April the British again faced the discouraging prospect of starting

the month with an immediate deficit reflecting the $150 million

repayment to the U.S. Treasury; and, mainly owing to money market

pressures, they had subsequently lost another $50 million. He

was hopeful that with the end of the Easter holidays sterling

would show renewed strength this week as money market pressures

reversed themselves. Also, there might be some sizable purchases



4/12/66 -4

of sterling for oil company account which might significantly 

reduce the April deficit as the month progressed.  

On balance, however, the position of sterling remained 

vulnerable, Mr. Coombs said. The problem was particularly 

worrisome because the present was a period in which sterling 

ordinarily was seasonally strong. In effect, the British elec

tions had cut off the recovery of sterling that had been underway, 

and the question was how to get that recovery going again. The 

new British budget probably would have a decisive effect. The 

question of whether or not it would be restrictive enough to 

turn the market situation was important to the U.S. as well as 

to the U.K. It seemed clear to him that if the British allowed 

the present combination of overheating of the economy and a 

wage-price spiral to continue, sooner or later the sterling 

parity would be seriously undermined.  

Mr. Ellis said he had thought the earlier strength of 

sterling had been due to a reversal of speculation against the 

pound, which was a one-time development. Was Mr. Coombs suggest

ing that the short positions still to be covered were large enough 

to be capitalized on? 

Mr. Coombs replied that if the British had not held an 

election the return flow that developed in the period from 

September through January probably would have continued for



4/12/66 -5

another two or three months, although possibly at a diminishing 

rate; there was a good deal of pressure tending to push the 

sterling rate up. In addition, January through June normally 

was the time when British foreign exchange earnings were sea

sonally high. Finally, the U.K. had been making some progress 

in terms of more basic improvement in their balance of payments-

exports rose about 7 per cent in 1965, while imports were up only 

1 per cent. There had been a certain loss of momentum, and that 

was dangerous in a situation in which confidence was so vital a 

factor. New and more forceful measures were needed to recapture 

the earlier momentum.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions 
in foreign currencies during the period 
March 22 through April 11, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs then recommended renewal for a further period 

of three months of the $100 million standby swap line with the 

Bank of France, which would come to the end of its three-month 

term on May 10.  

Renewal of the standby swap arrange
ment with the Bank of France, as recommended 
by Mr. Coombs, was approved.  

In connection with a second recommendation, Mr. Coombs 

noted that the Account Management was authorized (under the



4/12/66 -6

Committee's continuing authority directive for foreign currency 

operations) to buy, and to sell forward to the U.S. Treasury, 

up to $100 million of foreign currencies in which the Treasury 

had outstanding indebtedness. Such transactions were for the 

purpose of assisting the Treasury in financing payment of 

maturing bonds denominated in foreign currencies. As the Com

mittee would recall, in late 1963 and early 1964 the Account 

had accumulated a total of nearly $100 million in Italian lire 

and had sold the lire forward to the Treasury which used them 

to pay off maturing bonds. In recent weeks, the Account had 

purchased $46 million of Swiss francs which the Treasury would 

use in the same way. At present there was an opportunity to 

acquire German marks, a currency in which the Treasury had about 

$450 million of indebtedness. After the Swiss franc purchases, 

the leeway remaining under the $100 million limit was $54 million, 

but it appeared likely that a larger sum could be usefully devoted 

to mark purchases. Accordingly, he recommended some increase in 

the limit, perhaps to $150 million. There was no risk to the 

System in operations of the type in question, and facilitating 

Treasury repayment of its foreign indebtedness was, of course, 

highly desirable.  

In the ensuing discussion some members suggested that the 

limit might be removed entirely, or set at a level considerably



4/12/66 -7

higher than Mr. Coombs proposed, since the operations under 

discussion were riskless and helpful to the Treasury. Other 

members agreed that a limit of more than $150 million would be 

desirable. They saw some virtue, however, in keeping the figure 

within the range likely to prove necessary in the foreseeable 

future, noting that the Committee could raise it further at a 

later time if there were grounds for doing so. In this connec

tion action to raise the limit to $200 million was proposed as 

a reasonable course.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the third paragraph of the continuing 
authority directive for System trans
actions in foreign currencies was 
amended to read as follows: 

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also author
ized and directed to make purchases through spot 
transactions, including purchases from the U.S. Stabilization 
Fund, and concurrent sales through forward transactions 
to the U.S. Stabilization Fund, of any of the foregoing 
currencies in which the U.S. Treasury has outstanding 
indebtedness, in accordance with the Guidelines and up 
to a total of $200 million equivalent. Purchases may be 
at rates above par, and both purchases and sales are to be 
made at the same rates 

Chairman Martin then referred to the Secretariat's memorandum 

transmitted on February 21, 1966, proposing a reorganization in the 

Committee's instruments governing foreign currecny operations; and 

to a memorandum by Mr. Baker of the Board's staff, entitled "Federal 

Reserve Operations in Foreign Currencies 1962-1965," that had been



4/12/66 -8

distributed on March 21, 1966. He also noted that Mr. Coombs 

today had distributed a memorandum dated April 8, 1966, commenting 

on Mr. Baker's paper.1/ The Chairman suggested that the Committee 

hold a preliminary discussion of these materials today and plan 

on pursuing the subject further at a later meeting, since the 

members had not yet had time to study Mr. Coombs' comments.  

Mr. Heflin noted that language calling for certain reports 

by the Special Manager, contained in Section IX of the existing 

Authorization for foreign currency operations, had been deleted 

in the new Authorization proposed by the Secretariat. He 

recognized that no modification of present practice with respect 

to reporting was intended; rather, the language had been deleted 

to achieve consistency with the corresponding domestic instruments, 

in which the Committee did not consider it necessary to spell out 

the nature of reports to be made by the Account Management. In 

his judgment, however, the System's foreign currency operations 

were of a somewhat different character from its domestic operations; 

in particular, the Special Manager was given broader authority to 

act than was the domestic Manager. For that reason he thought 

there was some merit in having the record show that the Committee 

required reports from the Special Manager. Language as detailed 

1/ A copy of Mr. Coombs' commentary, as well as copies of the 

other memorandums mentioned, have been placed in the Committee's 
files.



4/12/66 -9

as that in the present Authorization did not seem necessary, but 

there might be a simple statement to the effect that the Special 

Manager was responsible for keeping the Committee informed on 

market conditions and on his operations, and for making such reports 

as the Committee might specify.  

Secondly, Mr. Heflin said, it was not clear to him whether 

the language at two points in the proposed new foreign currency 

directive--paragraphs 1(D) and 2(B)--was intended to involve changes 

from present practice.  

Mr. Young commented that a statement regarding reporting 

requirements could be included in the proposed new Authorization 

if the Committee thought that would be desirable. On the second 

point, he indicated that no departures from present practice were 

meant to be implied by the language of the directive paragraphs 

to which Mr. Heflin had referred.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the staff might review the 

two directive paragraphs in question, and that Messrs. Young and 

Heflin might get together after today's meeting to draft language 

on reporting requirements for the Committee's consideration.  

Mr. Young then remarked that he would recommend two changes 

in the proposed new instruments. The first affected the opening 

sentence of paragraph 3 of the proposed Authorization. Following 

the words "All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under



4/12/66 -10

paragraph 1(A) above shall be at prevailing market rates" would 

be added, "and no attempt shall be made to establish rates that 

appear to be out of line with underlying market forces." Similar 

language was included in the Section 2 of the existing Guidelines, 

and it seemed desirable to retain it in the new instruments.  

The second amendment, Mr. Young continued, related to 

paragraph 1(E) of the proposed new directive, which specified 

that one of the basic purposes of System operations in foreign 

currencies was "To facilitate growth in international liquidity 

in accordance with the needs of an expanding world economy, by 

providing for reciprocal holdings of currencies." It had been 

suggested that the final clause, following the comma, should be 

deleted. A similar coupling of reciprocal currency holdings with 

needs for international liquidity was made in the statement of 

the specific aims of operations in the existing Authorization, 

but when that language was written outright market transactions 

were expected to play a more important role than had proved to 

be the case. The fact that the great bulk of System operations 

involved swap drawings made the clause seem inappropriate.  

Mr. Coombs commented that he thought it would be wise 

to delete the clause in question because it might be misinterpreted 

to imply that the System intended the swap network to be used for 

the purpose of inflating the foreign currency holdings of both 

parties to the arrangements.



4/12/66 -11

Mr. Hayes observed that the proposed new instruments 

seemed to be a clear improvement over the existing ones. Noting 

that the Committee had postponed action on them earlier, he 

asked whether the kinds of questions that had been raised were 

sufficiently important to warrant again holding them over to a 

later meeting.  

Chairman Martin remarked that no problem would be raised 

by delaying action; operations could be conducted under the 

existing instruments until some conclusion was reached on the 

proposed new ones. Mr. Coombs had distributed a new memorandum 

today, and it might be desirable for the Committee to consider 

the Secretariat's memorandum, as well as those by Mr. Baker and 

Mr. Coombs, at one time.  

Mr. Hayes then said that he would make one observation on 

Mr. Baker's memorandum at this time. As the memorandum itself 

indicated, it tended to stress certain alleged limitations and 

shortcoming of System operations. Personally, he would have 

preferred a somewhat more balanced presentation. In his judgment 

the System's accomplishments in the foreign currency area had been 

great, and he hoped the members would not overlook those accomplish

ments in reviewing the memorandum. On the whole, he thought, the 

operations had been extremely useful. Moreover, all of Mr. Baker's 

criticisms were answered effectively in Mr. Coombs' memorandum.



4/12/66 -12

Mr. Daane agreed that the operations had been highly 

useful. He added that they were so viewed not only within the 

System but at the Treasury and abroad as well.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee plan 

on considering further the several memorandums on foreign 

currency operations at its next meeting.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

March 22 through April 6, 1966, and a supplemental report for 

April 7 through 11, 1966. Copies of both reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

System open market operations over the interval 
since the Committee last met kept bank reserve 
positions under pressure, and last week Federal 
funds traded for the first time at 4-7/8 per cent.  
On balance, outright holdings of Government securities 
rose by $526 million, including $56 million of coupon 
issues bought early in the period when Treasury bills 
were in scarce supply. Repurchase agreements against 
Governments were used to meet temporary reserve needs 
in the week ended April 6, but none were outstanding 
at the close of business last night. While net bor
rowed reserves were not much changed from earlier weeks, 
the money market came under increased pressure over the 
past week or so, reflecting continued strength in credit 
demands, particularly increased financing needs of



4/12/66

Government securities dealers. Market participants 
realize that the System is applying a fair degree 
of pressure and seem to believe that it is appropriate.  

Despite money market pressures and higher CD 
and finance company paper rates, the Treasury bill 
market was experiencing a life of its own until the 
very end of the period. Three weeks ago dealer 
inventories were unusually low. There was widespread 
demand for bills, including System buying and buying 
by public funds which are entering into a period of 
seasonal demand. For a time, indeed, the 3-month 
bill rate dipped below the discount rate. Moreover, 
there were anticipations of growing seasonal demands 
for Treasury bills, while the reflux of bills into 
the market following the quarterly bank statement and 
Cook County tax dates was only moderate. In this 
environment dealers were anxious to rebuild their 
inventories and received heavy awards in the April 4 
auction. By this time other short-term money rates 
were more attractive relative to Treasury bill rates, 
and sharply increased dealer financing needs could 
be financed only at higher bank lending rates. In 
this environment, bill rates tended to back up. In 
yesterday's auction, bidding was cautious and scaled 
over a fairly wide range as dealers sought to protect 
themselves against further upward pressure on rates.  
Averaging issuing rates were set at 4.62 per cent 
and 4.76 per cent on the three- and six-month issues.  

The three-month rate was thus 4 basis points above 
the rate set in the auction just preceding the last 
meeting of the Committee and 8 basis points above a 
week ago.  

Looking to the period immediately ahead, it 
appears that the banks have made careful preparation 
for the April tax date pressures and should have no 
special problems with CD maturities. Finance companies 
are expecting sizable maturities of their paper over 
the tax date, and may be forced to borrow from banks.  

Given the likely short-run credit demands on banks, 
dealer financing costs are apt to remain at the higher 

levels reached last week. Consequently, for the moment 

at least, the Treasury bill rate is probably more 

sensitive to pressures on bank reserve positions than 

it has been for some time. The Treasury bill, of course, 
is no longer the main instrument for bank reserve

-13-



4/12/66

adjustments and the re-emergence of strong nonbank 
demand over the next few weeks could again isolate 
the bill rate from general money market pressures.  

In the capital markets, the improved sentiment 
that was in evidence at the time of the last meeting 
of the Committee continued over much of the period, 
although there were fairly wide price fluctuations 
on a day-to-day basis. The Government market reacted 
strongly to the President's statement near the end of 
March that implied that tax action would be forth
coming if prices continued to rise. The corporate 
and municipal markets were also generally buoyant 
during most of the period. The large AT&T issue 
offered on March 29 sold out quickly, and yields on 
municipal bonds continued the decline that started 
in early March. By the close of the period, however, 
there were some signs that the pendulum had again 
swung too far. An A-rated corporate issue priced to 
yield investors only 5 per cent, compared with 5.35 
per cent on a comparable issue in mid-March, was 
moving slowly. Prices of intermediate- and long
term Governments edged lower since last Wednesday, 
and a general note of caution appears to be coming 
back into the capital markets. While the forward 
calendar of offerings is not so heavy as in early 
March, a good volume of issues is scheduled for the 
current week and over-all capital demands are expected 
to continue strong. The markets remain sensitive and 
will be carefully assessing the prospects for a tax 
increase, while watching closely business response 
to the President's plea for moderation of capital 
spending.  

The Treasury is currently going through a period 
of cash stringency, with its balance in the Reserve 
Banks falling as low as $46 million last Friday. The 
low level of Treasury balances has not been disturbing 
to System open market operations, and so far, at least, 
the Treasury has not had to use its temporary borrowing 
facilities. But it will be touch and go for the next 
week.  

While the Treasury is not planning any cash bor
rowing for the rest of the fiscal year, various 
Government agencies will be raising sizable amounts of 
new money this month--aggregating perhaps $1 billion-
in order to finance their own activities. In addition

-14-



4/12/66 -15

there is a possibility of further asset sales over 
the next month or so. These agency offerings will 
be applying continuing pressure to financial markets 
throughout the month.  

The Treasury will be meeting with its borrowing 
committees on April 26 and 27 to set the terms on its 
May 15 refunding of $9.3 billion outstanding bonds 
and notes, of which only $2-1/2 billion are held by 
the public. Last February's prerefunding by the 
Treasury has reduced the operation to routine propor
tions, and the market is generally expecting that 
the Treasury will come out with a short-term issue 
maturing in about 18 months. While no particular 
problems appear to be presented by the refunding at 
the moment, it will come in the midst of substantial 
agency financing and even keel considerations will 
be of some importance late this month.  

Mr. Daane asked the Manager how he would expect the market 

to react if net borrowed reserves were deepened somewhat further.  

Mr. Holmes said that such judgments were hard to make 

because other developments were likely to be affecting market 

attitudes at the same time. On the whole, however, he did not 

think that some further deepening of net borrowed reserves would 

be particularly disturbing to the market.  

Mr. Ellis noted the Manager had said even keel considera

tions would be of "some" importance late in the month. How much 

attention did he feel would have to be paid to such considerations? 

Mr. Holmes replied that the point he meant to emphasize 

was that the Treasury operation would be fairly routine, and that 

there would be less need than in connection with many other 

financings to insure that the markets were kept in good shape



4/12/66 -16

while it was underway. On the other hand, the financing would 

come at a time when a fair volume of agency issues was being 

sold, and it was hard to judge what pressures those sales would 

put on the markets. As to the timing of even keel considerations, 

the Treasury announcement probably would be made on April 27, 

the last day of a statement week and one day before reserve 

figures for that week were made available. Thus, some con

sideration might have to be given to the financing in that 

statement week.  

Mr. Hickman noted that the blue book 1 / indicated that 

in the latter part of April there normally was a shift of funds 

toward money centers as well as seasonal demands for bills. He 

asked whether that suggested some downward pressures on bill 

rates after the tax date.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that downward bill rate pressures 

might be expected under ordinary circumstances. Because of the 

agency issues in prospect, however, it was not clear that they 

would occur this year. On the whole, however, he did not think 

that even keel considerations would pose much of a problem.  

Mr. Swan referred to Mr. Holmes' comment that banks 

should have no special problems with CD maturities over the 

tax date. Did he expect any problems as a result of borrowings 

for tax purposes? 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 
for the Committee by the Board's staff.



4/12/66 -17

Mr. Holmes replied that there was likely to be a significant 

volume of tax borrowing by corporations, as well as borrowing by 

finance companies with paper maturing on the tax date, as a result 

of which banks might well encounter some problems.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open 
market transactions in Government securities 
and bankers' acceptances during the period 
March 22 through April 11, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

I haven't found a more succinct description of 
economic conditions and problems than the lead paragraph 
in the latest survey put out by the National Association 
of Purchasing Agents. The paragraph reads: "Prices are 

up; quality is down. Costs are up; profits are down.  
Lead time is long; labor is short. But business is very 
good." 

About all I can add are the statistics that confirm 
the statement. Business is certainly very good. Our 
production index for March, just off the computer, shows 
another one-and-a-half point gain, not bad for an economy 
pressing on capacity in many areas. The March rise brings 
the first-quarter average for the production index to a 
13 per cent annual rate of gain over the fourth quarter.  

And this output is not staying on the shelves very 
long. Retail sales are booming, a natural consequence 
of the acceleration in wage and salary disbursements.  
February sales figures were revised upward significantly, 
and the March preliminaries show a healthy rise on top of 
that, bringing first-quarter sales to a 13-1/2 per cent 
annual rate of gain.



4/12/66

This pace of advance in the economy is pressing 
on both plant capacity and the labor supply, with 
order backlogs rising in important durable goods 
lines. Utilization of plant capacity in manufac
turing is up to a rate of between 92 and 93 per cent, 
with the rise limited in many key lines, such as 
machinery and other metal-using industries, by the 
shortage of skilled labor. We seem to have hit the 
bottom of the barrel some time ago for adult workers.  
The unemployment rate for this group is below 3 per 
cent, close to the low during the Korean war. And 
we have stretched the workweek pretty far. It was 
already at a postwar high in February, with hours in 
the machinery industries nearly back to World War II 
levels.  

Further gains in output will increasingly depend 
on our ability to absorb and upgrade more of the young 
and the inexperienced in the labor force. But this 
has its consequences for productivity and costs. The 
productivity squeeze is already showing up in unit 
labor costs and prices. The rise in unit labor costs 

in January could be explained largely on the basis of 
the increase in social security taxes. But the rise 
in February, and there was probably another rise in 
March, is a much clearer reflection of labor hoarding, 
costs of training inexperienced labor, and the expenses 
of substantial overtime.  

In this situation of strong demands, these rising 
costs are being carried through to industrial commodity 
prices, which advanced again in March. So far this year, 
the rise in industrial prices has been at about a 2-3/4 

per cent annual rate, compared to the 1 to 1-1/2 per 

cent rate that prevailed over most of last year. And 

increases are becoming more pervasive through the list.  

In February, the latest date for which detail is available, 
almost three-fifths of the sub-groups in the index rose, 
as compared with less than half in the closing months of 

1965.  

Putting these output, sales, and price developments 

into aggregate terms, we are estimating gross national 

product in the first quarter at a rate of $712 billion, 

up $15 billion or 8-1/2 per cent from the fourth quarter 

in current dollars, and a little over 6 per cent in real 

terms. As best as we can see, the pace this current 

quarter is likely to be almost as fast. The driving

-18-



4/12/66

forces, defense spending and business capital outlays, 
are not slackening. Although defense outlays in the 
first quarter were a little below Budget estimates, 
the President has indicated that the shortfall is 
expected to be made up this quarter. Business capital 
outlays, which may have exceeded earlier expectations 
in the first quarter, are also likely to stay strong, 
at a minimum to keep to the track marked out in the 
February anticipations survey. It is probably too 
early to expect to see any effects in this area of 
either monetary restraint or Presidential exhortations.  
Most other areas--except housing--are continuing strong, 
and a second-quarter rise in GNP at an annual rate of 
about 8 per cent, with prices accounting for about 
2-1/2 percentage points of the rise, still seems likely.  

There is general agreement that this is too fast a 
pace of advance to sustain, that increasingly more of 
the rise in GNP may reflect a larger price and a smaller 
real component unless something is done to retard it.  
But there is less agreement about what should be done, 
with controversy focusing around the need for a tax 
increase. To end any suspense, I will put myself 
forthrightly among the waverers. Over the past month 
I have argued myself all around the issue, but more 
often--and today--I come out on the side of favoring 
a tax increase.  

My hesitancy in reaching this position rests first 
on the feeling that the restraint job that has to be 
done is relatively moderate, at least if it is done 
soon. It doesn't seem to me that very much has to be 
shaved off spending demands, as we now see them, to 
bring total outlays into better balance with growing 
resource availability. Second, I have faith in the 
efficacy of monetary restraint, and increasingly expect 
that the effect of the restraint imposed to date will 
be reflected in a moderation of spending. Third, I 
wouldn't be alarmed at the possible discriminatory 
effect of tighter monetary restraint, particularly if 
it whacked housing a little harder at a time when 
business and defense construction needs were rising.  
And finally, I don't think we have exhausted the 
potential of policy, not with borrowings from the 

Fed still fluctuating around only about half a billion 

dollars, and interest rates still well down from month
ago peaks.

-19-



4/12/66

But the arguments for fiscal restraint are more 
persuasive. Even as hardhearted a free market economist 
as I can't shrug off the plight of banks' competitors 
in the housing finance industry. And monetary restraint, 
short of a dramatic rise in the discount rate, is not 
likely to have as strong or as immediate effect in 
damping any emerging inflationary psychology as would 
the announcement of a request for a tax increase.  
Moreover, the possibility of a step-up in defense 
spending carries with it the danger of a real consumer 
and business buying spree. If for no other reason, we 
need the insurance of a prompt, moderate, but reversible 
tax increase.  

This is not the Committee's decision to make, how
ever; monetary policymakers have to live with whatever 
the Administration decides. And they have to live with 
the fact that even if the Administration does opt for a 
tax increase, there are weeks and probably months ahead 
before it would actually begin to absorb spendable 
incomes. In the interim, the only tools of restraint 
available are persuasion and monetary policy. The 
situation calls for the use of both. Now that 
financial markets have had a chance to catch their 
breath, after the hectic pace at which interest rates 
rose from December to February, it would seem appropriate 
to me to restore and maintain the pressure on financial 
markets in the near term, to restrict reserve availability 
further and, hopefully, to see these pressures transmitted 
through to long-term interest rates.  

Mr. Holland made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The weeks since mid-March have been one of those 

confounding periods in which our measures of marginal 
reserve availability have proved remarkably stable 
around a new high plateau for this expansion, while 

other financial indicators have been charging off in 

all directions. We have had a major run-down in bill 

and bond rates, although the last few days suggest 

some turn-around of that move is in process. There 
has been an unexpectedly strong accretion of liquid 
funds to the money market banks, particularly the 
New York City banks. And there has developed a sharp

-20-



4/12/66

bulge in bank loans and the money supply all around 
the country, although there are grounds for believing 
that some of that increase will prove temporary.  

The reasons for all of this appear to be a blend 
of changing market expectations, shifting loan and 
investment policies of the larger banks, and heavy 
business cash needs over the March-April tax periods.  
These factors and their interrelationships have been 
amply described in the materials submitted for this 
meeting and in the comments of the Account Manager 
this morning, and I shall not belabor them.  

The experience does emphasize again how accom
modative of changes a net borrowed reserve target 
can be. It also has some implications for the proper 
stance of monetary policy in the weeks ahead. While 
there are good reasons for looking forward to some 
partial redress of the recent interest rate declines 
and bank credit increases, it seems to me that a 
question remains whether such market readjustments 
will themselves carry far enough to achieve the 
results desired, given our current policy stance.  

Let me point particularly to the position of the 

banking system. The biggest banks--in New York City, 
especially--by dint of hard and costly efforts have 
managed to acquire some cushion of liquid funds in 

anticipation of expected strong credit demands just 
ahead. One result of these efforts is that the 

reserve pressures generated by System operations now 
bear most heavily upon other and smaller reserve 
city and country banks--banks that, by and large, 
are slower to undertake adjustments. In addition, 
the ways in which the pressures are now reaching 
these banks--poorer time deposit performance, and 

strong tax-associated credit demands in March and 

April--can easily be viewed by them as the kind of 

unexpected and temporary drains for which assistance 

can appropriately be sought under Regulation A.  

Consequently, we may be in a period when a given 

dollar of borrowed reserves will not represent quite 

as much restraint as before; or, to put it another 

way, when it would be in the spirit of current policy 

to let net borrowed reserves slide a bit deeper, with 

banks having to borrow a slightly larger fraction of 

the reserves needed to meet the remainder of the 

expected bulge in bank credit demand suggested in the



green 1/ and blue books. In the process, an extra 
degree of insurance will have been taken against any 
backsliding in the more restrictive lending policies 
being adopted by banks around the country. In other 
words, I would advocate a little further prudent 
tightening of reserve availability, to use the "phrase 
of art" employed in alternative B of the draft direc
tives.2/ 

Speaking of directives, the staff has been doing 
a good deal of study of directive language in the three 
weeks since the last meeting, reviewing minutes of the 
last few years in the process. It is striking how much 
corollary meaning can be drawn from the Committee's 
own comments to interpret its key operational phrases 
of art--two of them in particular. One, money market 
conditions, can now be fairly construed, I think, to 
imply more or less coordinate attention to free reserves, 

the 3-month bill rate, and the combination of cost and 
quantity of Federal funds transactions, cost and quantity 
of dealer financing, and the borrowing component of free 

reserves. A second phrase of art that has served the 

Committee well recently has been reserve availability.  

Comments at the last few meetings seem to be infusing 

this phrase with corollary meaning about as follows: 

primary attention to free reserves and borrowing, 
secondary consideration to the cost and availability 

of reserves in the Federal funds market, and probably 

also some modest allowance for changes in over-all 

reserve use, e.g., a willingness to let net borrowed 

reserves slip a little deeper if required reserve or 

bank credit expansion should prove unduly strong. At 

the very last meeting, the Committee may have started 

to create a third operational phrase of art--pressure 

on bank reserve positions--and that phrase is preserved 

in alternative A of the directives drafted for your 

consideration this morning.  
Mindful of the occasional criticism both from 

within and from outside the System that more explicit 

directive language is needed, the staff experimented 

1/ The report, "Current Economic & Financial Developments," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.  

2/ Two alternative draft directives are appended to these 

minutes as Attachment A.

4/12/66 -22-



4/12/66

with being a little more specific this time; but the 
best we could come up with on this score was a combina
tion target variable expressed as "maintaining about 
the same range of net reserve availability and related 
money market conditions as has prevailed since the 
last meeting of the Committee." We felt constrained 
by, among other things, the performance outlined in 
Mr. Bernard's memorandum 1/ distributed last week, 
showing that the staff projections of money market 
conditions as a group have proved reasonably accurate 
from one Committee meeting to the next, but up to now 
our ability to project broader financial aggregates has 
been distinctly mediocre. And, frankly, we felt that 
even this kind of language was a little more specific 
than the majority of the Committee would prefer.  

In the absence of different directions from you, 
the staff would propose to push along resolutely in 
its current four-way approach to the directive: 
namely, continuing to serve up draft directives that 
speak essentially in the usual phrases of art; second, 
depending heavily upon comments at Committee meetings 
to interpret the shadings of those phrases, for purposes 
both of guiding operations and of phrasing the pertinent 
policy record entry; third, trying, in the contents of 
the green book, the blue book, and staff presentations, 
to go as far as practicable in suggesting the relevant 
measures and their interrelationships; and, finally, 
pushing research efforts to identify better the kinds 

of linkages that make up the monetary process and that 
might best be exploited in the conduct of System opera
tions. A prime example of a subject for intensive 
study is the reserve target proposal put forth by 
Governor Robertson; it is planned that one or more 
memoranda on that proposal will be forwarded to the 
Committee before long by the Account Manager and perhaps 
othersof the Committee staff.  

It should be recognized that all current efforts 
at any more explicit definition of Committee goals and 
instructions may soon be rendered obsolete; for both 

the Government securities market study and the discount 

1/ A copy of this memorandum, dated March 31, 1966 and entitled 

"Staff quantification of FOMC directives since August 1964," has 
been placed in the Committee's files.

-23-



4/12/66

study may lead to changes that could entail substantial 
revisions in System operating guides and procedures.  
But the subject of communicating the Committee's inten
tions may appear too important to wait until these basic 
studies are finished. Accordingly, the staff stands 
ready to proceed as noted, subject to all the guidance 
in this matter that the Committee members individually 
or collectively are moved to provide.  

Mr. Ellis commented that he would urge the staff, instead 

of attempting to prejudge how far the Committee was prepared to 

go in accepting more explicit directive language, to advance any 

suggestions it had and let the Committee judge whether or not it 

was prepared to accept them.  

Mr. Mitchell thought that the eloquence with which Mr. Holland 

described the present approach to the directive did the Committee 

an injustice. In his (Mr. Mitchell's) opinion the directives were 

basically inadequate. He had become discouraged about the possi

bilities of improving them, although he thought the staff should 

continue to work on the problem of developing more explicit language.  

In his judgment, Mr. Mitchell continued, operations since 

the last meeting were unsatisfactory because the Committee had not 

given the Manager sufficiently good instructions; ground had been 

lost when it should have been gained. The Committee could not rely 

on fiscal policy, since no one could say whether a tax increase 

would be enacted. But one thing the Committee could do was to avoid 

letting up on monetary restraint at this time. Alternative A of the

-24-



4/12/66 -25

draft directives included a phrase about "continuing to exert 

pressure on bank reserve positions." Unless strong pressure 

of that kind was maintained it seemed to him that the Committee's 

whole program of monetary restraint would fail.  

Chairman Martin said it was not clear to him that the 

Committee had lost ground since the preceding meeting. He asked 

Mr. Mitchell what measure he had used in reaching that conclusion.  

Mr. Mitchell said he had based his judgment on the recent 

performance of the capital markets and the change in trend of long

term interest rates.  

Mr. Hayes said it was his impression that some of the ground 

which Mr. Mitchell thought had been lost in capital markets actually 

was a natural reaction to the earlier excessive adjustment in 

interest rates. The market often displayed a pendulum-like pattern, 

with rates moving too far in one direction and then coming back part 

way. From his observations he concluded that banks still felt they 

were under considerable pressure. He hoped that was true, and he 

shared the view that it was desirable to maintain the pressure.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed that bankers felt under pressure. His 

concern was with recent capital market developments, which he thought 

had not been desirable. He did not know whether monetary policy 

could have stemmed the decline in interest rates, but an attempt 

should have been made to do so.



4/12/66 -26

Mr. Holmes commented that the market had indeed acted 

like a pendulum. The earlier rise in long-term rates probably 

would have occurred even if the System had moved toward greater 

ease. Subsequently there was a backwash, reflecting a basic change 

in expectations with regard to the likelihood of a tax increase.  

It was possible that the pendulum would now swing back the other 

way.  

In reply to Mr. Mitchell's question as to whether a deepening 

of net borrowed reserves of perhaps $100 million would have stopped 

the recent decline in long rates, Mr. Holmes said it might have 

slowed the decline but he did not think it would have stopped it.  

Mr. Maisel said he shared Mr. Mitchell's position. He would 

stress that during the recent period the System supplied too large a 

volume of reserves, permitting bank credit to grow at a much more 

rapid rate than earlier. He agreed that expectational factors affected 

the trend of long-term interest rates, but the movement in the variable 

the Committee could control--bank reserves--had been inconsistent with 

what he thought had been intended. It was clear from that experience 

that the Committee's directive was formulated improperly. The out

come would have been better if the Committee, rather than relying on 

a marginal reserve target, had given the Manager instructions along 

the lines Mr. Robertson had proposed at several recent meetings.  

Mr. Holmes observed that there often were large swings in 

required reserves of a temporary nature that were hard to distinguish



4/12/66 -27

in the short run from more basic changes. For that reason it was 

extremely difficult to make operating decisions from week to week 

in terms of the broader reserve measures in which the Committee was 

interested.  

Mr. Daane commented that while he sympathized with the view 

that the Committee did not want to lose ground, he thought it was 

necessary to gauge the degree of pressure that was being exerted 

in broader terms than the movements in reserves and bank credit.  

Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Holmes if he thought the 

Committee had lost ground recently. Mr. Holmes replied he did not 

think so, in terms either of market developments or the views of 

market participants regarding the posture of policy. To use a 

phrase the Committee had employed in the past, the Desk recently 

had been "resolving doubts on the side of tightness." For example, 

last Wednesday, April 6, dealers had large financing needs and were 

inquiring about repurchase agreements. The Desk had responded 

negatively, and the dealers were forced into the banks. Nor, in 

his judgment, had ground been lost in terms of bank loan policies.  

The banks had tried to get more liquid and to put themselves in a 

position to meet some of the loan demands they saw ahead. While 

they were in pretty good shape to meet those demands, that did not 

mean that they were not turning down some customers, particularly 

new ones. In general, it had become harder for banks to get funds.



4/12/66

Mr. Hayes noted that one of the banks in the New York City 

area had begun to compile figures on loans that it was turning 

down, and found that the total already was quite large.  

Chairman Martin commented that the question of whether 

ground had been lost obviously was a matter of judgment. It had 

been useful, he thought, to hear the views on that subject around 

the table.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

Recent balance of payments figures are in some ways 
reassuring. The first-quarter deficit on the liquidity 
basis now appears to have been below the $1-1/2 billion 
annual rate given in the green book. And the deficit 
on the basis of official reserve transactions was apparently 
very small indeed, less than $1/2 billion at a seasonally 
adjusted annual rate, in marked contrast to the very large 
deficit on this basis in the fourth quarter. In the latest 
quarter, U.S. banks succeeded in attracting large Euro
dollar deposits through their foreign branches, aided by 
the renewed weakness of sterling and by the fact that 
Italian commercial banks placed abroad again the funds 
they had pulled back late last year. This second measure 
of the deficit has fluctuated very widely from quarter to 
quarter, and should for most analytical purposes be averaged 
over a longer period, as I shall do presently.  

So far, we know of four other large changes in interna

tional transactions between the fourth quarter of 1965 and 

the first quarter of this year. On the favorable side, the 
reflow of bank credit swelled from an already large $1 

billion annual rate in the fourth quarter to a rate of 

nearly $2 billion in January-February. A second change, 
also favorable, was that there was no U.K. debt service 

payment to be waived in the latest quarter. On the adverse 

side, the merchandise trade surplus shrank from its earlier 

annual rate of $5 billion to only $4 billion in January

February. And there was a sharp increase in the rate of

-28-



4/12/66

capital outflow into foreign securities, as new Canadian 
issues earlier postponed came to market.  

These four changes by themselves would have increased 
the liquidity deficit. But apparently their net adverse 
effect was more than offset by favorable changes in other 
transactions not yet identified or measured.  

These recent developments do not seem to call for 
any broad revision of earlier projections for the year 
1966 as a whole. It still seems likely that with good 
management, by which I mean adequate restraint of domestic 
inflationary pressures, the liquidity deficit may be held 
close to last year's rate despite the larger balance of 
payments costs of Vietnam, and the deficit on the basis 
of official reserve transactions may be a little smaller.  
However, no substantial improvement over last year seems 
likely and there would almost certainly be a deterioration 
if domestic inflation and anticipations thereof should 
become more intense.  

This morning I should like to comment on some longer
term trends in the balance of payments. It seems to me 
that the over-all figures for the latest three quarters, 
since mid-1965, give a good indication of the trend-level 
of the payments deficit. For this 3-quarter period, the 
deficit was at an annual rate of $1.6 billion on the 
liquidity basis and $1.4 billion on the official reserve 
transactions basis, i.e., about $1-1/2 billion on either 
basis of calculation. The deficit was held down by a 
number of special factors, including debt prepayments, 
military prepayments, and the voluntary restraint programs.  
On the other hand, there were also a number of special 
factors tending to increase the deficit in this period, 
including the U.K. debt waiver already mentioned, lique
fication by the U.K. Treasury of its security portfolio, 
and a strike-related bulge in U.S. imports of steel.  
These two sets of special factors may be very roughly 
regarded as cancelling each other out. So also may the 
twin payments influences of our domestic boom, which 
has made credit unusually tight but import demand 

unusually strong. Obviously any quantitative weighing 
of all these factors must be exceedingly rough. But 

after allowance for them, it seems reasonable to think 

of the recent size of our payments problem as about 

$1-1/2 billion a year.  
This represents a significant improvement from a 

trend rate of deficit of about $3-1/2 billion in

-29-



4/12/66

1959-60--a little higher on the liquidity basis, a little 
lower on official settlements. The fact that our progress 
has not been exactly breathtaking should not be allowed 
to obscure the fact that it has been substantial--substantial 
even after one discounts that part of it that can be attrib
uted to the voluntary programs.  

A key element has been the improvement in the relative 
price-cost position of this country. Appropriate indicators 
are hard to come by, but consumer price indexes give some 
rough ideas of magnitudes. From the year 1960 to the year 
1965, the U.S. consumer price index rose by only 7 per cent.  
In the same period, similar indexes for Britain, France, 
Germany, and the Netherlands rose by about 20 per cent, and 
the increases were even larger in Italy and Japan.  

Thus, inflation abroad has permitted us to achieve 
an important degree of international adjustment merely by 
avoiding inflation at home. But there is nothing automatic 
about such an adjustment--nothing inherent in the system 
that guarantees its continuation. If therefore we wish it 

to continue, at a time when other leading countries are 

experiencing price advances of 3 or 4 per cent a year but 

are attempting to slow them down, it is crucial that we 

not acquiesce in domestic price advances of similar 

proportions.  
Against this setting, how should prospective payments 

developments in 1966 be viewed? In particular, if there 

should be little change in the liquidity deficit in 1966 

as compared with 1965, and only a modest reduction in the 

official settlements deficit, would that mean that the 

slow-working, favorable underlying trends of the past five 

years has ceased to operate? I do not think so. If 

military expenditures abroad in connection with hostilities 

in Vietnam were to increase by more than $1/2 billion this 

year, as seems probable, while the deficit on all other 

transactions were to diminish by more than $1/2 billion, 
it seems to me that this outcome could reasonably be 

interpreted as further progress towards equilibrium.  

Whether the market, or European central bankers, 
would so interpret it would depend partly on the clarity 

and candor of the official explanations, and even more, I 

should think, on U.S. economic developments other than 

those directly reflected in the balance of payments 

accounts.  

What would profoundly justify a new round of pessimism 

about the U.S. payments position would be a clear acceleration

-30-



4/12/66

of price-cost advances in this country. If that should 
be allowed to happen, it seems to me that pessimism 
would be justified even if the adverse payments effects 
of inflationary developments were to be offset for a 
time by ad hoc programs or controls aimed at restrain

ing particular types of international transactions.  
Inflation here would close one of the main avenues of 
adjustment that has been open to us in a world of fixed 
exchange rates.  

In short, the balance of payments outlook--both 
short-run and long-run continues to indicate to me that 
the paramount economic policy objective now must be to 
moderate domestic inflationary pressures, rather than 
to operate ad hoc on particular international flows.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and view on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Hayes said he would first like to commend the three 

members of the staff on the high quality of their presentations 

today. His own analysis of the business situation followed 

Mr. Brill's quite closely. And, with Mr. Reynolds he would 

emphasize the great importance of avoiding an acceleration of 

price-cost advances.  

Mr. Hayes then made the following statement: 

The economy's current performance and the economic 

outlook are both extremely strong. Unemployment has 

been dropping very rapidly at a time when a relatively 

moderate rate of absorption of the remaining unemployed 

would be preferable; and the capacity utilization rate 

in manufacturing is higher than at any time since late 

1955. These conditions are resulting in undue upward 
pressure on costs and prices. There is an undertone of 
inflationary expectations, even though there has been 
no outbreak of inflationary fever. Recently there has

-31-



4/12/66

been some leveling tendency in the farm and food price 
area. But industrial wholesale prices rose again in 
March, bringing the rate of increase thus far this year 
to about double that experienced in 1965. Price rises 
have been increasingly pervasive in the last few months.  
While it is encouraging to note that the recent appeals 
of the Administration for restraint constitute recogni
tion of this inflationary threat, the effectiveness of 
this method of combatting cost and price pressures may 
be open to doubt. Among businessmen in our District, 
there seems to be a good deal of skepticism as to the 
effect of the President's appeal in restraining plant 
equipment expenditures, though some businessmen concede 
that it might have some modest influence.  

After several months of relatively favorable per
formance, the balance of payments is becoming again a 
cause for serious concern. The annual rate of deficit 
in the first quarter, after seasonal adjustment, seems 
about in line with that of 1965 as a whole. But we 
face a very real danger of further deterioration, 
primarily because imports are likely to rise steeply 
under present boom conditions. The demand for exports 

is decidedly favorable but our export performance over 

the next few months may well depend largely on the 

extent to which domestic demand pre-empts available 
output. Thus an improvement in the trade balance in 

1966, which had seemed likely a few months ago, now 

appears doubtful. Our tighter monetary policy is 

proving helpful on the side of capital flows. However, 
the projected reduction in direct investment abroad 

may turn out to be overoptimistic in view of growing 

difficulties in placing offshore issues in Europe.  

With imports and military and tourist outlays burgeoning, 
it seems very probable that the Administration's solemn 

assurances of near-equilibrium in our 1966 balance of 

payments will not be fulfilled in the absence of inten

sified policy measures. And, in my judgment, our 

failure to come close to this goal could bring a renewal 

throughout the world of the serious doubts concerning 

the dollar that haunted us until a year or so ago.  

The latest credit data are hard to evaluate, as 

usual, but there does seem to be some basis for con

cluding that a more restrictive monetary policy has 

brought some significant slowdown in bank credit 

expansion relative to last year. Business loan demand

-32-



4/12/66

continues very strong, but selective lending policies 
appear to be growing in importance as a limiting factor 
in loan expansion. There may be some transfer of demand 
to the bond market in view of the sharp increase in the 
cost to prime borrowers of bank borrowing as compared 
with the sale of new bond issues. However, for the time 

being, there seems to be a considerably calmer tone in 
the capital markets than prevailed through much of 
March, Apparently part of the recent improvement in 
the tone of the financial markets has resulted from 
rising expectations of a tax increase to stem infla
tionary developments.  

On both domestic and international counts, this 
would seem to be a time when general Government policies 
must work together in the direction of restraint. As 
far as international considerations are concerned, we 

are no longer in the situation of the last five years 
when we were trying to stem a payments deficit while 
stimulating the domestic economy. On the contrary, our 

prospective payments deficit may be regarded in some 

degree as of the "classical" type attributable to 
excessive demand in the economy. There seems to be 

persuasive evidence that the monetary and fiscal 

measures taken to date are insufficient to prevent 

excessive growth of aggregate demand. The most recent 
revisions to our measures of fiscal stimulus indicate 

that in the absence of a tax increase the Federal budget 

will continue to provide substantial economic push in 

the second half of this calendar year, despite an 

assumed slowdown in the growth of Federal spending.  

The needed degree of additional restraint is such that 

a tax increase is clearly warranted. In business 

circles there seems to be considerable reluctance to 

accept this necessity, largely because of a belief that 

the Government has not yet shown sufficient restraint 

on the expenditure side and might well dissipate much 

of a tax rise through further growth of expenditures.  

My own view is that since there is no likelihood that 

the necessary degree of restraint will be forthcoming 

from a reduction in expenditures, we must inevitably 

look to a tax increase, and the announcement thereof, 
to dampen current inflationary psychology. Furthermore, 

a decision must be reached very soon if the fiscal 

restraint is to be effected when it is needed, i.e., 

during the coming six months or so.

-33-



4/12/66

If monetary policy is left to carry the burden 
alone, without fiscal support, I think we shall have 
to face some very unpleasant decisions later this year.  
Even with fiscal support, it seems quite possible that 
our policies will have to become somewhat more restric
tive. Nevertheless, I would not suggest any appreciable 
change in policy at this time, mainly because such a 
move might be taken by the public as a signal that a 
tax increase is not likely to be forthcoming, and also 
it might even contribute to the fulfillment of that 
expectation. For the time being, I think the Committee 
should maintain about the present stance of policy, 
i.e., we should maintain a considerable degree of 
pressure on bank reserve positions in order to carry 
through with the slowdown in bank credit expansion 
which--subject to temporary deviations--may already 
be under way. We might well aim at maintaining net 
borrowed reserves in a $200 to $250 million range, 
with swings outside of this range on both sides, with 
borrowings ranging perhaps close to $600 million and 
with the Federal funds rate consistently at a premium 
over the discount rate. Until we have had a little 
more time to evaluate the results of our policy to 
date and to reach a more accurate judgment on the 
probabilities of a fiscal policy move, I believe we 
should avoid any further dramatic action such as a 
discount rate increase. We might well bear in mind 

that in any case even keel considerations will 

probably prevent any policy move during the first 

three weeks of May.  
With respect to the directive, I think that 

alternative A is quite satisfactory.  

Mr. Ellis reported that business appeared to be running at 

just about full throttle in New England. Consumers were setting 

the pace with March department store sales substantially above 

year-ago levels and auto registrations in the most recent data also 

above 1965 levels. Manufacturers noted still expanding flows of 

new orders in March, and in February they boosted output to a

-34-



4/12/66 -35

12-month rise of 11 per cent in the Reserve Bank's region-wide 

index. Manufacturing employment, in turn, showed a 6 per cent 

year-to-year gain, leading total nonfarm employment to successive 

new peaks and unemployment to a low of 3.6 per cent. At that 

level the outstanding characteristic of the labor market was a 

quite general shortage of trained or mature workers and greater 

willingness of workers to shop for better jobs, adding to so

called "frictional" unemployment.  

In that atmosphere, Mr. Ellis said, District bankers 

had aggressively pursued one another into increasingly tighter, 

less liquid positions. Competition for deposits was intense and 

the commercial banks were more than holding their own. The 

weekly reporting member banks had increased their savings deposits 

by 12.6 per cent in 12 months, while their "all other time deposits" 

had expanded 33.7 per cent. Deposit balances at the regularly

reporting mutual savings banks showed a 6.4 per cent year-to-year 

growth in the February reports. Compared with a year ago, new 

deposits were up 17 per cent but withdrawals were up 29 per cent.  

Even with substantial rates of deposit growth--both demand 

and time--commercial banks had shown no evidence of satisfying 

the demands for bank credit, Mr. Ellis continued. With business 

loans standing 20 per cent higher, with loans to other financial 

institutions (chiefly finance companies) standing 28 per cent



4/12/66 -36

higher, and with real estate loans standing 15 per cent higher 

than year-ago levels, the Boston banks had loan-deposit ratios 

that averaged 81 per cent in March. Those same banks had a growing 

uneasiness about their long-standing commitments to loan--when 

asked--to their customer savings banks.  

Looking ahead, Mr. Ellis said, the virtually universal 

expectation in New England was for continued and even expanding 

loan requests. Contract awards during the past three months had 

averaged 17 per cent above year-ago levels, paced by unusually 

high nonresidential building awards. The Boston Bank's spring 

survey of manufacturers' capital expenditure plans for 1966 kept 

indicating higher and higher goals as more reports were tabulated.  

In response to Mr. Holland's query,1/ the Boston Reserve Bank 

surveyed eight of the largest respondents who accounted for a 

fifth of manufacturing employment in the region. None had made 

any recent revisions. Three indicated they might review their 

plans later in the year. Since some 10 per cent of this year's 

planned expenditures were carryovers of 1965 plans that could 

1/ On April 4, pursuant to a suggestion by the Board of 
Governors, Mr. Holland had sent the following telegram to 
the Presidents of all Reserve Banks: "In connection with 
your presentation at Open Market meeting on April 12, it 
will be appreciated if you will report such information as 
may come to your attention regarding changes (particularly 
downward revisions) since the end of March in business plans 
for plant and equipment expenditures, and reasons for such 
changes."



4/12/66 -37

not be accomplished because of delayed deliveries and so forth, 

there was some expectation that, if some companies did cut back 

on expenditures, that would simply enable others to fulfill their 

programs.  

At the national level also Mr. Ellis would describe the 

economy as "cruising at full throttle." He said "cruising" 

because he believed--and hoped--it was not running out of control; 

"full throttle" because virtually all labor and capital resources 

were in production. The critical question for monetary policy was 

whether that condition had been achieved or was being maintained 

through a credit creation process that was itself appropriate and 

sustainable. In retrospect, on the negative side, Mr. Ellis would 

suggest that as of early December, when the Federal Reserve raised 

the discount rate, it was not expecting or seeking acceleration to 

an 8 per cent rate of growth in total reserves (on average) in the 

succeeding four months. It remained true, however, that the present 

economy included that financial event in its recent history.  

On the positive side, Mr. Ellis continued, it was equally 

true that the rate of increase in total reserves had fallen each 

month since December to an estimated March annual rate of 2.6 per 

cent. It was also true that by gradual tightening of reserve 

availability the Committee had even more dramatically reduced the 

rate of providing nonborrowed reserves. Unhappily, however,



4/12/66 -38

experience suggested that that time span was too short and the 

numbers too tentative to support a full-blown conclusion that 

the bite of policy had been fully realized and that the Committee 

could rest on its oars. The staff projection for April suggested 

a reversal; that the proxy variable for bank credit (total member 

bank deposits) would expand sharply and that total reserves would 

again increase at a 7 or 8 per cent annual rate. The first para

graph of both the present and proposed directives set out the 

objective of "moderating the growth in the reserve base," an 

objective which he favored.  

Mr. Ellis' own inclination, looking ahead to the next four 

weeks, was to continue the policy of gradual tightening commenced 

on February 8. He found it impossible to accept the philosophy 

that the Committee should not use monetary policy for fear that 

such a course would reduce the chances of a tax increase, because 

he feared that any tax increase would come too late. To be specific, 

he urged the Manager to accept a target of net borrowed reserves 

centered at $250 million. Borrowings probably would range near 

$600 million, bill rates would be expected to rise slightly from 

their present levels near 4.58 per cent, and Federal funds would 

usually trade at premiums of 1/4 per cent or more. He found 

alternative B of the directive drafts more closely expressed that



4/12/66 -39

policy choice, but he would have liked to have had an opportunity 

to study the other language Mr. Holland had mentioned.  

Mr. Irons commented that business conditions in the Eleventh 

District paralleled those in the nation. Industrial production 

was quite strong; manufacturers' output was 11 per cent above a 

year ago, with strength in both durable and nondurable goods 

sectors, and petroleum production was very high. The employment 

situation continued to tighten--unemployment was negligible and 

there was a real scarcity of skilled workers. District retail 

sales, as measured by data for department stores, were rising 

about in line with national sales. Automobile registrations were 

continuing to run at high levels. The agricultural outlook was 

quite promising; the indications were that this year would be better 

than last, which in itself was not a bad year.  

Turning to financial developments, Mr. Irons noted that 

there had been little change in the positions of banks, which 

remained tight. There was no appreciable borrowing from the Reserve 

Bank but purchases of Federal funds remained heavy. Bank loans 

continued to expand moderately. Bankers still reported very strong 

loan demands, and they saw no relaxation of pressures in the months 

ahead. In recent weeks several bankers had noted in the course of 

informal conversations that they were making loan decisions in a 

manner that approached rationing. They said they were reducing



4/12/66 -40

anticipatory borrowing to a minimum, cutting back excessive 

loan requests of firms that overstated their needs in an effort 

to "play it safe," and denying loans to firms with banking con

nections in other parts of the country that were now seeking 

funds in the west. Also, they were requiring substantial 

compensating balances. In general, they felt that credit avail

ability had to be lessened in view of existing economic conditions, 

and that it was necessary to take actions of a type they did not 

like and ordinarily would not take.  

With respect to Mr. Holland's question concerning cutbacks 

in business plans for capital spending, Mr. Irons had little of a 

definite nature to report that could not be found in the press, 

such as the announcements that had been made by some large national 

companies with operations in the District. There were indications 

of a re-examination of plans by several companies. As one firm 

had put it, they were looking at their planned capital expenditures 

from the standpoints of essentiality, desirability, and deferrability.  

They hoped to cut back some expenditures that fell in the desirable 

but deferrable category, even though that meant taking a less 

economic approach in the strict sense. But those indications were 

highly indefinite and they applied only to a few of the large concerns.  

It was the opinion of many bankers and businessmen in the District 

that companies considering cutbacks in their plans were primarily



4/12/66 -41

concerned about rising wage rates and costs of operations, and 

were beginning to think about the consequences if the volume of 

activity should slip. At the same time, he had not heard any 

significant criticism of the System or of the Government; the 

causes of the current situation were simply being accepted as 

facts. Insofar as there was any criticism, it was directed to 

fiscal policy, and reflected the position that if it was proper 

for private industry to re-examine its expenditures it was proper 

for the Federal Government to do so also.  

As to national economic conditions, Mr. Irons said it 

was unnecessary to repeat what was said so well in the green 

book. It was clear that the economy was operating at full strength.  

On policy, Mr. Irons aligned himself with those who would 

not seek any appreciable further firming at the moment. He favored 

net borrowed reserves in the $200-$250 million range, about where 

they had been recently, and he noted that the difference between 

such a target and one of around $250 million was fairly small.  

He hoped member bank borrowings would run around $600 million, 

and he would expect Federal funds to trade at 4-3/4 or 4-7/8 per 

cent. The bill rate might run somewhat above the discount rate 

and perhaps up to the 4.70 per cent area.  

Mr. Irons favored alternative A for the directive. However, 

he thought the Committee's objective with respect to growth in the



4/12/66 -42

reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply was accurately 

described by the word "restricting." Accordingly, in the final 

sentence of the first paragraph he would suggest using that word 

rather than "moderating," which struck him as having a weaker 

connotation. He did not feel strongly about the matter, and could 

accept the directive as drafted.  

Mr. Swan reported that the Twelfth District continued to 

share in the national expansion despite the lack of strength still 

apparent in residential construction and retail sales, particularly 

automobiles. Year-to-year comparisons in consumer expenditures 

were considerably less favorable for the District than for the U.S.  

as a whole. As he had noted at the previous meeting, District banks 

as a group were not under particularly severe reserve pressure and 

had not been for some weeks, despite their concern over the strength 

of loan demands. They had been substantial sellers of Federal funds 

for some time now and had been supplying funds to Government securities 

dealers, although the totals were influenced substantially by the 

operations of one bank that had worked itself into a more liquid 

position. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank had remained low through 

the week ended April 6, and the increase in loans at weekly reporting 

banks in the three-week period through March 30 was well under the 

increase in the comparable period of 1965.



4/12/66 -43

At the same time, Mr. Swan said, District banks had 

intensified their efforts to attract savings funds. Savings 

certificates were now being offered to individuals at a 5 per 

cent rate by most of the banks in California, compared with a 

4-3/4 per cent rate three weeks ago. Moreover, for the first 

time one or two large banks outside of Los Angeles and San 

Francisco had joined the few small banks that were offering a 

5-1/2 per cent savings certificate. It was difficult to assess 

the impact of the higher rates partly because interest earnings 

were credited to savings accounts in the period since the rate 

increases began. However, there appeared to have been a sub

stantial shift at banks from passbook savings to savings 

certificates, although total time deposits also rose rather 

substantially in the three weeks ending March 30.  

Most of the savings and loan associations reacted by 

offering 6-month savings certificates at 5 per cent, Mr. Swan 

remarked, although a number of them had now raised their regular 

savings rate to 5 per cent. No figures were yet available to 

indicate what the consequences of the rate changes were for the 

distribution of the flow of funds between savings and loan 

associations and banks. Officials of the Federal Home Loan Bank 

recently had said their impression was that there had been a



4/12/66

considerable outflow of funds from the savings and loan associations 

starting in late March. It was a little difficult to understand, 

however, why 5 per cent on savings certificates at banks should 

result in a substantial outflow from regular accounts in savings 

and loan associations paying 4.85 per cent.  

On the question of business plans for plant and equipment 

investment, Mr. Swan continued, the information that had come to 

the attention of the Reserve Bank could be fairly summarized by 

the statement that it included no reports of revisions in plans.  

While no direct inquiries had been made of companies in defense

related industries, it was quite unlikely that they would make 

any cutbacks. The attitude of some of the utilities perhaps was 

represented by the comment of an officer of one such firm that 

their investment plans were based on their estimates of the 

needs of their customers and they saw no basis in those estimates 

for cutbacks. The reaction of another major company was somewhat 

similar to one cited by Mr. Irons. Their treasurer indicated 

they were taking a long look at their planned capital expenditures, 

but intimated that the examination was pretty much in terms of 

profitability and had been prompted more by questions concerning 

the cost and availability of funds than by any other recent 

developments. Again, that company had no downward revisions to 

report at this point.

-44-



4/12/66 -45

Mr. Swan agreed with the comments already made about 

national economic conditions. It seemed to him that, with the 

tax date and the Treasury financing ahead and with due regard to 

recent developments, the Committee should maintain about the same 

degree of pressure that it had, perhaps with some very gradual 

further tightening--and he would emphasize the word "gradual." 

He would go along with a net borrowed reserve target in the 

$250 million range. However, he did think it was increasingly 

important to look behind the net borrowed reserve figures to the 

extent possible, to consider what was happening to required 

reserves and also to time deposits. He noticed there had been a 

substantial increase in the rate of time deposit growth in the 

past few weeks, and if that should continue it obviously meant 

a greater expansion potential with respect to the reserve base.  

However, time deposit growth might slacken after the April tax 

date.  

Mr. Swan said he could accept either alternative for the 

directive but, on balance, would prefer alternative A. He would 

encourage the staff to attempt to develop somewhat more specific 

language in its draft directives; the present situation was an 

ideal illustration of the need for more specific language. He 

had one other comment on the directive, relating to the statement 

in the first paragraph that "our international payments continue



4/12/66 -46

in deficit." As the green book indicated, there was a surplus in 

March and approximate balance in January-February before seasonal 

adjustment. In the interest of accuracy, it might be better to 

revise the statement to refer to the over-all payments position 

in the first quarter.  

Mr. Galusha commented he did not as yet have any "hard" 

information on how the Ninth District economy performed during 

March, but suspected that it did very well. All the statistical 

series indicated that January and February were exceptionally 

prosperous months, that the historically high growth rate estab

lished in the fourth quarter of last year was maintained in the 

first two months of 1966. And in the Bank's most recent round 

of conversations with District businessmen there was no hint of 

a slowdown in the pace of economic advance.  

On short notice, Mr. Galusha said, he had not been able 

to determine for sure whether there had been any trend of down

ward revision of investment plans by District firms. His suspicion, 

for what it might be worth, was that a few already had and that 

quite a few more would be soon. The Reserve Bank had been getting 

reports, not only of the difficulties of borrowing money, but of 

shortages of engineering personnel and construction labor and of 

rapidly rising construction costs. One of the largest manufacturers 

had reported recently that they had asked a dozen construction firms



4/12/66 -47

to bid on a proposed plant and got only three submissions, all 

of which were, to quote the manufacturer, "ridiculously high." 

On the basis of informed gossip he had heard, he thought the odds 

favored no upward revision in plant and equipment spending 

estimates later this year.  

Mr. Galusha went on to say that Reserve Bank's most recent 

agricultural credit survey, completed only last week, indicated 

that even though country bankers did not see themselves as short 

of funds they nevertheless had increased their loan rates. Few 

respondents reported having to turn down loan applications because 

of a shortage of funds, or being no longer interested in new loan 

accounts. But the vast majority reported higher short-term and 

long-term loan rates.  

With farm prices so much in the news, Mr. Galusha said, 

the Reserve Bank had lately given some thought to the outlook for 

the agricultural sector. Its current guess was that the general 

level of agricultural commodity prices would remain pretty much 

unchanged over the next few months and then would decline somewhat 

over the second half of the year. He was therefore apparently 

in agreement with the authors of the green book and the Secretary 

of Agriculture. But he was not sure what the implications of that 

prospective decline were. Possibly the decline, if it materialized, 

would moderate future money wage demands, but that seemed rank 

optimism.



4/12/66 -48

But why the Secretary of Agriculture should have seemed 

so joyous when he announced his bearish outlook for agricultural 

prices was rather hard to understand, Mr. Galusha observed. That 

one could now be more confident than a while back about a decline 

in agricultural commodity prices would not seem to have altered 

the demands the economy was making on economic policy-makers or, 

more particularly, on the Committee. In determining open market 

policy, the Committee should focus not on the outlook for agricul

tural prices nor even on the outlook for the prices of basic raw 

materials, which incidentally affected the developed trading 

countries pretty much alike. The Committee should focus, at 

least in the first instance, on the outlook for other prices and 

especially on the prices of those manufactured products which 

bulked importantly in the export total. And that outlook was not 

at all reassuring.  

That, briefly, was why Mr. Galusha would favor a modest 

increase in monetary restraint at this time, with a slight 

increase--to somewhere around $300 million--in net borrowed reserves.  

The only misgiving he had about greater monetary restraint at present 

was its likely effect on nonbank financial institutions and--although 

their problem seemed less severe--on smaller commercial banks.  

Lately he had been hearing reports, not only from Ninth District 

institutions but from others around the country as well, of savings



4/12/66 -49

and loan associations and savings banks being in what was 

described as a "bad way." One must of course discount those 

reports somewhat, but it would be foolish, it seemed to him, 

to treat them as nothing more than expressions of grasping self

interest. The Committee could, however, keep a careful watch 

on the situation and, at the same time, move toward slightly 

greater monetary restraint.  

However, Mr. Galusha added, instead of consideration of 

a higher target for net borrowed reserves, he would prefer a 

change in reserve requirements--an increase in the average require

ment and, more importantly, a reform of the structure which would 

give advantage to the smallest member banks. He continued to be 

concerned about the situation of those banks and, equally to the 

point, how they felt about System membership. There were sharp 

indications of a deterioration in the relationship. The implica

tions were hardly precise but in a world ruled by emotion--not 

reason--that was hardly a comforting change in the environment in 

which the Federal Reserve System had to operate.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that no abatement of the pressures of 

demand on available resources was evident in the Seventh District.  

Labor shortages had intensified, and price increases in the 

industrial sector had been increasingly frequent. He thought the 

passage Mr. Brill had quoted from the Purchasing Agents' report



4/12/66 -50

would also serve pretty well as a summary of basic economic 

conditions in the District so he would not comment further on 

that subject.  

As to changes in business plans for plant and equipment 

spending, Mr. Scanlon had no evidence of "voluntary" cutbacks in 

the District, although admittedly the Reserve Bank's inquiries 

had not been extensive. If anything, sights had been raised 

further. A factory-locating service headquartered in Chicago 

reported an acceleration during the past month in an already 

high volume of proposed work. Some construction projects, both 

business and municipal, had been postponed or scaled down because 

of unexpectedly high bids, inability to obtain firm bids, diffi

culties in arranging financing, delays in architectural and 

engineering work, and delays in deliveries. He knew of no private 

projects postponed primarily because of the President's statement 

on capital expenditures.  

Bank loans in the Seventh District gave no indication of 

any slowing in credit demands, Mr. Scanlon said. Business loans 

expanded in March somewhat less rapidly than last year but still 

much faster than usual. Outstandings to finance companies 

remained at a relatively high level. District weekly reporting 

banks continued to add to their holdings of real estate loans 

and municipal securities. In his judgment, the reserve positions



4/12/66 -51

of the weekly reporting banks in the District had not shown 

evidence of severe pressure. The large Chicago banks appeared 

to have weathered the April 1 personal property assessment date 

with less difficulty than usual. To some extent, however, the 

relatively light reserve pressure reflected their continued sales 

of CD's at high rates. Loan increases at smaller District banks 

also appeared quite strong through the mid-March period and their 

borrowings at the discount window remained relatively high.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon agreed with those who favored 

continued gradual firming, with due consideration, of course, for 

the Treasury financing. He favored alternative B for the directive.  

Mr. Clay reported that telephone calls were made to the 

heads of three large national industrial corporations with head

quarters in the Tenth District in order to develop some indication 

of revisions in business capital outlay plans since the end of 

March. All three indicated that their firms were reviewing their 

capital outlay plans, although none had completed the review. One 

was confident that his company would be able to make some downward 

revisions whose implementation would begin to show in four months 

or so after the review was completed. The second said that his 

firm's review could not produce any capital outlays cutback for 

at least a year. While his company had a large capital program, 

there was no practical way of cutting back on the projects under



4/12/66 -52

way. The only possibility for capital outlay reductions involved 

programs that were still in the planning stage.  

The head of the third company also indicated that it would 

not be economically feasible to cut back projects already under 

way, Mr. Clay continued. In that connection, the company head 

mentioned a $36 million project scheduled for completion in 

February 1967 and for which all needed materials had been provided.  

On the other hand, he referred to a $40 million project that he 

thought would be deferred. While the deferral would coincide 

with President Johnson's cutback drive, he indicated that it actually 

would be because of shortages of materials. In that case, a sub

stantial amount of fabricated materials and electrical machinery 

were required in which copper was a component, and it was particularly 

that type of material that would cause the deferral.  

Looking toward the formulation of monetary policy, Mr. Clay 

said the Federal Reserve was faced with an economy in which the 

pressures on resources did not appear to be lessening. While news 

stories over the week end underscored the favorable showing in the 

latest monthly wholesale price index release, it actually did not 

involve any significant change or improvement in the forces at work 

in the nonagricultural sector of the economy. The impact of the 

Administration's appeal to businessmen for cutbacks in capital 

outlays was difficult to judge. There was reason to wonder whether



4/12/66 -53

the principal cutbacks would not be in projects only in the 

planning stage and whether any significant impact on the economy 

might not be many months away. It still was to be hoped that 

fiscal policy action would be taken.  

Mr. Clay thought that monetary policy should continue to 

apply pressure on the financial sector of the economy, and that 

the Committee should avoid any retrogression in the progress 

toward monetary restraint achieved since the discount rate increase 

late last year. Recognizing that Treasury bill yield movements 

had differed from other short-term rates in recent weeks, money 

market conditions in the period ahead should be maintained 

generally in line with those in the interval since the last meeting 

of the Committee. Presumably the Federal funds rate would be 

mostly at 4-3/4 per cent. Upward movements in Treasury bill yields 

from recent levels need not be a matter of concern unless they 

threatened to make the present discount rate untenable. Gradual 

reduction in reserve availability should continue to be the 

Committee's aim, with the net borrowed reserve target set at $250 

million. Open market operations would need to be adapted to the 

varying conditions that might prevail in the money markets during 

and following the April tax payment period. The draft economic 

policy directive with alternative B as the second paragraph was 

satisfactory to him.



4/12/66 -54

Mr. Heflin commented that whether one found himself 

agreeing with Mr. Mitchell that the Committee had lost ground 

or with Mr. Hayes that capital markets recently had acted like 

a pendulum, it was apparent from the situation in the Fifth 

District that the task of moderating--or, as Mr. Irons would say, 

restricting--the expansion would not be easy. The Richmond Bank's 

latest business survey suggested that business activity in the 

District was expanding at the fastest pace in the past four years.  

There were no reports of declines in wages, prices, or hours 

worked except in textiles, where one of eight respondents reported 

small declines. New orders and shipments were strong in all manu

facturing industries, but especially so among producers of durable 

goods. Additional evidence could be found in several recent 

developments in the textile business, the furniture industry, and 

bituminous coal mining, and in the growing pressures on banks.  

Almost no evidence of any significant reduction or postpone

ment in plans for capital spending had been found in the District, 

Mr. Heflin said, until Friday afternoon when one such report was 

received from North Carolina, and yesterday when another case was 

reported from southwest Virginia. In Virginia 97 new plants and 

expansions were announced in the first quarter, compared with 60 

in the first quarter of 1965. Informal interviews with a few 

leaders in the textile, metals, electrical equipment, and furniture



4/12/66 -55

industries yielded remarkably uniform replies. The respondents, 

as Mr. Clay had reported was the case in his District, contended 

that their programs were too far advanced to permit any significant 

reductions this year. They said they urgently needed additional 

capacity, and that they had no assurance that their competitors 

would practice restraint. With respect to plans for the more 

distant future, several of the respondents said that they were 

reviewing their long-range plans in the light of one or more of 

three possible restraints. The first was the higher cost of 

capital funds. The second, and possibly more important, was the 

lack of certainty that funds would be available at any cost. A 

final limiting factor in some cases was the availability of 

equipment within any reasonable time. Incidentally, one manu

facturer called attention to another problem created by inflation 

and tight money. He would have to raise several million dollars 

of additional working capital because many of his customers were 

short of funds and were not taking the cash discount.  

In the national economy, Mr. Heflin said, there seemed to 

be growing signs of stress. The report on employment for March 

was especially significant in that respect, showing a larger than 

seasonal increase in employment and a further rise in the already 

high figure for weekly overtime in manufacturing. As employers 

dug deeper into the ranks of the less qualified and less experienced



4/12/66 -56

workers there was likely to be a fall in productivity and an 

increase in unit labor costs. Despite the appeal of the President, 

it was unlikely that there would be any reduction in capital 

spending large enough to be significant in the next few months.  

In the same way, it was doubtful that any change in fiscal policy 

could be expected which would be effective in the immediate future.  

Each new report, and especially each revision of preliminary data, 

showed that inventories and unfilled orders continued to mount, 

probably reflecting rising speculative expectations.  

Such conditions would normally be accompanied by a distinct 

upward trend in prices, Mr. Heflin continued. The large number of 

price increases publicly announced and the very small number of 

price reductions, as well as reports from manufacturers, purchasing 

agents, and others all indicated that such a trend now existed.  

At the moment the country might be experiencing a pause in the 

upward movement, with a shift from price increases caused by 

demand-pull and scarcities of farm products and metals to increases 

caused by cost-push as producers passed on higher labor and materials 

costs.  

In that situation, it seemed advisable to Mr. Heflin that 

the Committee step up its effort to reduce reserve availability in 

the hope of slowing down the rate of expansion in bank credit and 

the money supply. He found himself aligned with those who favored



4/12/66 -57

alternative B for the directive; if the Committee was going to 

make progress, it would have to apply more pressure.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that there was no need to 

elaborate on the reports that had already been given indicating 

generally strong economic activity. Whether the apparent relaxa

tion in security markets in recent weeks was an actual relaxation 

or simply a swing of the pendulum, the indications as noted by 

the staff were for further rapid expansion in the weeks ahead in 

both bank credit and the money supply. That pointed to the need 

for further restraint at this time.  

Mr. Shepardson then said that he would like to make one 

point with respect to the interpretation of recent changes in 

agricultural prices. Earlier, when prices of farm products and 

foods were rising rather rapidly, it had been observed repeatedly 

that the effect on the total wholesale price index should be 

discounted because agricultural prices were not subject to the 

same forces as other prices and because adjustments would occur 

as increased supplies, particularly of meat, came onto the market.  

Now publicity was being given to the decreases that had occurred 

and could be anticipated, which would have effects on both the 

wholesale and consumer price indexes. But if it was proper to 

discount the effects when farm and food prices were rising, by 

the same token too much should not be made of declines. In any



4/12/66 -58

case, nonagricultural prices, which monetary policy could 

influence more than farm and food prices, were continuing to 

advance.  

As he had indicated, Mr. Shepardson said, he thought that 

the Committee should exert greater pressure. In his judgment 

that should be reflected in a net borrowed reserve target ranging 

from $250 million upward rather than from that level downward.  

He would expect some increase in bill rates, and a Federal funds 

rate in the present neighborhood or possibly somewhat higher.  

The policy he favored was indicated by alternative B of the draft 

directives, which called for some further gradual reduction in 

reserve availability.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he favored as much firming as 

possible within the confines of the existing discount rate and 

Regulation Q ceilings. He was not sure just how restrictive that 

would be. However, it was at least as restrictive as called for 

by alternative B of the draft directives, for which he would opt.  

It seemed to Mr. Mitchell that everyone who had spoken 

thus far agreed that the staff reports today accurately described 

the existing situation, and that the Committee had to be as aggres

sively inclined against inflation as possible now. Short of a 

discount rate increase, for which he was not prepared at present, 

he thought the Committee ought to be putting more pressure on the



4/12/66 -59

banking system. Several of the Reserve Bank Presidents had 

reported that banks in their District were in a reasonably com

fortable position. There had not been much comment on the money 

supply thus far in the discussion but its recent growth rate was 

high for a period of restraint.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that if there was to be additional 

fiscal restraint it would not occur before mid-year, and its main 

effects would not be felt until another half-year had passed.  

The Committee did not have much time left in which to operate 

against an expansion rate that all agreed was unsustainable; given 

the lags in monetary policy, major effects on spending of monetary 

actions taken in the second quarter probably would not be felt until 

at least the third quarter. He believed, therefore, that the 

Committee should adopt a policy at least as restrictive as that 

indicated by alternative B.  

Mr. Daane said that the strength of the boom clearly called 

for dampening aggregate demands by the methods within the power of 

the Committee. With Mr. Mitchell he felt that, whether the Com

mittee liked it or not, monetary policy had to carry the burden 

for the foreseeable future. The Committee could hardly look for 

much help from fiscal policy for the balance of the year even if 

a tax increase were enacted. Certainly the Committee should not 

let up on the degree of monetary restraint.



4/12/66 -60

The real question, Mr. Daane continued, was when and how 

to apply more pressure. He would be a little reluctant to press 

too hard at this particular juncture. He thought Mr. Mitchell had 

put the matter well when he called for maximum firming within the 

confines of the existing discount rate and Regulation Q ceilings.  

For the moment, taking into consideration the Treasury financing 

and the fact that a bite of undetermined proportions was being 

achieved with the existing degree of restraint, he would align 

himself with those who favored a net borrowed reserve target of 

$250 million, ranging upward. He would remind the Committee that 

for the past three weeks net borrowed reserves had averaged about 

$230 million; an increase of a few million from that level could 

hardly be considered a very significant change.  

Mr. Daane said he had no firm convictions as to which of 

the draft directives should be adopted. If, in the language of 

alternative A, operations were conducted with a view to "maintaining 

firm conditions in the money market and continuing to exert pressure 

on bank reserve positions," the results probably would be about the 

same as under alternative B.  

Mr. Maisel observed that, as had been made clear in previous 

discussion, there were two questions which the Committee had to 

answer in determining a proper policy for the next period. First, 

had there been a sufficient change in the underlying economic



4/12/66 -61

situation to call for a current change in monetary policy? 

Secondly, what was the relationship between the recent movements 

in the monetary aggregates and the Committee's existing policy 

stance? In that respect, he recognized the difficulty of inter

preting short-run movements, and also that there seemed to be 

some differences around the table in the interpretation of the 

data.  

It seemed to Mr. Maisel that there was insufficient 

evidence of any change in the underlying situation to require 

currently an alteration in monetary policy. Demand was still 

heavy. Current projections showed a fine balance between demand 

and supply. There remained considerable probabilities that demand 

could be met only with further increases in the prices of industrial 

commodities. He concluded that a proper monetary policy for the 

System still was to attempt to restrict the growth of bank credit 

and total credit to a level at least one-third less than the rate 

of expansion of last year. On the other hand, he believed it 

important that the Committee no longer delay in adjusting reserves 

to a reduced expansion level which was consistent with a policy 

aiming at lowering real investment. Because of the lags in the 

system any further delays in reducing the reserve expansion rate 

increased the danger that the real policy shift might have been 

delayed too long and that it would become effective in a contra

productive period.



4/12/66 -62

When the actual results of current monetary policy were 

examined, Mr. Maisel continued, a major divergence between the 

record for the past six weeks and the prior six weeks was noted.  

While the marginal reserve measures showed a sharp increase in net 

borrowed reserves as well as in borrowings, the changes at the 

margin had not succeeded in restraining the aggregates to a 

desirable rate of advance.  

In fact, Mr. Maisel pointed out, even as net borrowed 

reserves had increased, total reserves, the money supply, and the 

bank credit proxy all had exhibited an accelerated rate of expansion.  

At the same time, as had been noted, a sharp fall occurred in interest 

rates. While the Committee might believe it had brought about a 

changed monetary policy--and clearly the atmosphere and some rates 

had changed--if one considered either the entire period since 

December 1 or the past six weeks, one found that the basic policy 

indicators (with the exception of the money market) showed an 

expansionary rate of increase over the period prior to December 1.  

It seemed to Mr. Maisel, therefore--consistent with his 

views at the past several meetings--that the Committee ought to put 

less stress on the marginal measures. He agreed with the Secretary's 

interpretation of the directive, but felt that it was not a proper 

policy directive. In place of what was primarily a money market 

instruction, the Committee should make certain that its directive



4/12/66 -63

was interpreted in terms of a desirable rate of expansion in 

total reserves and in bank credit. Between now and the Committee's 

next meeting, an attempt should be made to restrict the rate of 

expansion in total reserves even if that required a somewhat larger 

increase in the level of net borrowed reserves. He would support 

alternative B for the directive.  

In contrast to the purely net borrowed reserve criterion, 

Mr. Maisel would interpret "reduction in reserve availability" to 

mean that the rate of increase in reserves and bank credit should 

be cut back from the recent five-week expansion at an annual rate 

of nearly 16 per cent to an annual rate of 5 per cent or less.  

The amount of net borrowed reserves and money market rates should 

be allowed to move considerably higher if necessary to bring about 

that slower rate of expansion in total reserves. However, during 

that time, it would be useful to continue to make it clear that 

changes in the discount rate and Regulation Q would be avoided if 

at all possible.  

Mr. Brimmer commented that staff reports in the course of 

recent Board briefings indicated that corporations were likely to 

be back in the market for funds, substantially increasing either 

their bank loan requests or their capital market flotations. That 

prospect suggested the need to move toward some further tightening 

at this time. It appeared that at the end of the first quarter



4/12/66 -64

corporate liquidity was much lower than had been anticipated, 

which in itself might result in more security floations. It 

also might insure that the recent sharp bulge in bank credit, 

which the blue book described as apparently largely temporary, 

might turn out to be somewhat less temporary than expected. That 

again pointed to the need for some further tightening.  

Mr. Brimmer thought that the Committee should not rely on 

an expected tax increase to achieve the necessary degree of 

restraint. According to estimates by the Board's staff a tax 

increase on the order of $5 billion--the magnitude suggested by 

recent press stories--put into effect at mid-year would cut only 

about $3 billion from GNP in the third quarter (in terms of annual 

rates) and about $7 billion in the fourth quarter. In the interim, 

monetary policy would still have quite a bit of work to do. He 

felt that alternative B of the second paragraph of the draft directives 

was a reasonably accurate summary of what the Committee's objective 

should be at this time, and accordingly he subscribed to that alterna

tive.  

Mr. Hickman said that the marked rise in nonfarm employment 

in March and further increases in orders, backlogs, inventories, 

and overtime pay were disquieting developments against the background 

of an extremely tight labor market and bottlenecks in materials, 

equipment, and plant capacity. The most recent monthly reports on



4/12/66 -65

unit labor costs in manufacturing now showed clearly the shift 

towards increased costs that had been feared for so long.  

Prices were, of course, the most bothersome element in 

the situation so far, and would remain so until demand leveled off, 

Mr. Hickman continued. The wholesale price index was stable in 

March, as a rise in industrial prices was offset by declines in 

farm and food prices. He remained concerned about the unrelenting 

rise in industrial prices caused by the pressure of output on 

available resources.  

As to the possible moderation of capital spending by 

business firms, Mr. Hickman said, it was still much too early to 

evaluate the effects of monetary policy, resource bottlenecks, 

and the President's latest exhortations. As he had reported at 

the last meeting, some firms in the Fourth District had taken a 

second look at capital spending plans, because of tighter money, 

higher costs of materials, and limited supply of labor. The 

President's request was unlikely to interrupt spending plans 

already under way, but might deter some corporations from starting 

planned projects.  

A number of firms reported to the Cleveland Reserve Bank 

that they were re-evaluating their capital spending plans. For 

reasons unknown to Mr. Hickman, many of those companies were 

centered in the Pittsburgh area--for example, Westinghouse, Alcoa,



4/12/66 -66

Pittsburgh Plate Glass, Koppers, and Heinz. In the case of Koppers, 

it was known that a substantial cutback was already in process 

before the President's request. He had also just been informed, 

on a confidential basis, by executives of Goodyear Tire & Rubber 

and Armco Steel, that, although they would be unable to cut projects 

already under way, they would take a hard look at projects not yet 

started because of short supplies of money, materials, and labor, 

plus the President's exhortations.  

Unlike typical experience during business expansions, 

Mr. Hickman observed, actual capital spending in 1966 might not 

exceed by much, and perhaps might even fall short of, spending 

anticipated in early surveys. Monetary policy had to be given 

credit for at least a marginal influence in moderating capital 

spending, but he was not able to quantify the effects and to dis

entangle them from others. Since only starts would be affected, 

there would be a lagged delay which, while desirable today, could 

cumulate into unwanted slack tomorrow.  

Fiscal policy remained the main hope for alleviating the 

present difficulties, Mr. Hickman said, but he was rapidly losing 

confidence that it would be used at the right time and in the right 

amount. The Administration was vacillating on taxes, and Congress 

seemed determined to outspend the Administration, as evidenced by 

the new G.I. Bill, the House bill for higher Civil Service salaries, 

and the upgrading of other popular programs.



4/12/66

Monetary policy in the past three weeks had followed the 

last directive as he interpreted it, Mr. Hickman continued, but 

the money and capital markets had had a slightly easier tone than 

he now thought desirable, given today's inflationary political and 

economic environment. In the absence of a decision about taxes, 

and with Federal spending pointing higher than original budget 

estimates, he believed the Committee should continue to tighten 

cautiously and gradually. With credit demands still strong, he 

favored letting net borrowed reserves rise slowly against that 

demand, from the present target of about $200 million to $250 million, 

or perhaps even to $300 million if market conditions eased towards 

the latter part of April, as the staff suggested in the blue book.  

He assumed that that target could be achieved without the 91-day 

bill rate piercing the 4.75 per cent level, which he believed would 

trigger discount rate action. He would not favor the latter at 

this time. For the reasons indicated, he supported alternative B 

of the staff's draft directives.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that almost every sector and every 

indicator at which he had looked in the past three weeks confirmed 

the pressure on the economy and provided little suggestion that a 

letup might be in sight. Of course, capital spending remained a 

pivotal sector of economic activity, and from the Reserve Bank's 

sounding of business attitudes in the Third District, the President's

-67-



4/12/66 -68

recent call for a re-examination of capital outlays bore little 

promise for a timely amelioration of pressures. Capital spending 

plans had been discussed with top executives from 37 large firms 

whose business ranged from textiles and apparel to paper, chemicals, 

primary and fabricated metals, machinery, transportation equipment, 

and instruments. Of those 37 firms, only 3 had so far re-examined 

plans, and they had done so in the ordinary course of business and 

had decided to increase not decrease spending. When asked if 

spending plans would be re-examined in the very near future, 11 of 

the firms replied affirmatively, and 8 of those mentioned as one 

of the reasons a desire to cooperate with the President. However, 

it was also pointed out that any decisions which might be made to 

reduce spending would not be felt in the economy for many months 

because of firm commitments over the near term.  

Turning to policy, Mr. Bopp said that while he would not 

let up on existing pressure, he would be reluctant to move toward 

further restraint at this time for three reasons. First of all, 

the full impact of earlier actions still had not been fully trans

mitted either to financial markets or to markets for goods and 

services. He would be reluctant to impose additional restraint 

until the results of past actions were known with greater certainty.  

Second, Mr. Bopp continued, the degree of restraint associ

ated with any given level of borrowing and net borrowed reserves was



4/12/66 -69

probably greater now than in the 1950's. That point was made 

at the last meeting of the Committee and was supported by evidence 

from the most recent survey of Federal funds activity in the Third 

District. At the present time, almost half of the country banks 

in the District were active in the Federal funds market, compared 

with a little over one-third last year at this time. Moreover, 

of the banks currently active in the market, almost 90 per cent 

had entered after 1960.  

Corresponding with the rapid increase in country bank 

participation in the Federal funds market, Mr. Bopp noted, had 

been a sharp reduction in borrowing at the discount window by 

District banks. The District's share of total borrowing at the 

discount window dropped from an average of about 5 per cent in 

1959 to around 2.5 per cent last year. Although the development 

of the Federal funds market might have proceeded more rapidly in 

the Third District than in some other areas of the nation, it was 

reasonable to believe that a relatively heavier reliance on the 

Federal funds market was typical of other sections of the country 

as well. If that was so, a given level of borrowing and net 

borrowed reserves might be associated with greater restraint today 

than in the 1950's.  

The third reason for which Mr. Bopp would hesitate to 

impose additional monetary restraint at this time was simply that,



4/12/66 -70

at present high levels of rates and given the heavy loan commitments 

of financial institutions and the potential problems inherent in 

rolling over CD's, significant further tightening could be partic

ularly unsettling to financial markets. Given those problems, 

it would be most desirable for any additional restraint to come 

from the fiscal side of the monetary-fiscal policy mix. A 

significant shift in monetary policy now would make it all the 

more unlikely that timely and appropriate fiscal measures would 

be taken.  

Mr. Bopp said that he favored alternative A of the draft 

directives on balance, but would be prepared to go along with 

alternative B if the latter was the choice of the rest of the 

members.  

Mr. Patterson reported that the battle for time deposits 

in Atlanta that he predicted several weeks ago had broken out in 

earnest. On March 30, one large bank advertised it would offer 

5 per cent on so-called investment certificates. The next day, 

the only Atlanta bank that previously had paid more than 4-1/2 

per cent announced it was going to 5 per cent. And as one might 

have expected, the other two major banks quickly followed suit.  

The conditions under which the various institutions were paying 

that new rate varied, of course, But two of them were paying 

5 per cent on denominations as low as $100 and $25, respectively, 

if held for 90 days.



4/12/66 -71

The savings and loan associations had not yet changed 

their rates, Mr. Patterson noted. One was trying to hold on to 

its shares by advertising that it was paying the highest rate 

any Atlanta savings institution paid on equivalent passbook 

money. Several others stressed in their ads the premium offered 

on longer-term savings. Since mortgage rates in Atlanta were 

already well above 6 per cent, the savings and loan associations' 

decision to stand fast seemed to reflect a weakness in housing 

rather than competitive conditions.  

The increase in time deposit rates of banks had been 

predictable from straws in the wind, some of which were not 

exclusive to the Atlanta area, Mr. Patterson continued. Bank 

loan demand in Atlanta had been very strong and unpredictably 

so, since large out-of-town corporate customers had begun to 

draw on credit lines for the first time in years. The corporate 

CD and passbook savings growth rate had slackened. A regional 

Federal funds market and a regional mortgage-gathering market 

were slower to develop than the decline in bank liquidity seemed 

to demand. Time deposits seemed to be the only major source left 

for the banks to exploit. The fact that the one bank which moved 

in that direction last year had been fairly successful in that 

endeavor, at least temporarily, was undoubtedly another factor 

influencing the decision.



4/12/66 -72

Mr. Patterson reported that the latest available employ

ment figures for the District were not quite as bullish as they 

had been. Only a large gain in Florida's employment had made it 

possible for the District to register a plus in February. In his 

estimation, those figures indicated only a slight slowing down 

from very high increases. Perhaps the same generalization could 

be made for some national economic series. However, in neither 

case was the Reserve Bank's staff prepared to attribute much of 

that change to higher interest rates or changed credit conditions.  

Certainly, one could expect the pace of the economy to slacken 

occasionally even in a period of rapid expansion.  

In checking for changes in business plans for plant and 

equipment spending in the District, Mr. Patterson said, no single 

instance was discovered of a reduction in capital expansion plans; 

nor was there found a single postponement of a commercial or indus

trial construction project in the Atlanta area. Only in the 

residential housing field could evidence of disruptive markets be 

found. And, perhaps he should add, the District shared in some of 

the cancellations and postponements of security offerings of State 

and local governments.  

The Committee was just beginning to realize what Mr. Patterson 

believed was its present goal, namely, a slackening in the growth 

rate of money and bank credit. For that reason alone, in his opinion,



4/12/66 -73

the Committee should hold to its present policy posture. Then, 

too, monetary policy although flexible was not so precise that 

the Committee could adjust its actions to the slight ebb and flow 

of the course of the economy. He also believed that the Committee, 

having changed policy not too long ago, needed to observe more 

closely what effects its actions were having before it turned to 

additional tightening. Finally, the status quo, which he inter

preted to be a net borrowed reserve figure of around $200-$250 

million, also made sense by reason of the Treasury mid-May refunding, 

even if that refunding was just routine. He favored alternative A 

of the draft directives.  

Mr. Francis said that the St. Louis Reserve Bank had not 

learned of any recent cutbacks in capital spending plans in the 

Eighth District. From time to time they heard of a case in which 

a firm had been unable to obtain financing from its customary 

sources, but such firms generally succeeded in finding alternative 

sources of funds.  

Mr. Francis then noted that since last June and continuing 

since November, monetary expansion had been at the very rapid rate 

of about 6 per cent a year. In the last half of December there had 

been a great jump in the money supply, and in January a partial 

elimination of the jump returned growth to the 6 per cent trend 

line of the past nine months. That rate of growth in money was



4/12/66 -74

the highest for any nine-month period since World War II. Total 

reserves and reserves available for demand deposits had followed 

a similarly rapid upward trend.  

The rapid increase of the money supply had continued at 

the same time that the directive had called for only a moderate 

rate of increase of reserves and money, Mr. Francis noted.  

Apparently, the continued rapid increase of reserves and money 

supply had come about because net borrowed reserves, averaging 

about $150 million since last July, had not been restrictive.  

In recent months, Mr. Francis said, fiscal actions of 

the Government had been the most stimulative in several years.  

While it would be desirable for the Government to adopt a more 

restrained fiscal position, such a move of a substantial or 

adequate magnitude did not appear to be forthcoming in the near 

future. In the absence of fiscal restraint, or until evidence 

of such restraint appeared, a risk might be run of further price 

rises of a significant nature unless the rate of monetary expansion 

was reduced considerably. Therefore, it seemed to him, the Committee 

should not be reluctant to apply the tools of monetary action at its 

disposal to limit growth in total demand for goods and services to 

the amount that could be accommodated without inflation.  

With regard to policy, then, Mr. Francis suggested a reduction 

in the rate of increase in money. The proper rate could not be



4/12/66 -75

specified with certainty, but he suggested that the rate might 

properly be brought down gradually to as much as half the 6 per 

cent rise of recent periods. If the rate of increase in money 

were so reduced, loan funds would become more restricted than 

during the past nine months. He would view the likely resulting 

rise in interest rates as desirable from both domestic and balance 

of payments points of view. He would give major consideration to 

reserves and money supply in carrying out System actions in the 

immediate future.  

Mr. Francis favored alternative B of the draft directives.  

He liked Mr. Irons' suggested revision in the first paragraph, 

replacing the word "moderating" with "restricting." 

Chairman Martin commented that the differences in members' 

views on policy did not seem great today. His own thinking was 

similar to Mr. Mitchell's conclusion; he would like to see the 

pressure maintained as vigorously as possible without necessitating 

a change in the discount rate or an overt change in policy. As he 

had observed at the previous meeting of the Committee, monetary 

policy could not be formulated in terms of still pictures; the 

economy always was in motion and the Committee had to maintain 

pressure if it was to achieve its objectives. Whether alternative A 

or B of the suggested directives was adopted, it was clear that the 

Committee did not want to reduce the degree of pressure from that



4/12/66 -76

currently existing. Alternative B seemed to be favored by the 

majority, and if it was interpreted in the manner he had suggested 

perhaps the Committee could agree on it. He asked whether anyone 

would question that statement.  

Mr. Maisel said he thought the discussion today reflected 

a basic difference in the interpretation of recent developments.  

A number of members believed there had been a relaxation while 

others, as well as the Manager, felt there had not. In his judgment 

it would be desirable to get some agreement on the nature of the 

existing situation before deciding how to proceed.  

Chairman Martin agreed that there were differences in 

judgment regarding recent developments; he personally thought that, 

by and large, there had not been any relaxation, although some others 

disagreed. He did not know quite how to resolve that sort of 

difficulty. Certainly there had been no intention to relax; the 

developments in which members saw evidence of relaxation had come 

about because of other factors. Mr. Maisel's point was that if 

net borrowed reserves had been deepened the growth in aggregate 

reserves would have been less, but Mr. Holmes thought that such a 

course would at most have moderated the decline in interest rates.  

Mr. Holmes said he felt that somewhat deeper net borrowed 

reserves certainly would not have forestalled the decline in long-term 

interest rates, which was caused mainly by a change in expectations.



4/12/66 -77

Chairman Martin then said that however one might assess 

recent developments he thought it was clearly the Committee's 

intention to continue the process of cautiously and gradually 

increasing the degree of pressure over the coming period.  

Mr. Shepardson noted that several members had expressed 

the opinion that the rate of increase in aggregate reserves 

should receive attention. The net borrowed reserve figures 

suggested that pressure was being applied, but the growth rate 

of total reserves was quite high. His own feeling was that that 

growth should be slowed down.  

Mr. Hayes observed that, while earlier he had expressed 

a preference for alternative A, he was prepared to go along with 

the majority on the policy of continued gradual firming called 

for by alternative B. It seemed to him that the Chairman's summary 

of what the Committee would intend by adopting alternative B was 

clear, and he did not expect much difficulty in interpretation.  

Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Maisel whether he thought 

his position had been taken into account adequately.  

Mr. Maisel replied that to him the point Mr. Shepardson had 

made was the critical one. If there was agreement with Mr. Shepardson's 

point, then the Committee was agreed on the issue that had concerned 

him.



4/12/66 -78

The Chairman noted that Mr. Shepardson's comment was to 

the effect that total reserves should be taken into consideration.  

He did not think that anyone would disagree with that; it was 

just a matter of the degree.  

Mr. Hayes observed that, while the objective was clear, 

there was a question arising from the problems of implementing 

such an instruction, particularly within a short time period.  

Mr. Hickman noted that there would be an interval of four 

weeks before the Committee's next meeting. He suggested that it 

might be desirable for the Committee to hold an interim meeting, 

perhaps by telephone conference, if there again was a divergence 

between developments in the market and the Committee's intentions 

such as he thought had occurred in the recent period.  

Chairman Martin commented that it was always possible to 

call a meeting of the Committee if one was required. In general, 

however, he did not favor telephone conference meetings unless 

there was something of real importance to discuss.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he agreed with the Manager's view 

that the recent decline in long-term rates was atrributable to 

developments in the market, particularly to the change in expecta

tions regarding a tax increase. Expectations were always subject 

to change and such developments could have much more significant 

effects than an increase of, say, $25 or $50 million in net borrowed 

reserves.



4/12/66 -79

Chairman Martin said that whatever change might occur 

in net borrowed reserves he would not want so much pressure to 

be put on the market as to force an increase in the discount rate.  

Several other members indicated that they concurred in that view.  

Mr. Swan, noting that the Federal funds rate recently had touched 

4-7/8 per cent for the first time, expressed the opinion that on 

the basis the Chairman had mentioned it might not be possible to 

go much beyond the existing degree of pressure.  

Chairman Martin then said he gathered that all of the 

members were prepared to vote for alternative B for the directive 

as it had been interpreted. As to Mr. Irons' suggestion that the 

word "moderating" be replaced by the word "restricting" in the last 

sentence of the first paragraph, he personally had no strong feeling.  

Mr. Daane remarked that when the directives for the calendar 

year were published in the Committee's record of policy actions 

some readers might interpret the substitution as reflecting a 

significant change in policy when none was in fact intended. How

ever, he had no real quarrel with either word.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that if "restricting" was ever a proper 

word to use, it was the appropriate word now. Other members also 

indicated that they favored the change.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until



4/12/66

otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that the domestic economy is 
expanding vigorously, with industrial prices continuing 
to creep up and credit demands remaining strong. Our 
international payments continue in deficit. In this 
situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to resist inflationary pressures and to help 
restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 
of payments, by restricting the growth in the reserve 
base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to attaining some further gradual 
reduction in reserve availability, while taking into 
account the forthcoming Treasury financing.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 10, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-80-



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) April 11, 1966 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on April 12, 1966 

First paragraph 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding vigorously, 
with industrial prices continuing to creep up and credit demands 
remaining strong. Our international payments continue in deficit.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy 
to resist inflationary pressures and to help restore reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, by moderating 
the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

Second paragraph 

Alternative A (preserving about the current degree of firmness) 

To implement this policy, while taking into account the 

forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 
a view to maintaining firm conditions in the money market and 
continuing to exert pressure on bank reserve positions.  

Alternative B (continued gradual firming) 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 
a view to attaining some further gradual reduction in reserve 
availability, while taking into account the forthcoming Treasury 

financing.


