









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 26, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Clay 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis and Galusha, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee, 

and Tow, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors



7/26/66 -2

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, Senior Attorney, Legal 
Division, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Heflin and Kimbrel, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. Link, Ratchford, Brandt, Baughman, 
Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the minutes of the meetings of the 
Federal Open Market Committee held 
on June 28 and July 11, 1966, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period June 28 through July 20, 1966, and a supplemental report for 

July 21 through 25, 1966. Copies of these reports have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock was being reduced by $100 million



7/26/66 -3

today in order to replenish the Stabilization Fund. In June the 

French took in nearly $100 million and they were converting all 

of it to gold this month. In addition, the U.S. share of gold 

pool losses in July would cost some $25 million. Pressure had 

been extremely heavy on the London gold market, but had tapered 

off in the last few days after the announcement of the new British 

program. If the program did not go well, however, the pressure 

was likely to resume.  

The gold pool had suffered a great deal of attrition so 

far this year, Mr. Coombs noted. The pool's resources were now 

down to $94 million from $312 million at the start of the year, 

and an effort was currently being made to negotiate agreement on 

new contributions of $100 million by the pool members. It was not 

clear, however, whether those negotiations would be successful; 

the European members of the pool were becoming extremely discouraged 

and restive, and at the next Basle meeting in September there might 

be some fairly strong opposition to further calls upon their gold 

reserves to maintain a ceiling on the London market price. More

over, thus far in July the French had taken in $140 million which 

they presumably would convert to gold next month. If there were 

other official conversions of dollars to gold as well as heavy 

drains on the gold pool over the next few months the gold situation 

could rapidly become serious. As the Committee knew, for some time



7/26/66 -4-

he had felt that the greatest potential threat to the dollar was a

breakout in the London gold price.

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, the speculative

attack on sterling witnessed during the past month was more sustained

in intensity than that of November 1964, and in certain respects more

dangerous. Perhaps he could best summarize the magnitude of the

crisis by noting that, from July 1 through Friday, July 22, the drain

on British reserves amounted to roughly $1.1 billion, and it would

have been increased by $145 million if the New York Reserve Bank had

not undertaken market operations for Treasury and System Account to

support sterling. In addition, the Bank of England entered into new

forward contracts in the amount of approximately $750 million. All

told, therefore, official intervention in the spot and forward mar-

kets for sterling from July 1 through July 22 came to very nearly $2

billion, on top of similar intervention during June of $500 million

or so.

The sheer magnitude of those figures--which, of course, were

extremely confidential--suggested a remarkably wide swing of the

leads and lags against sterling and the buildup of a huge short

position. Before the new British program was announced there was

some hope on both the British and U.S. side that strong market

action to push up the sterling rate might force some quick covering

of short positions. An abrupt swing, such as had occurred last



7/26/66 -5

September, did not seem likely, however. For one thing, the 

deterioration in sentiment this year was considerably greater.  

Secondly, last September's announcement concerned a new interna

tional package of assistance for sterling, the significance of 

which could be quickly grasped by the market, in contrast to the 

announcement now of a complicated new Government program with 

much uncertainty remaining as to whether it could be implemented 

effectively.  

The New York Reserve Bank began market operations in 

sterling a few minutes after the program was announced, Mr. Coombs 

said. On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of last week it bought 

a total of $145 million, in the process pushing the rate up from 

$2.7875 to a peak of $2.7912. Very strong resistance was 

encountered as sterling continued to be sold in heavy volume 

through the Paris bourse and other European markets. Although 

the pressure receded a little on Friday, the operations clearly 

had not yet succeeded in inducing short covering; there was a 

general feeling in the market that devaluation of sterling was a 

foregone conclusion, and such an attitude was hard to combat. On 

the other hand, both the New York Reserve Bank and the Bank of 

England felt that the operations had had a useful stabilizing 

effect on expectations during a period of acute uncertainty.  

They had also provided concrete evidence of official U.S. support



7/26/66 -6

for the British program by backing up with money the statement the 

Treasury had issued. In addition, the operations had probably 

succeeded in sweeping the market reasonably clean of the last rem

nants of sterling available for sale, thus setting the stage for a 

natural recovery of the rate if there was even a minor return of 

confidence. The British had no reserve losses on Monday and so far 

today, which might suggest that they were slowly rounding the corner.  

If and when a more buoyant tendency appeared in the market, it might 

be useful to give an additional push through market operations.  

Mr. Coombs remarked that the skepticism of the market 

regarding the new British program did not seem to arise out of any 

widespread feeling that the program was not sufficiently drastic; 

it certainly was that. Rather, the continuing concern of the market 

was based on fears that the Government might be confronted with a 

revolt by the trade unions and so be unable to carry through the 

most important element of the program--namely, the wage freeze.  

That issue now hung in the balance, but by tomorrow there might be 

some indication of whether the trade unions would go along or would 

rebel. If trade union support, however grudging, could be secured, 

there might be a major turn for the better. If not, a major chal

lenge to the entire international financial system might eventuate.  

As he had mentioned, Mr. Coombs said, the cost of the 

intervention by the Bank of England this month had been very heavy



7/26/66 -7

indeed, and they would face the prospect, in the absence of further 

central bank financing, of having to show a reserve loss of roughly 

$1 billion for the month of July. As the Committee knew, the New 

York Reserve Bank had strongly urged the Bank of England at the end 

of June to minimize their use of the Federal Reserve swap line and 

to show a sizable reserve loss so as to point up the cost of the 

seamen's strike, and thereby bring home to the British public the 

necessity of drastic corrective action. They chose to follow another 

course. With respect to the end of July reserve problem, however, 

the market was in such a speculative mood that he feared a report 

of heavy additional reserve losses could trigger a panic which 

might quickly get out of control. He had, accordingly, been urging 

the Bank of England to round up central bank financing from all sides, 

and it now appeared that they might be able to raise approximately 

$500 million from various European sources. Assuming that they would 

wish to show a reserve loss of no more than $100 million, they would 

still need another $400 million. The Treasury might be prepared to 

provide $200 million on an overnight basis, and he would be hopeful 

that the System could provide the remaining $200 million through the 

swap line, also on an overnight basis. In a situation as dangerous 

as the existing one he could see certain advantages in avoiding 

three-month commitments until it was clear whether the tide had 

begun to turn.



7/26/66

In reply to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said that 

the Bank of England now had drawings of $250 million outstanding on 

its swap line with the System, all on a three-month basis. As he 

indicated, they might wish to draw an additional $200 million at the 

month end, and his recommendation was that that drawing be made on 

an overnight basis, to be repaid August 1.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked whether Mr. Coombs thought the 

British would soon be able to make some repayment on their existing 

$250 million drawings if developments unfolded as now expected.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the main need was for the British to 

implement their program effectively--although it was possible that 

even if they were forced to give way on the wage-price freeze the 

rest of the program would prove sufficiently strong to lead to a 

turn in the situation. In any case, the turn was likely to be slow.  

The British were faced with a high degree of disillusionment in 

sterling and in the policies of their Government, and once confidence 

was lost it was hard to restore.  

Mr. Mitchell asked what implications an abandonment of the 

gold pool operation would have for the British.  

Mr. Coombs said that Britain's share in the pool was 

relatively small. Moreover, since they had used up so many dollars 

over the last few months they might have to sell gold in any case, 

so an abandonment of the pool operations would have no particular



7/26/66 -9

implications for them on that score. Countries in a surplus position, 

however, preferred to buy rather than sell gold, and calls by the 

pool upon their gold reserves created a difficult problem for them 

domestically. More generally, a break-out of the London gold price 

would have ominous speculative implications for all currencies, 

including sterling and the dollar.  

In answer to another question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs 

said that in London, the prime market for gold, daily turnover might 

be on the order of seven or eight tons, and on occasion as high as 

twenty-five tons. In contrast, other markets--such as Beirut-

typically handled only about one or two tons a day. All South 

African and Russian gold was channeled through London. There had 

been some indications recently that the South Africans were trying 

to establish alternative marketing locations, but that effort would 

probably be resisted by the European central banks. The big question 

was whether the breakdown in confidence in sterling would ramify 

throughout the whole system. In his judgment that was a clear and 

present danger, and if it eventuated the market demand for gold 

might reach such proportions as to make the cost of the gold pool 

operation prohibitive. The U.S. share in the pool was 50 per cent, 

and if the Europeans pulled out the U.S. would have to carry the full 

burden. The U.S. gold stock was now down to $13.3 billion and market 

demands plus official conversions by France and possibly by others



7/26/66 -10

might result in further heavy losses. If the pool arrangement was 

discontinued because the cost of intervention had become prohibitive 

and the price of gold moved up, the situation would be much like 

that of late 1960. In fact, it would be much worse; in 1960 the U.S.  

gold stock was over $18 billion and the position of the dollar was 

still relatively unchallenged. In present circumstances a wave of 

apprehension might well be set off, with pullbacks of dollar balances 

and panicky purchases of gold by smaller countries. In effect, a 

sharp rise in the London price would be regarded as a direct challenge 

to the $35 U.S. parity.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked whether Mr. Coombs thought the U.S.  

should not plan to withdraw from the pool if the Europeans were 

planning to do so and if it seemed clear that this country could not 

handle the market alone.  

Mr. Coombs responded that there had been a good deal of 

quiet technical discussion of the gold pool during the past year.  

It had been hoped during that interval that the U.S. balance of 

payments position would improve and that sterling would strengthen.  

Instead, there had been a steady string of unfavorable developments 

and increases in pressures. He had not meant to imply that the 

Europeans were going to withdraw from the pool, but rather that they 

were becoming discouraged and highly restive. The U.S. faced a 

problem in that area that might require some basic decisions in the 

next few weeks.



7/26/66 -11

Mr. Mitchell asked if the British had the legal authority to 

close the London gold market.  

Mr. Coombs replied affirmatively, but added that they 

probably would strongly resist such a suggestion. Moreover, he was 

not sure that they should be encouraged to close the market. The 

London market would be subject to a measure of responsible control 

even if it were on its own. Such control was not feasible in Middle 

East or other markets. To shift gold trading out of London thus 

might contribute to further instability.  

Mr. Mitchell then asked whether the London gold market might 

not function more effectively if trading there were confined to 

Governments and monetary authorities.  

Mr. Coombs replied that it was not possible to exclude 

private buyers from the gold market. If they were kept out of London 

they would shift their demands to other centers, and the price in, 

say, the Middle East would become sufficiently attractive to draw 

South African gold there.  

Mr. Hayes noted in that connection that a dilemma had existed 

since 1960. On the one hand all central banks, including the Federal 

Reserve, were reluctant to see a large proportion of the gold supply 

absorbed by private demand. On the other hand they were acutely 

aware of the effect a large rise in the price of gold in London or 

elsewhere could have on confidence in the dollar. He agreed with



7/26/66 -12

Mr. Coombs that if the London market were closed to private buyers 

a large part of new gold production would flow to them through 

other markets.  

Mr. Coombs recalled that in the late 1940's and early 19 5 0 's 

the price of gold in Beirut, Tangiers, and other markets was high-

on the order of $75 an ounce. In those days, however, no one 

considered such prices to pose a challenge to the dollar. The 

experience in 1960 demonstrated that that assumption no longer held 

good, and it was even less valid at present. He recalled that an 

official of a large bank in New York City had made a speech in 1960 

in which he suggested that the free market price of gold had little 

to do with the position of the dollar. That official had been sub

jected to a barrage of criticism from financial market participants 

who thought otherwise. There were, however, certain protective 

measures that could be taken.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that Mr. Coombs' position seemed to 

him to be unrealistic. The series of unfavorable developments to 

which Mr. Coombs had referred was quite likely to continue, and he 

(Mr. Mitchell) did not see any basis for expecting an easing in the 

demand for gold. If the Europeans were becoming restive it behooved 

this country to make positive plans now for dealing with the situation.



7/26/66 -13

Mr. Coombs said he had made a series of recommendations a 

year ago for that purpose. The problem had not come as a surprise 

to him or to the Committee.  

Mr. Shepardson said he shared Mr. Mitchell's concern. The 

Committee's whole program of foreign currency operations, as he had 

understood it, was geared to operating against foreseeably revers

ible trends, but in his report today Mr. Coombs had indicated 

pessimism about the prospects for reversal of present trends. That 

posed a real question as to what actions would be appropriate.  

Mr. Hayes asked if Mr. Shepardson was referring to the gold 

or the sterling market situation, and Mr. Shepardson replied that 

in his judgment the two were related. Mr. Hayes then commented 

that he thought there was a good possibility of reversal with 

respect to the sterling situation, although that was by no means 

certain.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that in view of the press reports 

regarding the resistance of British labor to the new program he 

questioned whether there was any basis for optimism regarding 

sterling.  

Mr. Hayes observed that the System had a delicate role to 

play in the present situation. In his view the Committee was 

entitled to feel a growing skepticism. At the same time, he 

believed it would be a mistake to conclude that the System should



7/26/66 -14

now withdraw assistance on the grounds that the whole effort was 

futile. The British might now be rounding the corner, and the 

situation might be at a point at which patience would pay large 

dividends.  

Mr. Coombs concurred in Mr. Mitchell's observation that 

decisions with respect to U.S. participation in the gold pool were 

the responsibility of the Treasury. He had mentioned the subject 

because any serious difficulties in the gold market would lead to 

sizable flows of funds which in turn might necessitate heavy System 

drawings on the swap lines.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Galusha, Mr. Coombs said that 

those who had been closely following developments in the gold market 

felt that the basic forces of supply and demand probably were begin

ning to move against the pool. Whereas in 1963 and 1964 the pool 

had accumulated large surpluses, on the order of $650 million a 

year, the trend of private buying was rising and South African 

production was leveling off. Industrial uses of gold were expanding 

rapidly, and with the rise in real incomes throughout the world 

private individuals were increasingly attracted to holding gold in 

jewelry and other forms. In due course private demand would probably 

exceed the new supply. The annual report of the Bank for Inter

national Settlements had detailed the supply-demand situation, which



7/26/66 -15-

previously was not widely appreciated, and probably had been an

important contributing factor to recent speculative buying.

Mr. Shepardson asked whether the purpose of the proposed

overnight credit extension to the British was to allow them to

window-dress their reserve statement.

Mr. Coombs replied affirmatively, but added that the more

basic purpose was to save them from bankruptcy. The market had no

inkling of the actual size of their July reserve loss, and if the

British published figures showing a large loss a panic situation

was likely to result that might lead to either the imposition of

exchange controls or devaluation.

Mr. Robertson asked whether the Treasury had already agreed

to provide a $200 million overnight credit, and Mr. Coombs said he

thought that the decision was fairly solid. He noted that the

Treasury had extended a $100 million overnight credit at the end of

June.

Mr. Shepardson then asked how long the situation might be

papered over.

In reply, Mr. Coombs noted that the British had not revealed

their actual reserve losses for three months in mid-1965. They had

then shown true figures, by and large, from September 1965 through

May 1966. Actual losses had not been disclosed in June, and they

would not be again in July. If the Government remained in power



7/26/66 -16-

and there was no general strike, the new program should begin to

have an effect in the next few months and could bring about a

gradual turn in the situation. He was not suggesting that the

outlook was hopeless, but rather that there were serious risks

of which the Committee should be aware.

Mr. Shepardson then asked what Mr. Coombs would expect if

the hoped-for turn did not eventuate and there was a break-through

in the sterling situation in August or September.

Mr. Coombs replied that under such circumstances short-term

central bank credits would do no good whatever. That was why he

had suggested making the additional $200 million swap drawing an

overnight arrangement. Of course, the British still had about $1

billion in medium-term credits available, including $500 million

in drawing rights on the International Monetary Fund, a $250 million

Export-Import Bank credit, and $250 million in possible credits from

the BIS. They also had about $500 million in their portfolio of

American securities. He did not think any problem need be anticipated

in connection with repayment of British drawings already outstanding.

But on new credits in present circumstances he thought it would be

best to arrange, whenever practicable, for repayment in one day to

keep the pressure on the British.

Mr. Robertson said that it might be the better part of wisdom

for the British to camouflage their reserve losses. On the other



7/26/66 -17

hand, it might very well be that publication of the true reserve 

loss was necessary in order to win public acceptance of the wage

price freeze, and that the System would be doing the British a 

disservice in helping them to paper it over. He did not feel he 

knew enough about the situation to reach an independent judgment 

on the question, but he thought the fact that it had two sides 

should be recognized.  

Mr. Coombs agreed, but added that, in the judgment of the 

Bank of England and the British Treasury, publication of a reserve 

loss as large as $200 or $300 million for July might prove disas

trous.  

Mr. Hayes noted that in June, during the seamen's strike, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had thought it would be 

desirable for the British to show most of the loss they incurred 

in that month. The market situation then was not as acute as at 

present and there was an advantage seen in bringing home to the 

public the seriousness of the strike's effects. However, in the 

judgment of many people the present situation was too dangerous to 

take the chance of showing a large loss for July.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the 
period June 28 through July 25, 1966, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



7/26/66 -18

Mr. Coombs recommended renewal of two standby swap arrange

ments that would mature soon: the $250 million arrangement with the 

German Federal Bank, having a term of six months, and maturing 

August 9, 1966; and the $100 million arrangement with the Bank of 

France, having a term of three months, and maturing August 10, 1966.  

Renewals of the two standby 
arrangements, as recommended by 
Mr. Coombs, were approved.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that two three-month, $50 million 

drawings by the Bank of England on its swap line with the System 

would mature July 29, 1966, and August 31, 1966, respectively. He 

recommended renewal of each for another three-month period if the 

Bank of England so requested. Both would be first renewals.  

Renewal of the two drawings 
by the Bank of England, as recom
mended by Mr. Coombs, was noted 
without objection.  

Mr. Coombs reported that a $40 million, three-month swap 

with the BIS of guaranteed sterling against lire would mature on 

August 25, 1966. The swap had been renewed once and he would 

recommend a second renewal unless the U.S. Treasury executed a 

lira drawing on the IMF in time to permit repayment before matu

rity. In any event, a lira drawing by the Treasury was scheduled 

for late summer which would provide lira availabilities for paying 

off System debt to the Bank of Italy. The Committee might recall 

that in a memorandum of April 1965 he had recommended that the



7/26/66 -19

Treasury draw foreign currencies from the Fund when necessary to 

enable the System to repay swap drawings that were running on for 

unduly long periods. A number of System drawings were paid off in 

that manner last summer, and some technical problems encountered 

then had since been resolved. Thus, a major source of medium-term 

financing had been opened up that should enable the Treasury to 

backstop any System drawings that did not prove reversible within 

six months.  

Renewal of the $40 million 
swap of sterling against lire, as 
recommended by Mr, Coombs, was 
noted without objection.  

Mr. Coombs said he would conclude with one final observation.  

Earlier today he had cited the risks of a crisis in the gold pool 

that could result in a challenge to the dollar, and the risks that 

lay in the sterling situation. Unfavorable developments in those 

areas or in the U.S. balance of payments might result in a substan

tial buildup of dollar holdings at European central banks, causing 

the System to draw heavily on its swap network. The System already 

had drawings outstanding on the swaps with the Swiss, Italians, and 

Dutch, and a further large drawing on the Italians might be required 

shortly. The U.S. might well be confronted with an emergency situa

tion requiring drastic action by the System; but unless supporting 

measures were taken by the Government, such drastic action by the



7/26/66 -20

System, acting alone, might backfire, just as the British Bank Rate 

increase in November 1964 had done. He thought strong Government 

action in two areas would be desirable under such circumstances.  

His first suggestion would be to control, through licensing, direct 

U.S. investment in Europe. Secondly, he thought a strong appeal 

should be made to American tourists to stay at home for a year or 

so. Both actions would be welcomed by European central banks, 

although there might be some complaints from European business 

interests if American tourism was reduced. Unless some such meas

ures were taken by the Government, the System might find itself 

operating in a vacuum.  

Mr. Heflin asked how widely the true British position was 

known.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the recent British reserve figures 

were reflected on the books of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 

but were not known by other central banks; each such bank saw only 

a small piece of the whole picture. Conceivably, the Bank of 

England might disclose the figures to a European central bank in an 

effort to obtain credits, but otherwise they were not likely to do 

so.  

Mr. Hayes observed that that fact underscored the confi

dential nature of the figures. It was extremely important, he said, 

that they not be disclosed outside of the meeting room.



7/26/66 -21

Mr. Shepardson asked whether authorization by the Committee 

was required for the proposed overnight accommodation of the British.  

Mr. Coombs replied in the negative. In effect, he had sug

gested that he should take a more restrictive position in his 

discussions with the Bank of England than the Committee had approved 

generally for swap drawings. It was possible that the British would 

object to that position, and that he would have to consult on the 

matter before the next meeting of the Committee with the available 

members of the Subcommittee designated for such purposes in the 

Committee's foreign currency authorization.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that he still did not like the 

window-dressing involved but he supposed that it was necessary.  

Mr. Robertson remarked that no members liked it, but if it 

was necessary a short period presumably was better than a long one.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period June 28 through July 20, 

1966, and a supplemental report for July 21 through 25, 1966. Copies 

of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows:



7/26/66

Interest rates have moved sharply higher since the 
Committee met on June 28. At the close of business last 
night the three-month Treasury bill rate was about 1/2 
per cent above its level on the eve of that Committee 
meeting. During the interval yields on intermediate-and 
long-term Treasury coupon issues moved above their end
of-February highs by 10 to 15 basis points and corporate 
and municipal yields rose further. The prime rate was 
raised 1/4 per cent early in the period, Federal funds, 
bankers' acceptances, finance paper, Government agency 
securities, and dealer loan rates all moved into new high 
ground, while 30-day negotiable certificates of deposit 
became quite generally available at the 5-1/2 per cent 
ceiling. There were widespread market expectations of 
an increase in the discount rate, and in the absence of 
such action most rates have moved lower over the past 
week with some sentiment apparently arising again that 
this time the peak of rates may have been reached. In 
yesterday's Treasury bill auction rates on three- and 
six-month bills were established at 4.82 and 4.92 per 
cent respectively, 18 basis points lower than the high 
rates set in last week's auction.  

The conduct of open market operations was affected 
by a number of diverse factors, including market appre
hension about the course of interest rates after the 
prime rate increase, continuing strong loan demand, the 
Fourth of July holiday reserve needs, exceptionally wide 
swings in country bank excess reserves, and the airline 
strike. The mid-year interest payment period for 
savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks 
fortunately created no special problems, and with the 
higher rates offered by many of these institutions a 
rough competitive equilibrium appeared to have been 
attained among the major financial intermediaries.  
High yields on a variety of marketable securities, 
however, continued to attract funds from the financial 
intermediaries.  

Net borrowed reserves fluctuated widely from week 
to week, reflecting the behavior of required reserves 
growth, the swing in country bank excess reserves, and 
more recently, the $1 billion in extra reserves provided 
by the airline strike. Thus, in the week ending July 6, 
when required reserves were growing more rapidly than 
anticipated, net borrowed reserves were moved up above 
$450 million. In the week ending July 13, when required

-22-



7/26/66

reserves were showing less strength than expected, 
the country bank build-up of excess reserves was 
inhibiting the flow of reserves within the banking 
system, and the airline strike was beginning to supply 
reserves, net borrowed reserves fell to $95 million.  
In the following week, net borrowed reserves moved 
back up to $479 million, but in a considerably easier 
money market atmosphere as country banks moved their 
abnormally large accumulated excess reserves into 
the money centers.  

In view of the special report submitted to the 
Committee, I will not comment in any detail on the 
large volume of matched sale-purchase transactions 
carried on over the period.1/ I would like, however, 
to reiterate that the matched sale-purchase trans
action has proved to be a very valuable instrument 
for absorbing reserves in size for temporary periods 
with a minimum of market disturbance. It has worked 
even better than we had expected, and I believe that 
the lively competition between dealers kept the cost 
of these transactions to a minimum.  

Banks and the market generally feel that money is 
tight and that the Federal Reserve is really determined 
to keep bank credit expansion within reasonable bounds.  
It is somewhat disturbing to hear some leading commercial 
bankers talk in terms of a possible money panic, but it 
is clear that the financial community is feeling the 
pressure of continued loan demand in a period of monetary 
restraint. Against this background, and with the stern 
reality of high financing costs, Government security 
dealers are understandably reluctant to carry any 
substantial inventories. As a result we should be 
prepared to see a continuation of erratic fluctuations 
in interest rates as temporary supply and demand forces 
or specific economic, political, or financial devel
opments push the market first one way and then the 
other.  

1/ A memorandum from Mr. Holmes entitled "Use of Matched 
Sale-Purchase Contracts, July 13-20, 1966" was distributed 
to the Committee on July 22, 1966. A copy has been placed 
in the Committee's files.

-23-



7/26/66

Given the state of the markets and the many 
uncertainties involved, we should try to be as flexible 
as possible in our approach to open market operations, 
so that the routine alternation of the Federal Reserve 
as buyer or seller of securities does not unnecessarily 
exacerbate interest rate swings. Looking ahead, our 
current projections indicate a need to supply something 
over $1.5 billion of reserves in the next two weeks, 
assuming that the airline strike is settled by the first 
of the month. A continuation of the strike would, of 
course, supply a major portion of these reserves, while 
the reserve outlook is further clouded by the interna
tional financial uncertainties described by Mr. Coombs.  
As you will recall, the Committee at its June 28 meeting 
amended the continuing authority directive to permit 
repurchase agreements to be made against Government 
securities of any maturity rather than limiting them 
to Government securities maturing in 24 months. The 
understanding at that time was that this added degree 
of flexibility would remain in effect only until the 
next meeting of the Committee when Committee action 
would be required to restore the continuing authority 
directive to its original form. I would now recommend 
that the Committee not take action today to so restore 
the directive, thereby continuing to authorize repur
chase agreements against Government securities of any 
maturity.  

I would like to turn to one vexing question in 
connection with any repurchase agreements that may be 
made in the period just ahead. I am troubled by the 
fact that the discount rate, which is the rate at which 
RP's would normally be made, is so far out of line with 
other dealer financing costs and is well below the three
month Treasury bill rate. As you know, the Committee 
has set no upper limit on RP rates, but there is a 
distinct danger that setting a rate above the discount 
rate might well be detrimental to the Treasury financing 
operation and could possibly set into motion renewed 
speculation about an early increase in the discount 
rate. At this time, therefore, I see no good alternative 
to continuing to make RP's at the discount rate. I 
would hope that we would not have to lean too heavily on 
RP's during the coming weeks, but we will have to be 
guided by events as they develop.

-24-



7/26/66

In addition, in view of the heavy need to supply 
reserves indicated by the projections, I recommend that 
the Committee increase the leeway for changes in the 
System Open Market Account from $1.5 billion to $2 
billion. Such an increase would not be needed if the 
airline strike continues or if a substantial volume of 
repurchase agreements were made, but it would appear a 
useful measure to take in order to allow room for neces
sary operations if the reserve need turns out to be 
greater than expected.  

As you know, the Treasury will be announcing tomorrow 
the terms for the refunding of $9.1 billion outstanding 
Treasury securities maturing on August 15. With only 
$3.2 billion of the outstanding issues held by the public 
this should be a routine operation--but there is no such 
thing as routine in the markets at the present time.  
Market thinking is quite diverse on the appropriate terms 
for the issue, with different views as to appropriate 
maturity or maturities, as to coupon, and as to whether 
there should be a simultaneous prerefunding of November 
1966 and February 1967 maturities. All of these issues 
will be under discussion with Treasury advisory committees 
today and tomorrow, and the decision will not be easy in 
the light of recent market gyrations. Dealer underwriting 
interest in the refunding has been minimal, but somewhat 
more investor interest has developed with the improved 

market performance of the past several days. How long 

this sentiment will last is problematical, and a rather 

difficult even keel period will lie ahead. A definition 

of even keel is not easy when extraneous developments 

may have more effect on interest rates than minor swings 

in reserve aggregates or other factors under Federal 

Reserve control. But I believe it is clear that we should 

try to be as neutral as possible in our effect on the 

money market through the August 15 payment date and perhaps 

for some period beyond.  

Mr. Hickman, referring to Mr. Holmes' final remark concerning 

the Treasury refunding, asked how long an even keel might have to be

maintained to stabilize the after-market.

-25-



7/26/66 -26

Mr. Holmes said it was almost impossible to make a prediction 

on that point at a time like the present, when market conditions were 

tending to go through wide swings over short periods.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether the Manager was including the 

expected Treasury cash financing among the operations for which he 

thought an even keel should be maintained.  

Mr. Holmes replied that he was not. The cash operation, 

which probably would involve an offering of tax bills with tax and 

loan account privileges, would be announced before August 15, with 

payment to be made sometime later in the month. While it might 

present a problem for a short period the problem was not likely to 

be sufficiently serious to extend the time for which an even keel 

would be required.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether the Manager thought that the 

refunding would preclude a policy change in the latter part of 

August.  

Mr. Holmes replied there might be an opening for such a 

change in the latter part of August, but at this point it was dif

ficult to make a firm prediction.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that in an informal discussion a week 

or so ago the Treasury people had shown a willingness to consider 

the possibility of the System's not maintaining an even keel after 

the refunding. While they might change their minds, that was at 

least a possibility.



7/26/66 -27

Mr. Mitchell referred to the concern Mr. Holmes had expressed 

about the spread between the discount rate and dealer financing costs, 

and asked why he was reluctant to use a rate higher than the discount 

rate on any repurchase agreements he might make.  

Mr. Holmes commented that in the midst of a Treasury financ

ing market participants would be unusually sensitive to anything that 

suggested a change in System policy, and they might interpret a 

higher rate on RP's as foreshadowing a change in the discount rate.  

At the moment the market did not expect an immediate change in the 

discount rate.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether the rate on System RP's with 

dealers had been out of line with dealer loan rates at times in the 

past.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the rate on RP's had been well below 

dealer loan rates for some time now. The Account Management had con

sidered raising the RP rate, but had decided not to for the reason he 

had mentioned--a higher rate might be taken as a signal of an imminent 

change in the discount rate. There also had been periods in the past 

when the discount rate was out of line with dealer financing costs.  

Mr. Ellis asked whether a rate above the discount rate had 

ever been set on RP's by the Desk.



7/26/66 -28

Mr. Holmes replied that that had been done on one or two 

occasions, but that in each such case an increase in the discount 

rate had been announced a few days later.  

In response to a question by Mr. Robertson, Mr. Holmes said 

his intention would be to continue to set the rate on repurchase 

agreements at the discount rate if any RP's were made during this 

period, although he had expressed his concern over the fact that 

that rate was out of line with current dealer financing costs.  

Mr. Robertson said he shared Mr. Holmes' concern. He 

would recommend that the Desk avoid the use of RP's to the fullest 

extent possible, recognizing that some might be necessary. He did 

not think, however, that in present market circumstances a rate on 

RP's above the discount rate would necessarily be construed as 

signaling a change in the discount rate.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that the System could well be 

criticized if it made RP's with dealers at so large a differential 

below their alternative financing costs.  

Mr. Holmes agreed. At the same time, he said, he would 

not like to take any action that could be pointed to, rightly or 

wrongly, as having upset a delicate Treasury financing operation.  

The Desk had felt constrained in the use of RP's in the recent 

past because of the rate differential, but it might have to use 

them to some extent in the weeks ahead because, with dealer



7/26/66 -29

inventories small, exclusive reliance on outright purchases could 

push the bill rate very low. Of course, if the airline strike con

tinued and float remained high there would be very little problem, 

but the period ahead was a highly uncertain one.  

Mr. Brimmer remarked that precisely because of the existing 

uncertainties he would keep innovations to a minimum. If the Manager 

felt that he had to make RP's, he (Mr. Brimmer) would favor setting 

the rate on them at the discount rate.  

Mr. Maisel commented that the Committee's primary concern 

was with monetary policy and not with the cost of operations.  

Moreover, the cost to the System of outright purchases followed by 

sales probably would be greater than that of making RP's at the 

discount rate. It seemed to him, therefore, that if the Manager 

concluded that making RP's at the discount rate was desirable for 

reasons of monetary policy, he should proceed to make them.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the question was not one of costs 

to the System but rather of profits to the dealers, and Mr. Maisel 

rejoined that they were the two sides of the same coin.  

Mr. Hayes said that he was struck by two facts. First, the 

System was making funds available at a 4-1/2 per cent rate to banks 

through the discount window. Secondly, the Desk made RP's with 

dealers in amounts and for periods of its own choosing, and it 

policed them effectively. He could understand the concern that



7/26/66 -30

had been expressed, but he personally felt that the Treasury financing 

was sufficiently delicate to warrant the Committee's living with the 

existing situation for a few weeks more. Recent RP's had been made 

at the discount rate, so no change from present practice was involved.  

Mr. Shepardson noted that his feeling was similar to 

Mr. Mitchell's; the procedure might be necessary but he thought it 

was not desirable.  

Mr. Hayes summed up by saying that in light of the discussion 

the Manager was fully aware of the unfavorable aspects of the 

procedure and would try to avoid making RP's to the extent possible.  

The Committee's consensus, as he understood it, was that decisions in 

the matter should be left to the Manager's judgment, although some 

members were reluctant to have RP's made at the discount rate.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the open market transactions 
in Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period June 28 
through July 25, 1966, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Hayes then noted that while the Committee had amended 

the continuing authority directive at the previous meeting to remove 

the maturity limitation on securities held under repurchase agree

ments on the understanding that the directive would be restored to 

its original form at this meeting, the Manager now recommended that 

the Committee not take such action today. He asked whether there



7/26/66

was any objection to retaining the existing form of the directive, 

and none was heard.  

Mr. Hayes then asked whether there was any objection to the 

Manager's recommendation that the leeway for changes in the System 

Account holdings of Government securities between meetings of the 

Committee be increased from $1.5 billion to $2.0 billion, and none 

was heard.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
paragraph 1(a) of the continuing 
authority directive to the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was amended 
to read as follows: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities in 
the open market, from or to Government securities dealers 
and foreign and international accounts maintained at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or 
deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market 
Account at market prices and, for such Account, to 

exchange maturing U.S. Government securities with the 

Treasury or allow them to mature without replacement; 

provided that the aggregate amount of such securities 

held in such Account at the close of business on the day 

of a meeting of the Committee at which action is taken 

with respect to a current economic policy directive shall 

not be increased or decreased by more than $2.0 billion 

during the period commencing with the opening of business 

on the day following such meeting and ending with the 

close of business on the day of the next such meeting.  

Mr. Hayes called at this point for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed

in the files of the Committee.

-31-



7/26/66

Mr. Partee made the following statement on economic 

conditions: 

A good many business analysts seem recently to have 
turned less bullish on the future course of economic 
activity. Doubts are heard increasingly about the under

lying strength of private sector demands, and forecasts 
of marked slowing or even downturn around year-end or a 
little later are now not uncommon.  

Weakness in the second-quarter GNP figures, much of 
which reflected the substantial setback for the automobile 

market and its widespread ramifications for supplier 
industries, has helped fuel this concern. But many 
analysts view past and present spending levels as exces
sive in other lines as well--for plant and equipment, 
business inventories, consumer durable goods generally-
and point to the auto setback as a harbinger of things 
to come. Concern is also frequently expressed variously 
about the effects of tight money, rising costs and prices, 
the evident weakness in the stock market, and the balance 

of payments situation--all with forebodings for the future.  

To the extent that these forebodings are transmitted 

to businessmen, investors, and consumers, they will in 
themselves tend to bring a moderation in future plans and 

actions. But I cannot go along with the view that a 

near-term economic reversal is now shaping up. We would 

all agree, I think, that imbalances in the economy have 

broadened and intensified over the past six months or so.  

Plant and equipment expenditures look increasingly 

vulnerable, expectations of rising prices have become a 

more important part of the picture, and inventory 

accumulation may well be proceeding at an unsustainable 

rate if the uptrends in new orders and sales continue to 

moderate.  
But the continued expansion in spending associated 

with the war in Vietnam--which appears to have hardened 

further over the past month--provides a powerful support 

to the economy and a deterrent to cutbacks in private 

spending flows. The Federal budgetary position is now 

shifting abruptly to a more expansive stance, reflecting 

not only higher defense spending, but also the Federal 

civilian and military pay raises, the start-up of Medicare, 

and the phasing out of tax payment speed-ups, which raised 

receipts sharply in the second quarter. We estimate that,

-32-



7/26/66

on the revised national income basis, the Federal Government's 
net position will move from surpluses of $2.3 billion in the 
first quarter, and $3.6 billion in the second quarter, to 
approximate balance in the third quarter and a small deficit in 
the fourth.  

This shift figures prominently in the Board staff's 
projections of third-quarter GNP, which show a rise of $14 
billion as against $11 billion and $17 billion in the last 
two quarters, respectively. The main feature of the projec
tion is a pick-up in consumer spending, the expansion in 
which slowed markedly in the second quarter.  

The slowdown last quarter took the form of lower auto 
sales and reduced growth in nondurable goods, but it also 
reflected a somewhat slower expansion in personal incomes 
and a sharp increase in Federal tax payments, as the new 
withholding schedules took effect. Conversely, in the 
current quarter, personal incomes should rise faster--mainly 
because of higher transfer payments and the Federal pay 

raise--and the increase in the tax take will be more moderate.  

Hence, disposable income will rise sharply faster than in 
the second quarter, providing strong support to consumer 

spending. Higher retail sales in June and thus far in July, 
though tentative, provide some confirmation of the expected 

resurgence in consumer demand.  

Inventory accumulation accelerated last quarter, on the 

other hand, and in this case a slowing in the current quarter 

seems almost inevitable. Much of the increase reflected the 

dealer build-up in auto stocks, and these should be worked 

down in the weeks immediately ahead as output is cut sharply 

for model changeovers. But manufacturers' inventories have 

also accumulated more rapidly in recent months, and whether 

there will be any slowing here is less certain; not much has 

been allowed for in the projection.  

Another clearly weak spot--and on more than technical 

grounds--is in residential construction. Private housing 

starts in May and June were at an annual rate 20 per cent 

below the peak three-month average last winter, and the 

recent figures on building permits have been noticeably 

weaker than those for starts. The staff projection allows 

for some further decline in residential building expenditures, 

but it may still understate the drop in store.

-33-



On balance, it seems to me that the green book 1 / 

projection could turn out to be a little high for the 
third quarter. But even so, the general impression of 
recovery to a somewhat more rapid advance in GNP after 
midyear, with much more of it coming in final demands, 
seems correct. If so, the existing strong pressures on 
resources can be expected to be maintained. Industrial 
production rose at a 6 per cent annual rate in the second 
quarter, even with the slowdown in output and demand.  
And an extraordinary number of teen-agers were absorbed 
into the labor force in June with no increase in the 
unemployment rate. It would appear from this that there 
are substantial backlogs of labor demand, even for 
relatively unskilled workers.  

Prices also continue under pressure and, with 
aggregate demands continuing to mount, no real let-up 
is in sight. The June rise in the consumer price index 
brought the increase for the first half to 1.7 per cent, 
substantially more than in the same period last year.  
Much of the increase was accounted for by foods, reflect
ing in part special supply factors, but nonfood commodities 
also rose somewhat and the increase in services was the 
largest since 1957, paced by higher medical costs.  
Wholesale prices of industrial commodities also have 
continued upward, at a 3.5 per cent annual rate in the 
second quarter. Some sensitive materials prices recently 
have shown less strength, but it would take very little 
additional increase in other materials and products to 
make up the difference in the over-all industrial index.  

Under these circumstances--which include the prospect 
of a resurgence in consumer spending, continuing strong 
pressures on resources, and upward movement in the price 
indexes--public policies that will hold in check expansion 
in aggregate demand at about the current rate clearly are 
still in order-. Monetary policy, for its part, now appears 
to be biting, not only in construction but in other lines 
affected marginally by the restricted availability and 
increased costs of credit. And further effects are likely 
to appear with the passage of time, given the time lags 
required to influence spending decisions and actual outlays.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," prepared 
for the Committee by the Board's staff.

7/26/66 -34-



7/26/66

In view of these lags, and taking into account the 
apparent recent dampening in business expectations, it 
seems to me that a good case can be made for avoiding 
further escalation in monetary restraint for the present.  
But the situation bears unusually careful watching; 
either a breakout of the economy on the upward side or 
a spreading of unexpected weaknesses are long-shot pos
sibilities.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

A major uncertainty at the time of our last meeting 
was the extent of mid-year liquidity pressures that 
savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks 
might have to face. Deposit withdrawals have been 
substantial for the saving and loans, but fortunately 
less than had been widely feared. A factor helping to 
limit withdrawals was the increase in interest rates 
posted by the nonbank financial institutions, particu
larly in California and New York.  

But despite the less intense than feared recent 
pressure on major real estate lenders, mortgage financing 
and residential construction remain under great strain.  
This is indicated by the continuing evidence of sharp 
reductions in new commitments of lenders and in new 
permits to build. Although it is likely that the near 
crisis atmosphere that has been evident in mortgage 
markets in recent weeks is dissipating, market conditions 
no doubt will remain tight in the months ahead and flows 
of mortgage credit will diminish further, mainly 
reflecting commitment cutbacks.  

Commercial banks have benefited to some extent by 
the July withdrawals from competing institutions.  
Time and savings deposits at commercial banks are 
expected to be up at a seasonally adjusted annual rate 
of over 13 per cent this month, as compared with an 
average of about 10 per cent in May and June. Savings 
deposits, at least at city banks, continue to decline 
and growth in large negotiable CD's has been slower, but 
small denomination time deposits have increased 
substantially further. We have no comprehensive informa
tion as to how banks have reacted to the recent change in 
Regulation Q, but the reports we have heard are that many

-35-



7/26/66

banks are converting their time deposits to single-date 
maturities and continuing to pay the higher permissible 
rates.  

Looking at the domestic financial scene more broadly 
and over a longer time span, there is growing evidence 
that restraint is biting. Total net funds raised in 
financial markets by the private sectors of the economy 

decreased considerably in the second quarter. Mortgage 
financing and corporate security financing showed particu
larly sharp declines, but part of the corporate decline 
may have been due to earlier anticipatory borrowing.  

Total funds raised is a more meaningful indicator 
of over-all restraint than bank credit expansion alone, 
for bank credit reflects not only the effects of monetary 

restraint but also the changing role of banks as financial 
intermediaries for savings. Even the bank portion of 
total credit flows has fallen sharply--from about 45 per 
cent in the second half of last year to around 25 per 

cent in the first half of this year.  
The effect of Federal Reserve restraint on the 

commercial banking system can also be seen in the recent 

course of the aggregate measures. Total reserves, for 

example, increased at about a 5 per cent seasonally 

adjusted annual rate in the first half of this year, as 
compared with 7 per cent in the first half of last year.  

The rate of growth of the bank credit proxy--total member 

bank deposits--declined from 10 to 7 per cent, reflecting 

mainly a reduced rate of increase in time deposits.  

Growth in the narrowly defined money supply, on the other 

hand, has remained in the 4 to 5 per cent range that has 

prevailed over most of the past two years, but this rate 

has been below that in the GNP. I think it is fair to 

say we have been achieving the moderation in the rate of 

growth of the "reserve base, bank credit, and the money 

supply" sought in recent directives.  

Financial conditions have been getting more restric

tive for some time now, but it is only in the last couple 

of months that real tightness has developed. This is 

shown most clearly by recent changes in the cost and 

availability of various types of credit and capital.  

I have already commented on the tight situation 

prevailing in the mortgage market. The tightness has 

spread to the municipal market where interest rates have 

risen over 35 basis points since mid-April. Many banks, 

particularly the larger ones, are either cutting back on

-36-



7/26/66

their acquisitions of new municipals or are liquidating 
some of their existing holdings. Specialized municipal 
dealers are finding the going very rough and there have 
been postponements and cancellations of new issues.  
There is even some evidence of lower municipal spending 
on capital projects as a result of the credit squeeze.  

Financing of brokers and dealers in both private and 
Government securities is more expensive and less readily 
available. Consumer credit terms are also more restrain
ing at both banks and sales finance companies.  

Business borrowing from banks continues to be the 
area where restraint is less evident. The increase in 
such borrowing was at a seasonally adjusted annual rate 
of about 20 per cent in the second quarter and has 
continued brisk in July. One has to be careful, however, 
in basing monetary restraint on the course of business 
loans, for this type of lending is notoriously sluggish 
in its response to restraint.  

Small banks also seem to be under less pressure than 
large banks. Loan demands on them have been less intense 
and their liquidity remains greater. Yet it is difficult 
to see how additional pressure can be brought against 
these smaller banks without intensifying the already very 
tight situation of the large city banks. Discount policy 
may be a possibility, but it is a hard one to administer.  

As for the immediate future, our policy until the 
next meeting seems quite clear, namely, one of an "even 
keel." Although the Treasury refunding is relatively 
small, it occurs in a highly uncertain market, one in 
which even a well-priced, routine, short-term, rights 
refunding could result in high attrition and further 
upward pressure on longer-term interest rates. In this 
situation, it seems to me that the Manager should be 
instructed to hold to a steady course, using money market 
conditions as his main guide to operations.  

Mr. Mitchell said he had been under the impression that 

June and July were periods of exceptionally large demands for bank 

loans because of corporate tax payments and accelerated payments 

of withheld taxes, and that there would be some slack in loan 

demand in August. Mr. Koch's remarks suggested, however, that

-37-



7/26/66 -38

the slack was not likely to materialize. He (Mr. Mitchell) asked 

whether that did not imply that the Committee should increase the 

degree of monetary restraint.  

Mr. Koch replied that it would be difficult, in his 

judgment, to reduce the growth in business loans. Business loan 

demand was continuing strong partly because of the inventory 

situation, although the decline in the rate of accumulation of new 

car inventories should give some relief.  

Mr. Holmes noted that, as the blue book 1 / indicated, the 

Board's staff expected the bank credit proxy to rise at an annual 

rate between 4 and 6 per cent in August. That, roughly, was only 

half the July rate, although the seasonal adjustment factors used 

might be more than ordinarily subject to question. Moreover, a 

good deal of current business borrowing might be anticipatory, as 

a safeguard against the possible unavailability of funds later.  

He added, however, that the New York Reserve Bank's projections of 

bank credit growth in August were higher than those of the Board 

staff.  

Mr. Hayes commented that the New York Bank staff also 

expected loan demands to be somewhat stronger in August than did 

the Board staff.  

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 
for the Committee by the Board's staff.



7/26/66 -39

Mr. Mitchell said he thought the Committee would want to 

tranquilize strong loan demands. He was concerned about the 

possibility of another surge in bank credit in August if the 

Committee adopted a posture of even keel today.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that the basic question at issue 

concerned the interpretation the Committee intended to place on the 

proviso clause of the second paragraph of the directive, assuming 

it adopted a directive today along the lines of that proposed by 

the staff.1/ A similar question had been raised near the end of 

the June 28 meeting but was not completely resolved, and perhaps 

it was best to have it raised early in the meeting today.  

Mr. Brimmer said he had been concerned about the growth of 

business loans. He was particularly apprehensive about the prospec

tive growth rates in July and August, especially in light of the 

New York Reserve Bank projections. He thought that for several 

months the Committee had been led to believe that business loan 

growth would moderate, and that it should now discount such 

expectations and work on the assumption that the bulge would not 

prove to be temporary, for whatever reasons. Moreover, he felt 

that focusing on the expansion of total bank credit might divert 

attention from the shift that was occurring toward business loans 

at the expense of other categories of bank credit.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



7/26/66

Mr. Maisel said that it had been his understanding at the 

June 28 meeting that the proviso clause of the directive adopted 

then would become operative if growth in the bank credit proxy 

exceeded an annual rate of about 9 or 10 per cent in July. The 

latest estimates for July suggested that actual growth was a little 

higher than that, but not much. He asked whether it was contemplated 

that the proviso in the proposed new directive would become operative 

if the credit proxy rose at an annual rate in excess of 4-6 per cent 

in August.  

Mr. Holmes said that 4-6 per cent represented the Board 

staff's expectation; the projection of the New York Bank was close 

to 9 per cent.  

Mr. Maisel then asked whether there was a similar disparity 

in the projections of required reserves.  

Mr. Holmes replied that, speaking generally, that was the 

case, although one could not directly translate divergencies in 

estimates between one series and the other for various reasons, 

including differences in the seasonal factors.  

Mr. Maisel then noted that the proviso clause of the staff's 

suggested directive began, "provided, however, that if required 

reserves are stronger than expected. . ." He asked how Mr. Holmes 

would interpret that language.

-40-



7/26/66

Mr. Holmes replied that he would hope the members would 

express their opinions on the appropriate interpretation of the 

language in question when they commented on the directive today.  

The staff's projections were before the Committee; and if the 

members would note whether or not they thought the indicated 

growth rates were appropriate he would find it helpful in under

standing the Committee's intent.  

Mr. Hayes suggested that the members return to the subject 

under discussion in the course of the go-around.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

I find it today more than usually difficult to sum up 
the present state of the balance of payments. In the first 
place, the figures that have been coming in for increases 
in U.S. liquid liabilities in recent months have been 
heavily affected by foreign and international acquisitions 
of agency securities and time deposits with original maturity 
over 1 year. As a result, the preliminary press release at 

mid-August will show a second-quarter seasonally adjusted 

liquidity deficit greatly reduced from the first quarter's 
level. The average rate of deficit in the first half of 

1966 will appear to have been less than the average rate in 

the second half of 1965, which was $1-3/4 billion. Yet we 
know very well that there was a deterioration in the 

merchandise export surplus by $1 billion annual rate, and 

we think we know that the changes in other parts of the 

current account and in the private capital account were 

not, on balance, anywhere near favorable enough to offset 

this trade deterioration between the second half of last 

year and the first half of this.  

That is my first difficulty. My second difficulty is 

quite different. In the very recent data on changes in U.S.  

reserve assets and liquid liabilities--that is, the data 

for June and the first two-thirds of July--I sense a hint

-41-



7/26/66

that something of a more favorable kind may have begun to 
happen. The usual summer-time bulge in the deficit does 

not seem to be developing. Yet, it is much too early to 
have corroborative evidence. And the indicators of weekly 
and monthly deficits themselves are incomplete and subject 
to revision, and they may be affected by any number of 
accidental or at least nonregular factors.  

One reason for hesitance in taking seriously the hints 
of a favorable turn is that perhaps additional large shifts 
of foreign official and international funds may have been 

made in June and July into long-term time deposits and 

agency securities. Our estimate of the total of such move

ments in the second quarter has just been raised from a 
little under $500 million to nearly $550 million; the June 

figures are still not complete, and there is still a pos
sibility that the shift into non-liquid assets will prove 
to have been larger in June than it was in April or May.  

However, assuming that the hints of an improvement in 

the balance of payments in June and July do not eventually 

get explained away in that manner, we may find that the 
tight money situation and the slowing of the domestic 

economic advance in the second quarter have had measurable 

effects. One sector in which improvement could be hoped 

for is imports. The June import figure is being released 
today. It proves to be moderately encouraging: though it 

is up a little from May, it is no higher than the April

May average. It does leave the second-quarter total about 

4 per cent above the first quarter, but the higher level 

was reached early in the quarter. If we group the last 

four months by pairs, imports in May and June were no 

higher than those of March and April.  

What I wish to convey is simply the thought that it 

is possible that the balance of payments may show a turn 

for the better as the overheated economy begins to cool 

off. Whether a significant change has already occurred in 
the balance of payments is still a moot question, only to 

be answered with statistics that are not yet in.  

It is also possible that the backlash of the distrust 

of sterling may have generated abnormal net payments to 

this country on various current transactions or to acquire 

assets here other than those that are counted as liquid.  

But probably the largest effects of the sterling crisis 

are not on the liquidity balance at all, but rather only 

on the official reserves transactions balance--on which I 

will say a little later.

-42-



7/26/66

But suppose the hypothesis of a July drop in U.S. imports 
were to be confirmed. Even then there would be no immediate 
implications for policy, in my opinion. Just as the rise 
in imports may have ceased for the present with the recent 
slowing of the rise in domestic output, income, and expendi
tures, so the new acceleration of domestic expansion that 
seems to be in the cards for the third quarter can be 
expected to bring a new acceleration in imports, perhaps 
with a lag of a month or so. The balance of payments case 
for as restrictive a combination of monetary and fiscal 
policy as the economy can stand will continue to hold until 
the economy is firmly on a track of expansion at a sustain
able rate without appreciable inflation.  

I should like to add a footnote on the official reserve 
transactions balance, partly to correct a misstatement on 
page 5 of the summary part of the green book. We can now 
estimate the seasonally adjusted annual rate of this balance 
in the second quarter, not "somewhere between $1 billion and 
$2 billion," but at about $0.6 billion. The difference 
between this relatively small deficit and the liquidity 
balance at a rate of about $1 billion, a difference of $0.4 
billion, is explained as follows. Because shifts between 
liquid and nonliquid assets do not, in general, affect the 
official reserve transactions calculation, this balance 
would have been very much larger than the liquidity balance, 
if it had not been for a still larger factor working in the 
other direction. This was an increase in U.S. liquid 
liabilities to commercial banks abroad and to other private 
holders, amounting to half a billion dollars before seasonal 
adjustment and $650 million seasonally adjusted. This was 
mainly a reflection of the run on sterling.  

Some of the drain on U.K. net reserves from their 
over-all deficit on current account, long-term capital, and 
short-term capital had its counterpart in reserve gains for 
European countries, and had no effect on the U.S. net reserve 
position on either of our two styles of calculation--though 
it does increase our liabilities to central banks who may be 
unwilling dollar holders. But a very large part of the 

flight from sterling was into dollars, and especially into 
Euro-dollar deposits. Given the tight money market in the 
United States, banks in the Euro-dollar market receiving 
these deposits placed in this country much of the dollar 

funds they had gained, rather than lending out dollars in 

Europe to end up in the holdings of European central banks.  

Thus, there was a very large increase in the balances owed

-43-



7/26/66

by banks in the United States to their branches abroad (and 
perhaps also to other banks) operating in the Euro-dollar 
market. The increase in these balances owed to banks in the 

Euro-dollar market would apparently have been even larger 
than it was if the Bank of England had not swapped out part 
of its spot dollar losses to the market, causing banks 
operating in London to put back into sterling, on a covered 
basis, some of the dollars that had come to them.  

Presumably these processes continued to work during 
the first three weeks of July, at a more violent pace. The 

whole business illustrates very well the good standing of 
the dollar under present conditions as a currency into which 
some people are willing to move their funds out of a currency 
that is under attack.  

Note: Immediately following the meeting, 
information was received that the estimate 
of the June deficit on the liquidity basis 
had been revised downward to correct a 

reporting error by a commercial bank. For 
the second quarter, the seasonally adjusted 
annual rate was changed from about $1 bil
lion to about $0.6 billion. The estimate 

for the official reserve transactions 
deficit given in Mr. Hersey's statement 
($0.6 billion, seasonally adjusted annual 

rate) was unaltered. The increase in U.S.  

liquid liabilities to commercial banks 

abroad and to other private holders was 

changed from $650 million to $550 million, 

seasonally adjusted quarterly amount.  

Mr. Hayes then began the go-around of comments and views on 

economic conditions and monetary policy with the following statement: 

The business expansion continues to proceed at a less 

hectic pace than in the first quarter. It looks, however, 

as if the advance in aggregate demand in the third quarter 

will be stronger than in the quarter just completed. The 

prospective advance is rapid enough to maintain strong 

upward pressure on prices. Federal Government expenditures, 

particularly on defense, are now clearly the most powerful 

force propelling the economy forward, and business outlays 

on plant and equipment are another important stimulant.  

We look for a renewed acceleration of consumer spending in 

the current quarter.

-44-



7/26/66

A most disturbing feature of the second quarter was 
the fact that over-all prices recorded the same large 
increase as in the first quarter--a 3-1/2 per cent annual 
rate--while real GNP rose at a rate of only 2-1/2 per cent.  
We see no reason to look for a slowdown in the rate of 
price rise, although no acceleration is visible at this 
time, Cost-push pressures on prices are likely to increase.  
Unemployment continues to be relatively low and is likely 
to remain so.  

The further deterioration of the balance of payments 
in the second quarter, apart from special "cosmetic" 
adjustment, is an additional reason for serious concern.  
The dominant factor has been a weakening of the trade 
account, with a rapid rise in imports and a slowing in the 
growth of exports. Rapidly rising aggregate demand in 
this country is of course the main source of the import 
increase. Rising Government outlays abroad, tourist 
expenditures, and direct investment must also share the 
responsibility for our poor payments showing. In view 
of the prospect of further domestic business expansion, 
and considerable restraint on demand in many other 
countries, there is little hope of improvement in our 
trade balance unless efforts to dampen aggregate demand 
in the U.S. are more successful than they have been to 
date. It does seem clear that some decisive new program 
of action to deal with our payments deficit is badly 
needed.  

Last week witnessed the most serious of the crises 
that have beset sterling over the past couple of years.  
It is still too early to know whether the latest crisis 
has been surmounted, but there is at least ground for hope 
that the immediate danger is past, partly because of 

vigorous action by the System and the Bank of England.  
Of course Britain's longer-range problem is far from 
solved, and the sterling situation will continue to con
tribute to an atmosphere of uncertainty in international 
financial markets. However, the Wilson program is an 
impressive one, and, if effectively implemented, would 
set the stage for a long-run solution. Of course, pressure 
on the gold market and concern over our own payments are 
enhancing the uneasy international atmosphere.  

Bank credit growth seems to have been around an 8 

per cent annual rate for the first half of this year, as 

compared with about 10 per cent for the full year 1965.

-45-



7/26/66

Thus we have perhaps made a beginning toward our objective 
of slowing the pace of credit growth. In New York, at 
least, the demand for bank loans has remained very strong 
in July, despite the passing of the June tax and dividend 
dates. Although the banks' liquidity has reached a very 
low level, New York bankers feel that the quality of a 
great many borrowers whose requests are received is so 
high, and competitive factors so strong, that substantial 
loan increases are bound to continue short of considerably 
more severe reserve stringency than they have experienced 
so far. On the other hand, there is some fear that any 
sudden intensification of the pressure could lead to very 
serious problems, such as possible inability to honor 
commitments, or rapid forced liquidation of investments.  

The savings institutions appear to have weathered the 
mid-year interest period without any serious difficulties.  
The mutual savings banks were losing funds more rapidly in 
early July than in early April but have since recouped and 
at the moment seem to be gaining deposits at a better rate 
than in July of last year. The savings and loan associa
tions are also said to be gaining funds again. In both 
cases increases in rates have helped reverse earlier losses.  
Current efforts in Government circles to roll back rates 
paid on various types of certificates of deposit seem to 
me to overlook completely the fact that savings institutions 
and commercial banks together are already tending to lose 
out, in the competition for savings funds, to direct 
investment in securities on the part of the public.  

The need for a continued general policy of restraint 
seems clear in view of the still excessive rate of credit 
growth, the continuing inflationary danger, and the parlous 
state of our balance of payments. With no assist from 
higher taxes in prospect for the near term, I think we 
should seek an even firmer monetary policy were it not for 
current even-keel considerations. Under the circumstances, 
with the refunding likely to be especially delicate and 
perhaps quite difficult, we can do no more than maintain 
about the same degree of restraint prevailing in recent 
weeks. It seems to me, incidentally, that the new technique 
discussed at our special telephone meeting proved to be 
extremely useful in enabling us to prevent any undue easing 
as a result of the airline strike; and we might well consider 
whether this should not be a permanent addition to our kit 
of tools. In the coming three weeks we might have in mind 
a range of free reserves of $450-$500 million, but I think

-46-



7/26/66

the Manager should be given ample leeway to depart from 
this range in the light of apparent credit trends and of 
the Treasury's financing problems.  

Perhaps a word is in order at this point on the 
subject of the discount rate. In spite of the Board's 
position as stated in their letter of July 16, I am still 
convinced that the 1/2 per cent increase in the discount 
rate voted by our directors on July 14 was the right 
action under all the circumstances; and I was glad to see 
five other Reserve Banks take similar action. In regard 
to the point in the Board's letter that 1/2 per cent 
might not be enough to calm existing uncertainties, I 
think this doubt was far outweighed by the fact that a 
1 per cent rise would very probably have set off a renewed 
sharp spiral of interest rates, which in turn would have 
been undesirable both from the Treasury financing stand
point and in the light of current Administration and 
Congressional efforts to check the escalation of rates.  
The basic economic and financial reasons, both domestic 
and international, for the July 14 action are, I think, 
fairly obvious; and I believe there would have been a 
real advantage in narrowing the wide spread between the 
discount rate and market rates before the even-keel period 
was upon us. The sterling problem was not yet so acute 
on July 14 that this constituted a sufficient reason for 
holding our hand, whereas a week later the inflamed and 
delicate sterling market position did argue strongly 
against any discount rate action; and for this reason, 
and this reason alone, our directors voted last Thursday 
to re-establish the existing rate. I would hope that 
some opportunity might be found after completion of the 
refunding to carry out an increase in the discount rate 
with the Board's blessing. A couple of weeks ago Treasury 
officials indicated that this might be feasible, and I 
hope that this possibility will receive careful study 
during the coming weeks.  

I find the draft directive quite satisfactory, except 
for the wording at two points in the first paragraph. I 
would substitute "appears to be" for "is" in the first
sentence statement regarding over-all domestic activity; 
and I would change the reference to the balance of payments 

to read, "The balance of payments situation continues to 

reflect a heavy underlying deficit."

-47-



7/26/66 -48

Mr. Ellis reported that the New England economy continued 

to roll along in high gear. Each month saw new production, employ

ment, and income records posted with such monotonous regularity 

that one tended to overlook their real significance. For example, 

during the week ending June 18 insured unemployment was the lowest 

in tabulated records going back over 20 years. In many ways that 

statistic had greater long-range significance than the more widely 

publicized fact that not all students found jobs for the summer 

and the unemployment rate rose slightly. Rising employment, longer 

hours of work, and expanding incomes were translating into rising 

consumer spending--except for automobiles. Rising sales, in turn, 

were generating optimistic sales expectations in the minds of New 

England manufacturers. The Reserve Bank's regular quarterly survey, 

covering firms with one-eighth of the region's employment, found 

them expecting their seasonally adjusted sales level to rise by 1.3 

per cent from the second to the third quarter, having declined by 

that much between the first and second quarters.  

In the financial arenas, Mr. Ellis continued, both commercial 

banks and mutual savings banks were breathing easier now that the 

July dividend dates had passed. No savings banks had had to draw 

on lines at the commercial banks to meet deposit losses. In fact, 

it was estimated that, in the aggregate, the mutuals would gain 

deposits in July. They were still making a substantial volume of



7/26/66 -49

mortgage loans but were buying fewer out-of-State mortgages. While 

the large commercial banks were determined to meet their loan com

mitments to the mutuals, they were somewhat concerned about having 

the funds to do so. For all weekly reporting banks in the District, 

liquid assets as a per cent of total deposits adjusted fell to 4.8 

per cent on July 13, roughly half of the national figure of 8.9 per 

cent, and loan-deposit ratios reached 77.9 per cent, compared with 

a national ratio of 73.7 per cent. For Boston banks, the ratio 

touched 84 per cent. It was quite clear that First District banks 

were less liquid and were under stronger pressures than was suggested 

by data reflecting the national scene.  

District banks, particularly the larger ones, reported they 

were rationing their established customers and rejecting prospective 

new ones they would be delighted to accommodate in normal times, 

Mr. Ellis remarked. In fact, several had arrived at a point of 

urging that some guidelines--by total and by type of loan--be 

formally established to give them more backbone in reaching tough 

decisions. It was not at all surprising, therefore, to find that 

District banks were very active participants in the Federal funds 

market and also showed up frequently at the discount window. During 

the second quarter as many as 41 per cent of the country member banks 

borrowed at some time or other and their borrowings averaged 7 per 

cent of their required reserves, substantially more than in any other



7/26/66 -50

District. In contrast, among country banks, continuous borrowers 

of six periods or longer borrowed a larger portion of their required 

reserves in six other Districts than they did in New England.  

Apparently, while First District banks in general borrowed more 

heavily and more frequently, the extent of borrowing by the so

called continuous borrowers was below average.  

After considering those and related economic facts, Mr. Ellis 

said, directors of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank voted on July 18 

to raise the discount rate by 1/2 per cent. They viewed the move as 

a desirable step in continuation of a gradual tightening of monetary 

policy. Realizing that the longer a rate remained out of pattern 

the greater the distortion it caused and the greater the inertia 

that had to be overcome, they sought to reduce uncertainty in a 

market when such action had been fully discounted. In addition, 

they thought that such a move would reduce, marginally, the rate 

incentives to borrow from the Federal Reserve; that it would provide 

another signal to other nations that the United States was determined 

to pursue monetary restraint; and that it would reserve for later 

use the possibility of still another discount rate increase if market 

trends prevailed. The directors considered a possible increase of 

a full percentage point, but rejected it for two reasons. First, 

the abruptness of such an action, which would completely close the 

present gap between discount rate and the Regulation Q ceiling,



7/26/66 -51

could be viewed as a divergence from the recognized policy of gradual 

shifts toward tightness; it could well be described as slamming on 

the brakes. Secondly, the competitive balance between commercial 

banks and other financial institutions--Mr. Holmes had used the term 

"competitive equilibrium"--would be shaken more severely than desir

able just as it showed some signs of settling down.  

Quite obviously, Mr. Ellis continued, the Treasury financing 

schedule now blocked action on the discount rate until the last half 

of August, when it might possibly be fitted in around the expected 

issue of tax bills. It might be desirable at that time for the Desk 

to innovate with respect to the rate on repurchase agreements, 

setting a rate closer to the bill rate.  

Meanwhile, Mr. Ellis remarked, the critical issue of policy 

settled down to a meaningful definition of even keel in the context 

of present conditions and expectations in the market. The staff 

memoranda had outlined markets that were expected to fluctuate 

substantially under the influence of special float factors, changes 

in tax payment schedules, and other forces. In general, the 

Committee's objective, in his judgment, should continue to be 

retention of an atmosphere in which commercial banks felt under 

considerable sustained pressure to slow their rate of aggregate 

credit creation. The 10 per cent rate of credit expansion projected



7/26/66 -52

for July suggested that banks still had a considerable leeway for 

expansion, so the basic position of policy should be to continue 

gradual tightening whenever possible.  

The proposed directive apparently was intended to express 

such an objective, Mr. Ellis said. He thought Mr. Hayes' proposed 

wording changes in the first paragraph were appropriate. In 

addition, because the wording of the proviso clause in the second 

paragraph of the staff draft seemed unnecessarily clumsy, he would 

urge the Committee to consider some alternative wording such as 

"provided, however, that if required reserves expand more rapidly 

than expected and if conditions associated with the Treasury financ

ing permit, ... ." As he considered the directive, it instructed 

the Manager to hold to a posture of tightness insofar as the Treasury 

financing permitted, and to stiffen restraining pressures if reserve 

growth tended to accelerate. He would define tightness in the terms 

of the staff memoranda, with net borrowed reserves in the $400-$500 

million range, borrowings around $800 million, the Federal funds 

rate at 5-1/2 per cent or higher, and dealer loan rates above 6 per 

cent, as recently. He realized that the three-month bill rate 

probably would fluctuate rather widely, but he hoped it would 

fluctuate up--to the neighborhood of 5 per cent--more frequently 

than down. In general, he thought the Committee had not achieved 

the retardation of growth in bank credit that it had intended, and



7/26/66 -53

he would like to see occasional months in which there was no 

growth in reserves to offset the months in which reserve growth 

was unusually high.  

Mr. Mitchell asked Mr. Holland what particular expectations 

the staff had in view in suggesting that the proviso clause of the 

directive begin ". . if required reserves are stronger than 

expected." 

Mr. Holland replied that the staff started with the projec

tions contained in the blue book but recognized, of course, that 

the Committee might conclude that some different objectives were 

appropriate. Specifically, the staff had in mind the blue book 

projections for August of a 4-6 per cent annual growth rate in the 

bank credit proxy and of "small growth"--by which was meant 

practically no increase--in required reserves.  

Mr. Shepardson noted that Mr. Holmes had reported earlier 

that the New York Bank staff projected an annual rate of growth in 

the bank credit proxy of 9 per cent.  

Mr. Irons reported that economic activity in the Eleventh 

District was at a high level and continuing to move up, although 

it was not surging. Most recent indicators reflected further 

expansion. Department store sales were strong and automobile sales, 

although not as high as earlier, were generally regarded as very 

good. The year-to-year increase in employment was 5 per cent and



7/26/66 -54

unemployment recently had been running at about 3 per cent of the 

labor force. Manufacturing employment was expected to rise in 

July. Construction contract awards were up from May to June and, 

unlike the situation in other Districts, residential construction 

continued to rise in the Eleventh District. In June, the latest 

month for which figures were available, residential construction 

was 22 per cent higher than in May. According to the Reserve 

Bank's index, District industrial production was up 2.6 per cent 

in June and was running 8-1/2 per cent over a year ago. Agricultural 

conditions were difficult to assess at this time, although it 

appeared the cotton acreage this year would be about 25 per cent 

lower than last year.  

In the financial area, Mr. Irons said, total loans at 

District banks declined slightly in the last few weeks. Deposits 

were up, with demand deposits rising quite substantially. The 

unfavorable developments that had been feared at savings and loan 

associations around the mid-year interest-crediting date had not 

materialized; he had heard of no cases of real hardship. In the 

last month large negotiable CD's of District banks had increased 

about $44 million to a total somewhat over $1 billion. Bankers 

reported that loan demand continued very strong and that they were 

rationing credit. Perhaps the rationing was not as severe as 

might be desirable, but the fact remained they were turning down



7/26/66 -55

loans they would have made under other circumstances. Bank liquidity 

was somewhat less than it had been in earlier months. Banks were 

active purchasers of Federal funds, averaging net purchases of about 

$500 million in the latest week. The total dollar amount of Reserve 

Bank discounts outstanding had increased in the last three or four 

weeks but that could not be described as reflecting a trend; the 

volume of discounting often rose sharply for a short period if one 

or two large banks came to the window. The proportion of banks bor

rowing was not large, although some very small country banks that 

had not borrowed in long periods were being referred to the Reserve 

Bank by their city correspondents.  

Mr. Irons said that he had thought he had a clear understand

ing on how to operate the discount window, but was no longer sure 

that he did after receiving the Board's recent letter on the subject.  

The Bank was continuing to operate as it had been earlier, while 

trying to blend in the suggestions made. The problem rested largely 

on the question of the appropriate definition of "continuous" 

borrowing. He assumed that that question was being examined in the 

current fundamental reappraisal of the discount mechanism.  

With respect to the national economy, Mr. Irons observed 

that the rate of expansion had been high during the second quarter 

and thus far in the third quarter. In light of the staff's projec

tion for a $14 billion increase in GNP in the third quarter, with



7/26/66 -56

considerable increases in consumer, business, and defense spending, 

he did not see any let-up in sight. Pressures on prices were strong, 

interest rates had moved up substantially, and money market conditions 

were very firm. There had been some moderation in bank credit growth 

recently, but demands for bank credit continued strong.  

In Mr. Irons' judgment the Desk had handled the float problem 

created by the airlines strike extremely well, and he approved the 

technique that had been used of matched sale-purchase contracts. The 

Eleventh District had been fortunate in not experiencing a large rise 

in float; the airlines that were not struck had got the mail through, 

and the float increase was smaller than had been anticipated. That 

situation was not likely to continue, however, if the strike extended 

to another major airline.  

There was no question but that the recent firmness of monetary 

policy was biting, Mr. Irons said. While bankers perhaps were trying 

to find ways to work around the current tightness, they were not 

expecting conditions to ease. At present, the forthcoming Treasury 

refunding called for maintaining the status quo. Also, the Desk 

would have to try to avoid binds in the market. It had been success

ful in doing so in the period since the preceeding meeting, although 

he thought that additional firmness had developed in that period. He 

would like to have the present degree of firmness maintained without



7/26/66 -57

a deliberate attempt to tighten further. Net borrowed reserves in 

the $400-$500 million range would be satisfactory to him, with the 

structure of interest rates about as at present. The directors of 

the Dallas Reserve Bank had not considered an increase in the discount 

rate at their latest meeting, and he had not recommended that they 

take such action.  

Mr. Irons concluded by saying that he could accept the 

draft directive. He would prefer, however, to omit the proviso 

clause, as he had noted at another recent meeting. He was inclined 

in that direction partly because he did not have much confidence in 

the projections. It would be better, he thought, for the Committee 

simply to call for maintaining existing conditions, and to plan on 

deciding at the next meeting whether any change was required. But 

he did not feel sufficiently strongly on the matter to make a major 

issue of it.  

Mr. Swan said that total employment rose only slightly in 

the Pacific Coast States in June, despite an unexpectedly large 

increase in employment reported by aerospace firms. With the labor 

force rising somewhat faster, the rate of unemployment increased by 

one-tenth of one per cent for the second successive month. Housing 

starts in the western States, as in the rest of the country, declined 

in June and in the second quarter were 7 per cent below the first 

quarter. The extent to which the decline in housing starts of the



7/26/66 -58

past few years had been concentrated in the west, particularly 

California, was evident from the figures. From 1963 to the second 

quarter of 1966, starts in the western States dropped more than 40 

per cent, compared with a decline of between 5 and 10 per cent in 

the rest of the country. Within the area there had been some 

recent crosscurrents. In the Northwest--the States of Washington, 

Oregon, and Idaho--residential construction contract awards in the 

first five months of 1966 were higher than in the same period of 

any of the previous four years. Washington, in particular, had 

experienced a sharp increase in residential building from a low 

point in early 1965. The other component of total construction-

nonresidential construction--was continuing at relatively high 

levels. While resources were not completely transferable between 

the two kinds of construction, obviously there was some transfer

ability.  

California chartered savings and loan associations did much 

better in the first eleven days of July than in the corresponding 

period in April, Mr, Swan said, and much better than they had 

feared. While exact figures were not available, their share 

accounts apparently declined by about $100 million in the first 

third of July, compared with over $300 million in that part of 

April, and there were some indications of an increase in subsequent 

days of July, although data were not yet available. The California



7/26/66 -59

experience differed from that elsewhere; in the country as a whole 

the decline in association share accounts in early July was con

siderably larger than in April. The regional Federal Home Loan 

Bank had indicated that it had been able to make some loans 

recently to provide for an expansion in mortgage lending activity, 

rather than simply to help associations meet withdrawals. The 

relative improvement at California associations apparently was 

related to the higher rates they were now paying. By the first 

of July the typical rate on passbook accounts had risen to 5-1/4 

per cent, and on bonus accounts to 5-3/4 per cent. Like banks, 

savings and loan associations had found that advertising higher 

rates on bonus accounts led to a substantial shift to such accounts 

from passbook accounts. He suspected that most of the associations' 

customers did not realize that the 5-3/4 per cent rate was not 

guaranteed, but that rates would be established quarter by quarter; 

any reduction in the rate probably would come as a surprise to them.  

In any case, Mr. Swan continued, the California associations 

were no longer worried, as they had been some weeks ago, about the 

possibility of an immediate massive outflow of funds. Their concern 

had now shifted to the longer-run problem of the profitability of 

operations at the existing rate levels. A few noninsured savings 

and loan associations in Idaho and Utah had experienced difficulties 

recently; one had closed and at least two others had invoked the



7/26/66 -60

30-day withdrawal notice provision of State law. Those events, 

however, apparently had not had any significant secondary effects.  

In the two weeks ending July 13, Mr. Swan continued, the 

District's weekly reporting banks gained considerably more IPC 

time deposits than they lost in passbook savings deposits, but 

the net increase was offset to a considerable degree by a decline 

in public deposits. As elsewhere, indications were that loan 

demands continued strong. He suspected, however, that some of 

that demand reflected anticipations of higher interest rates and 

lessened credit availability rather than current needs for funds.  

The District's major banks continued to be net buyers of Federal 

funds. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had been quite moderate 

for some time and were negligible in the week ending July 13. As 

Mr. Irons had indicated was the case in the Eleventh District, the 

borrowing figures for the Twelfth District fluctuated sharply in 

the short-run depending on whether a large bank or two came to the 

window.  

As far as policy was concerned, Mr. Swan said, the Committee 

was faced with the Treasury refunding, and there did not appear to 

be grounds for any course other than maintaining an even keel.  

Like others who had already expressed their views, he favored net 

borrowed reserves in the $400-$500 million area. He would hope 

that the kind of increase in the bank credit proxy that was



7/26/66 -61

projected by the staff would be realized. Given the uncertainties 

associated with the Treasury financing, however, he thought the 

Committee would have to rely on the Manager's judgment to some 

degree. With respect to the proviso clause of the draft directive, 

while he agreed with those who favored some specific indication in 

terms of the change in required reserves, he felt that the second 

condition mentioned--relating to the Treasury financing--was the 

significant one, and that it rendered the condition with respect 

to required reserves less important. With that qualification, he 

would note that the phrase, "if required reserves are stronger 

than expected" struck him as unclear. Instead, he would suggest 

the wording, "if required reserves increase measurably and con

ditions associated with the Treasury financing permit. .. ." 

Such language would appear appropriate in light of the blue book 

projection for virtually no increase, and at the same time it would 

avoid the use of a specific figure.  

Mr. Galusha said he would first make a few brief observa

tions about the Ninth District economy. Appearances were that the 

economy's growth also moderated somewhat in the second quarter; but 

he would hastily add that second-quarter gains in production and 

employment were still impressive. He was unable at this time to 

say whether the District economy's growth accelerated again in 

June, but from his travels about the area he could report that the



7/26/66 -62

dominant mood was one of ebullience. That was particularly so in 

rural areas. And, all things considered, perhaps that mood was 

fitting for an economy with a relatively important agricultural 

sector. The economic implications of the philosophic revolution 

now taking place in the U.S. Department of Agriculture were only 

dimly perceived, but they were enormous and far-reaching for the 

District economy. In any event, if he had to predict national 

economic activity on the basis of the soundings he had taken about 

the District, he would have to join with the authors of the green 

book and say that the recent slowing up was not to be taken very 

seriously.  

Mr. Galusha remarked that he, too, could be ebullient-

or nearly so, since he found the mood a hard one to manage under 

the best of circumstances--if it were not for the country bankers, 

some of whom persisted in a dim view of System membership. The 

threat of withdrawal continued very real in the District. And a 

change in the structure of reserve requirements, therefore, con

tinued as something very much to be desired.  

Before turning from District developments, Mr. Galusha 

said, he would respond to the Board's letter of July 19, 1966, 

and comment briefly on country bank borrowing. On trend, it had 

been increasing--largely, he suspected, because monetary restraint 

had been increasing. This year, however, country bank borrowing



7/26/66 -63

in the District had increased a little less in relative importance 

than one would have expected on the basis of seasonal forces. The 

normal seasonal pattern was for an increase in the relative impor

tance of country bank borrowing through July. But, in June, before 

the airlines strike, it was a bit under the seasonal expectation.  

Naturally, that pleased him. It confirmed what he had been told-

that administration of the Reserve Bank's discount window had not 

changed.  

As to open market policy, the present seemed to Mr. Galusha 

to be a time for temporizing and, he thought, it would be so even 

if there were no announcement of Treasury refunding terms in the 

immediate offing. As recent events had made clear and coming 

events would, he believed, make clearer, a considerable increase 

in monetary restraint had already been affected. Moreover, the 

quarterly increases in GNP projected by the Board's staff did not 

greatly exceed those which would likely be consistent with near

stability in important components of over-all price indexes. And 

one could not be sure that the projections captured the full 

effect of what had already been done by the Committee and the 

Board. In light of the relatively weak quarter just past, the 

Committee would therefore do well to wait for additional confirma

tion of a return to more rapid growth before tightening further.



7/26/66 -64

He, for one, fully expected that that additional confirmation would 

be rather quick in coming, but he still would prefer to temporize 

now.  

Mr. Galusha concurred in Mr. Irons' statement on the 

directive proviso. In introducing just one of the additional factors 

to which the Desk might have to respond in order to maintain a 

quality of credit stringency the Committee members were all agreed 

was essential, there might be a danger of limiting the Desk's 

response to other factors in the present time of uncertainty. Like 

Mr. Swan, he was bothered by the word "stronger" in the staff's 

draft. He supposed it was meant qualitatively as well as quantita

tively, but some clarification would be helpful. He said he would 

prefer deleting the whole proviso.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that the economic picture in the 

Seventh District in July did not differ appreciably from that of 

June. New housing starts had been reduced sharply and unemployment 

had increased temporarily in auto centers. No general improvement 

in the availability.of experienced labor had occurred, however, and 

upward price pressures continued dominant in markets for industrial 

goods. The principal concern of District bankers and businessmen-

other than international uncertainties--was the extent of labor 

demands in negotiations later this year and in 1967. Labor costs



7/26/66 -65

were widely expected to rise appreciably, thereby tending to erode 

profit margins and push prices up further.  

Delivery times on steel and aluminum products had eased in 

the past month, Mr. Scanlon noted, and current and prospective 

meat supplies had risen. Some building materials were more readily 

available, and freight car shortages had eased. Those factors, 

together with new industrial facilities coming into production, 

were helping to restrain inflation but were not sufficient to 

warrant complacency. Despite the influx of students to the labor 

force, labor shortages continued. Over 60 per cent of Chicago 

employers reported that their production was limited by their 

inability to obtain an adequate labor force.  

District savings and loan associations appeared to have 

weathered the crucial midyear period with much less loss of funds 

than had been feared, Mr. Scanlon continued. Since April many of 

those associations had been building liquidity and arranging credits 

with commercial banks. Although many associations were forced to 

reduce liquid asset holdings substantially to satisfy net with

drawals of funds in July, there was relatively little need to resort 

to borrowing. Some associations that had been "out of the mortgage 

market" since April were beginning to take an active interest in 

new loan requests. During the second quarter housing permits in 

the Chicago area were 10 per cent below the same period a year



7/26/66 -66

earlier, in contrast to a rise of 40 per cent in the first quarter.  

Average interest rates on new mortgages had continued to increase 

throughout the District.  

The banking statistics, coupled with further upward movements 

in interest rates, indicated that credit demands remained very 

strong, Mr. Scanlon said. Loans had declined less than seasonally 

this month following the unusually large expansion that occurred in 

June, despite higher interest rates and more restrictive loan 

policies. Loan patterns at District banks had been similar to those 

for the U.S. for the June-July period, with substantial increases in 

loans to business and finance companies accompanied by a reduced 

pace of real estate and consumer lending. Major Chicago banks 

reached a near-record basic deficit position in the second week of 

July, but had since become somewhat more comfortable, with borrow

ings at the discount window sharply reduced. Their outstanding 

CD's had increased over the past month but by less than the tax 

period outflow.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that estimates through the first half 

of July indicated continued rapid growth of bank credit and total 

reserves. The concurrent sharp rise in interest rates indicated 

continued strong demand for credit. The increase in interest rates, 

coupled with the rise in net borrowed reserves, was consistent with 

the policy directive adopted at the Committee's June 28 meeting,



7/26/66 -67

which called for reductions in net reserve availability if required 

reserves expanded more than expected. It appeared, however, that 

credit demands were so strong that the recent policy posture had 

not been sufficiently restrictive to slow reserve growth significantly.  

He would like to see further pressure on reserve availability and 

money market conditions in an effort to achieve some further slowing 

in growth of required reserves. The Reserve Bank directors continued 

to feel an increase in the discount rate would be helpful in that 

respect. Their only question now was whether any increase should 

be more than 1/2 per cent.  

Mr. Scanlon concluded by saying that he realized that, for 

the present, Treasury financing dictated no change in policy. The 

draft directive was acceptable to him with some of the amendments 

that had been suggested. He had interpreted the clause in the 

second paragraph reading "if required reserves are stronger than 

expected" to refer to the statement in the blue book that the 

expectation was for no growth or only a very small growth in 

required reserves.  

Mr. Clay observed that for the period ahead Treasury financ

ing had to be taken into account in formulating and executing 

monetary policy, thus leading to the desirability of an even keel 

policy. Apart from Treasury financing considerations, a further 

effort to gradually reduce reserve availability would appear to be



7/26/66 -68

in order. Developments and prospects in the domestic economy gave 

continuing evidence of pressure on resources and upward movement of 

prices. That was a matter of concern in terms of both the domestic 

economy and the international balance of payments. The goal was not 

one of increasing interest rates, but further action to reduce 

reserve availability presumably would have such an impact on interest 

rates.  

One rate change that was needed was an increase in the 

Federal Reserve discount rate, Mr. Clay said. There were under

standable reasons for not raising the discount rate in early July, 

and forthcoming Treasury financing activity was an additional factor 

that would seem to prevent such action in the next few weeks. Unless 

economic and financial developments led to a substantial reversal in 

money and capital markets, he thought that serious consideration 

should be given to an increase in the discount rate following the 

Treasury financing. The present situation put a large premium on 

borrowing at the Federal Reserve Banks and placed too much reliance 

on discount window administration. The draft economic policy direc

tive was acceptable to Mr. Clay.  

Mr. Heflin said there had been no really significant changes 

in the Fifth District except for a number of developments that 

underscored the difficulties of projecting Government expenditures.  

The textile industry continued under pressure from military demands



7/26/66 -69

for a wide range of goods, and the tobacco industry apparently was 

receiving a significant stimulus from military demands for cigarettes 

for shipment to forces overseas. It was highly unlikely, however, 

that the pressures on textiles and tobacco would continue at present 

levels; in both industries there was a feeling that, because of the 

heavy recent buying, future Government purchases would not be as 

large as had been thought.  

More generally, Mr. Heflin continued, economic activity 

continued at a high level in the District. The Reserve Bank's 

latest business survey showed further employment gains in both the 

manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors. In early June insured 

unemployment was at or near record lows throughout the District.  

Dealers at the recent Southern Furniture Market were reported to be 

bullish regarding the fall sales outlook, and the lumber industry 

was currently enjoying prosperity, but both were concerned about 

the probable effects on them of the slowdown in housing starts.  

Loan demand was heavy and growing, Mr. Heflin remarked.  

However, there had been practically no pressure at the discount 

window except on the part of a few banks that had tended to borrow 

heavily in the past. The Reserve Bank had discussed the situation 

with a number of those banks recently, as it had had to on previous 

occasions.



7/26/66

At the national level, it seemed to Mr. Heflin that the 

moderating trend that had started in April was continuing. That 

conclusion differed from the one reached by the Board's staff in 

the green book, perhaps because the staff at the Richmond Bank 

emphasized past performance while the Board's staff emphasized 

future prospects. That made it appear that two different periods 

were under consideration, as, to some extent, there were. To him, 

there was real significance in the second-quarter drop-offs in 

growth rates of GNP by a third, industrial production by a half, 

and payroll employment by somewhat more than half. The production 

and sale of automobiles had continued down except for a modest 

rise in June, and housing starts and expenditures for new construc

tion continued to fall. New orders for durable goods had registered 

small declines in two of the past three months and, while unfilled 

orders continued to grow, the rate of growth in the second quarter 

was appreciably below that of the first quarter.  

On the other side of the picture, Mr. Heflin continued, 

there were only a few major series which showed an accelerating 

upward trend. Inventories seemed to be moving up, if somewhat 

erratically. Outlays for Medicare would be large and rising and 

the recent increases in military and civil service pay scales 

would add to purchasing power. There also was the ever-present 

possibility of sharply higher defense expenditures because of

-70-



7/26/66 -71

escalation in Vietnam. But, while the picture was not clear, on 

balance the areas that showed declines or slower rates of growth 

seemed to outweigh those that showed strength.  

With respect to policy, Mr. Heflin remarked that money 

conditions now were the tightest in a generation. Two months ago 

the Committee had adopted essentially a holding policy, waiting to 

see if the emerging trends toward moderation would continue and 

grow. It seemed to him that those trends had continued and had 

not been offset by accelerating inflationary trends elsewhere.  

With interest rates and credit availability at their present 

levels, monetary policy would seem to be doing about all it could 

to restrain inflation without taking undue risks of precipitating 

a collapse. The forthcoming Treasury financing and the new austerity 

program recently inaugurated by the British Government also argued 

against further tightening.  

Mr. Heflin said he would associate himself with Mr. Irons' 

position that it would be desirable to eliminate the proviso clause 

in the draft directive.  

Mr. Shepardson said that, notwithstanding the lower rates 

of expansion in some areas that had been mentioned, it seemed to 

him that the over-all pressures in the economy were continuing and 

that the prospects were for further expansion at an excessive rate.  

Were it not for the constraint imposed by the Treasury financing he



7/26/66 -72

would consider it entirely in order to press for a reduction in 

credit availability. Given that constraint, however, he thought the 

proviso clause of the draft directive was appropriate. He would 

interpret the directive in terms of figures similar to those men

tioned by Mr. Ellis. He thought it important, to the extent the 

Treasury financing permitted, for the Desk to avoid slippages such 

as had occurred from time to time in the past when the Committee 

had been seeking to maintain reduced reserve availability.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he did not have quite as much 

confidence as the staff did in the projections. Nevertheless, like 

Mr. Shepardson he thought a little more firming of conditions would 

be desirable. Mr. Hayes' amendments to the first paragraph of the 

draft directive were acceptable to him. In the second paragraph he 

(Mr. Mitchell) would replace the language after the semicolon with 

the following: "however, if conditions associated with the Treasury 

financing permit, operations shall be conducted with a view to 

attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve availability, 

some further firming of money market conditions, and a lesser growth 

in money supply and required reserves than projected." He had some 

question about the desirability of accepting a projection as a policy 

goal. Also, he believed that there was real danger of some slippage 

in August, and he would like to avoid it.



7/26/66

On the question of the discount rate, Mr. Mitchell said, he 

was not in town when the Board acted on the increases voted by the 

directors of several Reserve Banks, and he had not yet had an oppor

tunity to review the Board's reasons for not approving those increases.  

He could say, however, that in his view a discount rate increase of 

1/2 per cent would not make much sense at this time and he doubted 

whether a I per cent increase would make sense as of today. But, 

if there were to be an increase, he would consider a rise of 1 per 

cent to be far more appropriate than one of 1/2 per cent.  

Mr. Maisel said that the period since the June 28 meeting 

had been more favorable with respect to credit expansion than the 

Committee had feared. While in his view the expansion was slightly 

larger than that contemplated in the proviso implementation clause, 

the Desk was to be congratulated particularly because of the 

emergency conditions under which it had to work. The Committee was 

rapidly approaching a point where its major monetary variables would 

be on the proper growth path. If the projected changes shown in 

the blue book for required reserves and the bank credit proxy were 

held to from now until the next meeting, the Committee would have 

come close to that path. From then on, a normal growth in those 

variables should be maintained. That might allow the credit markets 

to stabilize.

-73-



7/26/66 -74

In the current situation, Mr. Maisel continued, variables 

such as total deposits at all institutions and liquid assets were 

already below a desirable growth path. The staff had made clear 

that there had also been a slowdown in growth in total credit.  

The main difficulties were in business loans, where the rate of 

increase was still far above a normal and satisfactory level.  

In considering a possible discount rate change, Mr. Maisel 

said, it was necessary to be certain that the decision was made in 

the light of the total economy and not primarily for technical 

market or monetary reasons. What seemed reasonable on technical 

grounds might be drastic in terms of the economy. The past two 

weeks had shown that the market could adjust technically to the 

System's action or lack of action. As the Manager had made clear, 

the problems of the market were not primarily that of the discount 

rate. Since there was no way of estimating, even roughly, what the 

announcement effects of a change would be, the utmost efforts should 

be made to avoid having to run the danger of a move concerning whose 

impact the System was basically ignorant. The increased flexibility 

of Desk operations and market moves gained in this period should be 

extremely advantageous for the future.  

The Committee should not be concerned even if the rate of 

borrowing at the discount window doubled, Mr. Maisel continued, nor 

about the fact that the discount rate might be advantageous for



7/26/66 -75

borrowers. The Committee's concern was clearly with the economy. It 

should not place undue importance on minor costs or profit factors in 

comparison to the whole market. Larger borrowings would give the 

opportunity to each of the banks in the System to stress the need for 

more careful rationing of business loans and other loans that had a 

major inflationary impact at the moment.  

In concluding, Mr. Maisel said that the total impact on both 

the economy and monetary policy of maintaining the present posture 

should be advantageous in comparison to a change.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would like to second Mr. Hayes' expres

sion of concern regarding the balance of payments. In fact, he would 

suggest that the directive show that the Committee had taken explicit 

note of the extent to which the U.S. balance of payments figures were 

being window-dressed. There had been considerable discussion of 

British window-dressing today, and it would be desirable to recognize 

that the U.S. was doing the same. For that purpose he suggested 

revising the balance of payments sentence in the first paragraph of 

the draft directive to read as follows: "Despite the apparent 

statistical improvement resulting from special official transactions, 

the balance of payments situation continues to reflect a heavy under

lying deficit." 

Statistics apart, Mr. Brimmer continued, he agreed that the 

underlying balance of payments situation was serious and the need for



7/26/66 -76

progress was as real as ever. But he did not necessarily agree with 

Mr. Coombs that U.S. direct investment abroad and the tourism gap 

were the most important areas for attack. In his judgment there were 

some other areas that would have to be considered if the present 

serious situation was to be combatted, but he would not take time to 

catalogue them now.  

Mr. Brimmer indicated that he, too, thought the Desk's recent 

performance had been admirable--especially the manner in which the 

technique of matched sales-purchase contracts had been used to deal 

with the rise in float. He thought the Committee had made the right 

decision in approving use of that technique at its July 11 telephone 

conference, and that it should take note of how well the operation 

had been carried out. He had suggested that the Desk keep close 

track of the costs of the operation, and he was pleased to note from 

Mr. Holmes' memorandum of July 22 that the costs were quite small.  

Mr. Brimmer remarked that he had gone to some lengths 

recently to make public in specific fashion his views on what should 

be done about growth in bank loans. He felt as strongly now as he 

had a week ago that the Committee should not simply focus on over-all 

bank credit--although he thought that was growing too rapidly--but 

should consider its composition, to ensure that restraint did not 

bear unduly heavily on any one sector. It also was important to 

note the extent to which monetary policy was carrying the burden of



7/26/66 -77

restraint. While he did not expect a tax increase nor elimination 

of the investment tax credit in the immediate future, he felt that 

sight should not be lost of their desirability.  

With respect to policy, Mr. Brimmer thought it was necessary 

to look beyond the coming four weeks; indeed, he hoped the Committee's 

procedures would evolve in the direction of planning ahead for two 

or three policy periods rather than for the single period until the 

next meeting. Thus, while he recognized the need for even keel 

during the Treasury financing, he thought that further restraint 

would be required after the financing. Because any slippage in the 

coming period would make subsequent firming more difficult, he urged 

the Manager to keep slippage to a minimum. A very modest increase 

in required reserves would be good, and no increase at all would be 

better. Net borrowed reserves should be at the deeper end of the 

$400-$500 million range. In sum, he would hold to as much firmness 

as possible during the financing and plan on proceeding with further 

gradual and orderly tightening afterward.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would not go into the subject of the 

discount rate today except to note that he personally did not con

sider it obsolete as an instrument of monetary policy. In his 

judgment it should continue to be used along with the other policy 

instruments, and it would be appropriate for the System to again 

consider the desirability of an increase when the time was propitious.



7/26/66 -78

Finally, Mr. Brimmer said, the Committee should take into 

account the current discussions in Congress of possible means to 

moderate rate competition among financial institutions. While bills 

currently under discussion would not necessarily be enacted in their 

present form, it was quite likely that some expression of a Congres

sional intent to moderate competition would be forthcoming soon, 

perhaps before the Committee met next.  

Mr. Hickman commented that although business activity 

moderated in the second quarter, June was decidedly stronger than 

April and May, and the latest readings indicated a fast pace for 

July. While average second-quarter performance might be acceptable 

if it could be maintained, danger signals continued to predominate 

in major sectors. Defense spending and business spending were point

ing sharply upward and indications were that GNP advances in the 

third and fourth quarters would accelerate.  

Price developments continued to be disquieting, Mr. Hickman 

said. The 0.9 per cent increase in the GNP deflator during each of 

the past two quarters was well above tolerable limits. Price rises 

had accounted for increasingly larger shares of recent quarterly 

gains in GNP, from 20 per cent of the gain in the fourth quarter of 

last year to 40 per cent in the first quarter, and to 60 per cent in 

the second quarter. The share of the GNP gain in the second quarter 

accounted for by price changes was the largest since the first



7/26/66 -79

quarter of 1961, except for the abnormal fourth quarter of 1964.  

Prices of producers' equipment, in particular, continued to rise 

at an uncomfortably high rate and prices of consumer services were 

increasing steadily. With the labor market tight and with a large 

number of wage contracts to be renegotiated in the months ahead, 

the country could easily drift into cost-push inflation in 1967.  

Given that environment, Mr. Hickman thought it was fortunate 

that some economic series were declining and others were showing 

little further advance. Signs of moderation were evident in such 

areas as construction spending, housing starts, length of the 

average workweek, new orders for durable goods, and retail sales.  

The airline strike, now in its third week, was bullish on float but 

had provided some fortuitous assistance in cooling off the economic 

advance.  

With the Treasury refunding operation in August scheduled 

to be announced later this week, Mr. Hikkman [sic] felt that no change in 

monetary policy was indicated for the next few weeks. Nonetheless, 

the July projections for reserves and bank credit were very strong, 

and everything possible should be done to prevent the System from 

losing ground. Once the Treasury refunding was out of the way, the 

directors of the Cleveland Reserve Bank would probably vote once 

again to increase the discount rate by one-half per cent to help 

restrain excessive use of the discount window, which was occurring



7/26/66 -80

in some Districts. No further change in Regulation Q was indicated.  

The present ceiling, in combination with higher money rates--induced 

by the higher discount rate, if and when it was approved by the Board 

of Governors--would serve as a check on bank lending, particularly 

in the money centers, where it had been too buoyant.  

In addition, Mr. Hickman continued, some sort of fiscal 

policy action was needed, as Mr. Brimmer had suggested, to help 

maintain balanced growth in the period ahead. His own preference 

would be for an across-the-board increase in income taxes, both 

personal and corporate. The great danger now facing the U.S.  

economy was another surge of demand such as had been experienced in 

the fourth quarter of 1965 and the first quarter of 1966. The 

deterioration in the U.S. trade account was an additional reason 

why prompt action should be taken now to prevent the economy from 

further inflationary overheating.  

Mr. Hickman said he favored the staff's draft directive, 

including the proviso, with the hope that the credit proxy would be 

held in August to an annual rate of increase of no more than 4 or 6 

per cent.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that despite continued evidences of some 

slowing--particularly in autos and housing--no significant relief 

from pressures at work in the national economy had yet appeared.  

A month ago there were signs that some sectors of the Third District



7/26/66 -81

economy might be slackening, but latest information suggested they 

were a false alarm. In that kind of atmosphere, perhaps the best 

kind of news that could be expected was failure of fears to materi

alize. That seemed to have been the case with savings flows in July.  

In the Philadelphia area, commercial banks gained substantially, 

mutual savings banks lost fairly heavy amounts, and savings and loan 

associations lost still more. But all of the mutuals held off from 

raising rates from the level of 4-1/4 per cent which now had pre

vailed for a considerable time, and a few savings and loan 

associations also held their rates at that level. The general 

feeling of savings institutions in the area was that, given their 

relatively low rates, they had passed through the period with no 

dire results.  

Having been on the conference call since the last meeting 

of the Committee, Mr. Bopp said, he had worried along with the Manager 

during the airline strike and had shared his relief at the way things 

had worked out to date. The innovation of matched sale-purchase 

contracts looked like a useful addition to the tool kit.  

When it came to the outlook for the flow of money and credit, 

Mr. Bopp wished he could see equally favorable outcomes. Although 

the money supply certainly looked better for July, bank credit was 

probably a more meaningful measure at this time. As nearly as he 

could determine, demands for bank credit were still very strong and



7/26/66 -82

were likely to remain so. To get some quantitative idea of what 

might lie ahead, the Reserve Bank had asked the Philadelphia commer

cial banks for their forecasts of loan volume. The state of their 

forecasting art was rather rudimentary, so the results had to be 

interpreted with allowance for considerable error. They indicated, 

however, that loan volume was expected to rise further in the third 

quarter but at a slower rate than in the second quarter. That was 

partly seasonal, but it also reflected management policy of restraint 

and confirmed what the Reserve Bank had learned from the survey of 

lending practices.  

Given the stubbornness of credit flows in responding to 

restrictive policy to date, Mr. Bopp said, it was perhaps question

able whether the current degree of pressure on marginal reserve 

positions would achieve a more reasonable rate of growth of credit 

in the future. But net borrowed reserves had, after all, been 

increased to the highest level since 1959, and if the Committee 

simply maintained its present posture increasing credit demands 

would force still greater tightness. Rising rates would press 

harder on Regulation Q ceilings and force more banks to the discount 

window. On the other hand, if bank credit and required reserves 

continued to increase rapidly, it might be necessary to push some

what further in reducing marginal reserve availability. On that 

reasoning, and in consideration of the forthcoming Treasury



7/26/66 -83

financing, he accepted the staff's draft directive, as modified by 

Messrs. Hayes, Mitchell, and Brimmer.  

Mr. Bopp thought that an increase in the discount rate of 

1/2 per cent would be desirable at the earliest feasible time. He 

noted that the directors of the Philadelphia Reserve Bank had voted 

for such an increase on July 21.  

Mr. Kimbrel observed that four weeks ago he had reported 

that expansionary forces in the Sixth District had diminished in 

intensity. The signposts now seen still did not indicate a return 

to the ebullient growth of last winter. Yet, it was also evident 

that business activity had advanced more swiftly in June than in 

early spring. Employment gains had become larger, and automobile 

sales increased 7 per cent to just a shade below last year's level.  

Looking ahead, the auto sales picture was clouded by heavy dealer 

inventories, which for some major makes were equivalent to a two

months' supply. A definitely distressing factor was the airlines 

strike, which already had had noticeable effects on Florida's 

tourist industry. Should that walkout be settled on terms greatly 

in excess of the guidelines, its impact, of course, could become 

far more serious than it was now.  

Mr. Kimbrel said that bright expectations in residential 

housing were hard to find. Significant cutbacks had occurred in 

many places, especially in New Orleans, Nashville, and Huntsville.



7/26/66 -84

Except in Atlanta, the chief depressants had been overbuilding in the 

past and reduced demand due to location shifts in defense and space 

activity. Only in Atlanta had tight mortgage money been a critical 

factor. On conventional mortgages of savings and loan associations, 

the most frequently reported rate in Atlanta was now 6-3/4 per cent, 

while for some associations the minimum lending rate was 7 per cent.  

Fierce competition between banks and savings and loan associations 

had subsided somewhat. And because of the issuance of new 5 per 

cent certificates, most savings and loan associations managed to 

get by the June 30 dividend period with smaller savings losses than 

last quarter. Construction volume, as indicated by housing starts, 

however, did not yet fully reflect the lagging effects of stringency 

in the mortgage market.  

Mr. Kimbrel indicated that the banking data were difficult 

to interpret because of revisions in coverage, but there was some 

indication that loan growth at the larger banks slowed down in the 

first half of July, as some banks had difficulty in retaining their 

negotiable CD's. On the other hand, smaller banks were still 

experiencing very strong loan expansion, and their time deposit 

growth continued without letup. Although credit tightening affected 

the smaller banks last, it would appear that they should soon begin 

to feel those pressures to an increasing extent even without more 

credit restraint. Greater prevalence of those conditions in the



7/26/66 -85

District would perhaps suggest that the greatest concern should be 

with maintaining the present momentum rather than with intensifying 

restraint.  

Mr. Francis noted that total demand for goods and services 

had risen about 9 per cent in the past year. That sharp rise in 

demand had been excessive in view of the limited amount of idle 

capacity and the growth rates in labor, capital, and technology.  

As a result the economy had suffered many inefficiencies due to the 

strain on its resources, the nation's balance of payments with other 

countries had deteriorated, and prices had been rising at an 

accelerating rate. During 1965, each 1 per cent annual rate of 

increase in real output had been accompanied by a 0.2 per cent 

rise in prices; from the fourth quarter of last year to the first 

quarter of this year each 1 per cent gain had been accompanied by 

a 0.6 per cent rise in prices; from the first quarter to the third

quarter figures projected by the staff, each 1 per cent rise in real 

product would be accompanied by a 1.1 per cent rise in prices.  

The strong rise in total demand had been in part the result 

of very stimulative fiscal actions flowing chiefly from the Vietnam 

conflict, Mr. Francis said. The high employment budget, which 

apparently was the best measure of the influence of Government 

actions on total demand, ran at about a $7 billion surplus in the 

first half of 1965 and had since been at about a $1 billion surplus



7/26/66 -86

level. Also, considered after the fact, it was possible that in the 

absence of appropriate fiscal restraint monetary actions could have 

prevented so great a rise of total demand. Bank reserves, bank 

credit, and the money supply had all risen very rapidly during the 

past year. Although market interest rates had gone up, the rise had 

not been reflected in the real price of borrowed funds to the lender 

and the real return to the saver since the effect of the higher rate 

of inflation on the value of money had more than offset the rise in 

interest rates.  

Now the use of resources was becoming still more strained, 

Mr. Francis continued. Investment plans of business were unabated, 

and it appeared that the Federal budget stance was becoming increas

ingly stimulative. He noted that the staff estimate for 

current-dollar GNP in the third quarter was an annual rate of $746 

billion, up at an 8 per cent annual rate. It seemed to him that, 

unless Government policy was altered, the prospects were for greater 

surges of total demand. He feared that with the more stimulative 

Federal budget and acceleration of personal income, consumer 

spending, and business fixed investment, total demand would push 

forward more rapidly than at any time in the past few years, while 

the available resources for expansion of real product would be less 

than at any other recent time. Also, the prospects were for continued 

deterioration of the U.S. international payments situation.



7/26/66 -87

Accordingly, Mr. Francis remarked, there was even greater 

need for fiscal restraint, and pending that, for monetary management 

to do whatever it could to restrain total demand. It was necessary 

to keep total demand from rising at an 8 or 9 per cent rate when 

potentialities for increasing real product were expanding at only a 

4 per cent rate. It would seem appropriate for bank reserves, bank 

credit, and money to rise at much slower rates than they had over 

the past year. Recently there appeared to have been some moderation 

in the growth rate in money, but the slowdown might have been only 

the temporary result of an unusually high Treasury balance. He 

thought that slower growth in money was desirable and that the Com

mittee needed to consider the desirability of keeping down the 

growth rate as Treasury balances were again reduced.  

Mr. Francis observed that the St. Louis Reserve Bank's 

board of directors, as expressed by their action on July 14 in 

raising the discount rate by one-half on one per cent, viewed the 

current situation about as expressed by Messrs. Hayes and Ellis on 

behalf of their directors. He noted that he had already responded 

to the Board's letter with reference to discounts and would not 

comment further on that subject. No problems had developed at 

Eighth District savings and loan associations during the recent 

period.



7/26/66

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

Clearly, open market operations between now and the 
next meeting of the Committee are going to have to be 
governed by "even keel" considerations. Just how long 
and how severely restraining those considerations will 
be cannot be predicted as yet, for we do not even know 
the Treasury's proposed refinancing terms for certain, 
let alone the question of market response thereto.  
Basically, therefore, we shall have to rely on the Man
ager's judgment of the severity of the "even keel" 
limitations as events unfold.  

However, the developments I see taking place in the 
economy at large make me want to urge the Manager to 
maintain as tight a money and credit tone as he can with
in that "even keel" constraint. The resurgence in 
business activity following the second quarter slowdown, 
the continuing substantial rise in prices, and the 
evident labor market pressures all argue for a policy 
of monetary tightness. Looking at the financial system, 
one sees a good many signs of tightness already present-

enough so that I would not want to add substantially to 

those pressures just now--but I certainly favor keeping 

up the pressure on reserve positions to guard against 
any backsliding in the posture of monetary restraint.  

In fact, if expansion in bank credit and aggregate 
reserves threatens to get out of hand, I would not 

hesitate to deepen net borrowed reserves to $500 million 

or even a shade beyond. I would not want to countenance 

any more than a very short run expansion in reserves at 
a time of a Treasury financing, for cash or otherwise.  

Neither domestic economic activity, price movements, nor 
the balance of payments gives any reason for lessening 

our concern over the pace of aggregate reserve expansion.  

Since our instructions to the Manager are often cast 

in nautical terms, let me say that I am prepared to have 

us maintain an "even keel" during this period, but I also 

very much want us to keep a "taut ship" as well. In 

landlubber language, this means that I favor the draft 
directive as presented by the staff, including the proviso.  

Now for a word concerning the proviso. What we 
should be aiming at, in our deliberations, is the way in 

which to reduce or absorb some of the excess demand in the 
economy. We should seek to do this by curbing the expan
sion of bank credit--not just by helping to shove interest

-88-



rates higher. Since December, our record in this regard 
(i.e., contracting the expansion of credit) has not been 
too good. But it has been better since we began using 
the proviso--since we began focusing attention on the rate 
of expansion of bank credit as evidenced by increases in 
required reserves.  

As I understand the proviso, what we are trying to 
do is to build into the directive some protection against 
an unduly large expansion in bank reserves. At other 
times, it might be protection against an unduly small 
expansion. Under current circumstances, all we are doing 
is saying to the Manager that if required reserves look as 
though they are growing faster than some rate, he should 
deepen net borrowed reserves in order to discourage faster 
growth. Our ability to do this obviously does not depend 
on whether staff projections turn out to be right or 
wrong. While current projections provide a starting point 
for our decision, the rate of growth in required reserves 
that is of concern to the Manager is evidently the rate 
the Committee chooses.  

For my part, I would be willing to tolerate whatever 
small growth in "required" is consistent with 4 to 6 per 
cent bank credit growth--which happens to be the expecta
tion of our staff. With such growth over the next few 
weeks, I would not make special efforts to deepen net 
borrowed reserves beyond the $400-$500 million range.  
But if growth in required reserves and bank credit became 
more rapid, I would not hesitate to deepen beyond $500 
million, bearing only in mind the limitations necessitated 
by the Treasury financing operation.  

Mr. Robertson added that since a number of comments had 

been made on the discount rate he thought he should comment also.  

In his judgment every board of directors should make whatever 

decision it thought was right. So long as he was in his present 

position--in the absence of Chairman Martin--he would never tell 

any Reserve Bank President what his Bank should do with respect to 

discount rates. On the other hand, the Board itself had to make

7/26/66 -89-



7/26/66 -90

decisions in the light of the picture as it saw it, and the decision 

of the Board might differ from that of the Banks. That should not 

create any animosity between the Board and the Banks. The Board's 

decision could not be based solely on whether the discount rate 

was out of line with market rates; the problem was much deeper than 

that. It was necessary to recognize that there was sentiment in the 

Administration against escalation of interest rates, and a tendency 

to view discount rate increases as contributing to such escalation.  

The System had to have a strong case before risking any enlargement 

of that feeling. If the case was good, the risk should be taken; 

otherwise, it should not be. The discount rate obviously was out 

of line with market rates, but no one had made a case persuasive to 

him that additional price action was needed to operate the discount 

window effectively. The volume of borrowing had not been unusually 

large for a period such as the present; it was not nearly as large 

as it had been in 1959, for example. It was his personal view that 

the System would have much more control over lending by member banks 

if they were borrowing in larger amounts and open market operations 

were being relied on less to supply reserves. Of course, in saying 

that the price mechanism was not needed now to operate the discount 

window effectively he was assuming that the situation was still as 

reported by the Presidents recently--namely, that the smaller banks, 

which were doing much of the borrowing, were not borrowing and con

currently selling Federal funds to the large city banks, And he



7/26/66 -91 

assumed that the discount windows were being watched with that 

possibility in mind.  

The next time the discount rate came up for consideration, 

Mr. Robertson said, the Reserve Banks should make their own 

decisions. The Board would do the same in light of what action it 

thought, from its own vantage point, would be in the best interests 

of the country. While there might be differences of opinion reflect

ing differences in points of view, he would hope that there would 

be no resulting animosity.  

The whole Administration was involved in the effort to 

stop the escalation of interest rates, Mr. Robertson continued, 

and recently he had attended many meetings on the subject with 

representatives of various parts of the Government. The general 

feeling was that the "rate race"--if one might call it that--had 

to be stopped, because if it were not nonbank financial institutions 

would find themselves in great difficulty perhaps 6 months or a year 

hence, and ultimately irreparable harm would be done to the whole 

financial system, including banks. It also was thought that the 

impact of restrictive monetary policy was being felt too much in 

one area. In sum, the view was that the rate race had to stop.  

As the Committee knew, the Board had taken action with respect to 

multiple maturity time deposits, and it also had recommended 

legislation that would give the Federal Reserve, the Federal



7/26/66 -92

Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board 

discretionary authority to set ceiling rates on any reasonable basis 

they deemed appropriate.  

Mr. Robertson then summarized recent discussions with the 

Administration, and between the Administration and members of 

Congress, regarding alternative forms of possible legislation on 

deposit interest rates.  

Mr. Hayes commented that there were a number of reasons for 

profound concern at present, including the uncomfortable interna

tional position of the dollar, the absence of tax action, and the 

lonely position of monetary policy. He was happy that Mr. Robertson 

had said what he had about the discount rate, and he (Mr. Hayes) was 

sure that there was no animosity on the part of the Reserve Banks as 

a result of the Board's recent decision.  

The Committee's consensus on policy today seemed relatively 

clear, Mr. Hayes said. There was a general wish to keep a tight 

rein on credit expansion, and a general awareness that the Committee's 

ability to act in that area was considerably restricted by the Treasury 

financing and the consequent need to maintain an even keel. He thought 

it would not prove too difficult to develop language for the directive 

that would meet the wishes of a majority of the Committee.  

A discussion of the wording of the first paragraph of the 

directive followed, in the course of which it was agreed to accept



7/26/66 -93

Mr. Hayes' suggestion for the first sentence and a modified version 

of Mr. Brimmer's suggestion for the sentence referring to the balance 

of payments.  

Mr. Hayes then noted that a number of changes had been sug

gested in the staff's draft of the second paragraph of the directive, 

most of which were primarily matters of wording. However, Mr.  

Mitchell had suggested a more substantive change, calling for further 

firming to the extent that the Treasury financing permitted. As he 

understood the views expressed, a majority wanted to make any further 

firming contingent on developments with respect to required reserves 

as well as on conditions associated with the financing.  

Mr. Mitchell said that he would be prepared to accept a 

second paragraph along the lines of the staff draft if it was clear 

that a majority did not favor language such as he had proposed. He 

suggested that an expression of views be called for with respect to 

his proposed language.  

Mr. Shepardson also spoke in favor of a poll of the Committee 

on the question.  

At Mr. Hayes' request, the Secretary then polled the Commit

tee. Messrs. Bopp, Brimmer, Mitchell, and Shepardson indicated that 

they would prefer the language Mr. Mitchell had proposed, and the 

other six members indicated that they would not.



7/26/66

The Committee then agreed upon a second paragraph consisting 

of the staff draft with wording changes of the kind suggested by 

Mr. Ellis.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the Sys
tem Account in accordance with the 
following current economic policy 
directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 

activity appears to be expanding somewhat more rapidly 

than in the second quarter despite weakness in residen

tial construction, with industrial prices rising further.  

Total credit demands continue strong and financial markets, 

particularly for mortgages, remain tight. Despite the 

statistical improvement resulting largely from special 

transactions, the balance of payments situation continues 

to reflect a sizable underlying deficit. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist 

inflationary pressures and to strengthen efforts to restore 

reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, 
by restricting the growth in the reserve base, bank credit, 

and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account 

the forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 

be conducted with a view to maintaining about the current 

state of net reserve availability and related money market 

conditions; provided, however, that if required reserves 

expand more rapidly than expected and if conditions 

associated with the Treasury financing permit, operations 

shall be conducted with a view to attaining some further 

gradual reduction in net reserve availability and firming 

of money market conditions.

-94-



7/26/66 -95

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, August 23, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 25, 1966 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 

Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on July 26, 1966.  

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is expand

ing somewhat more rapidly than in the second quarter despite weakness 
in residential construction, with industrial prices rising further.  
Total credit demands continue strong and financial markets, particu
larly for mortgages, remain tight. The balance of payments continues 

in deficit. In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Commit
tee's policy to resist inflationary pressures and to strengthen 
efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 

of payments, by restricting the growth in the reserve base, bank 

credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, while taking into account the 

forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market operations until 
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 

maintaining about the current state of net reserve availability and 
related money market conditions; provided, however, that if required 
reserves are stronger than expected and conditions associated with 
the Treasury financing permit, operations shall be conducted with a 
view to attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve 
availability and firming of money market conditions.


