









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 13, 1966, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Shepardson 
Wayne, Alternate for Mr. Bopp

Messrs. Scanlon and Swan, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee, 

Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Hersey and Reynolds, Advisers, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



12/13/66 -2

Mr. Lewis, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Ratchford, Brandt, 
Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, 
Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. MacLaury, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Stiles, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
held on November 22, 1966, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions 

and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign 

currencies for the period November 22 through December 7, 1966, 

and a supplemental report for December 8 through 12, 1966. Copies 

of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

noted that the Treasury gold stock remained unchanged this week 

following a $100 million drop two weeks ago. The Stabilization 

Fund had sufficient gold on hand to take care of the second Italian 

purchase of $30 million expected this month without having to show



12/13/66 -3

any further decline in the stock before the end of the year. The 

London gold market naturally reflected the ups and downs of the 

Rhodesian crisis, although the fixing price remained in a rel

atively narrow range ($35.15-1/2 - 17-1/2). Trading was 

generally heavy whenever headlines concerning the Rhodesian crisis 

appeared and the possibility of sanctions against South Africa 

came to the fore, and on balance the gold pool lost about $12 

million during the period. That meant that there was still $25 

million in the pool, not counting the $50 million supplement that 

was also available. That could go quickly, of course, if there 

should be a blow-up in the discussions of the Rhodesian situation.  

Events since the last meeting had demonstrated the useful

ness of the preparations made to meet year-end pressures, Mr. MacLaury 

said. Those pressures developed suddenly and with great intensity 

on November 29 when one-month trading began for over-the-year-end 

dates. Euro-dollar rates for maturities of one month and over 

jumped by a full percentage point--from 6-1/2 per cent to 7-1/2 per 

cent--and the scramble for funds in the Euro-dollar market was 

hectic. As anticipated, the sudden demand for funds put spot 

sterling under strain; and the Bank of England had to provide 

nearly $50 million in spot support of the pound on that day. Under 

the circumstances, the Account Management decided to put into 

operation immediately the various techniques that previously had



12/13/66 -4

been agreed upon to deal with such a situation. The Swiss National 

Bank, which up until that time had been buying dollars spot only, 

announced that it would meet the temporary demand for Swiss francs 

by taking in dollars on a covered basis without cost to the banks, 

i.e., through flat swaps. The dollars taken in were to be redepos

ited in the Euro-dollar market, like the dollars previously bought 

outright. That same day, November 29, the Bank for International 

Settlements began placing sizable amounts of new money in the Euro

dollar market, acquiring the dollars through activation of its 

swap facility with the Federal Reserve in currencies other than 

Swiss francs. Finally, in New York, the Federal Reserve began 

purchasing spot sterling against forward sale for delivery after 

year-end, acquiring that day a total of $28 million for System 

and Treasury accounts combined.  

That three-pronged attack, Mr. MacLaury said, coming as an 

immediate and coordinated official response to sudden market 

pressures, did much to relieve the pressures themselves, but it 

was equally important psychologically as a demonstration that the 

markets would not be left to fend for themselves over year-end.  

Including operations prior to November 29, the Swiss National Bank 

had thus far replaced in the Euro-market a total of about $200 

million, partly through the BIS. In addition, the BIS had drawn 

the full $200 million under its swap arrangement with the System



12/13/66 -5

and placed those new funds in the Euro-market, as well as serving, 

as it had in the past, as a channel for dollar deposits of central 

banks other than the Swiss National Bank. With Euro-market pressures 

pretty well under control, and with the strain on sterling from 

that source considerably alleviated, it was not necessary for the 

System to extend its swap purchases of sterling beyond November 30, 

by which time a total of $36 million had been acquired for the 

System and the Treasury together.  

Although sterling had been fairly well insulated from year

end pressures by the operations he had just mentioned, Mr. MacLaury 

continued, it nevertheless felt the impact of the Rhodesian crisis.  

All things considered, the markets seemed to have taken the day-to

day swings in headlines from unwarranted optimism to undue pessimism 

on that issue in better stride than one might have expected. So 

far, at least, British reserves on balance had not suffered from 

the shifting prospects for settlement or sanctions; the British 

had recouped all of the losses they incurred when the Rhodesian 

rejection of the proposed settlement was announced. Of course, it 

was impossible to tell how much better their reserves might have 

looked had it not been for that problem. But that volatile issue 

remained potentially explosive and made it difficult to predict 

how the month might turn out for sterling reserves.



12/13/66 -6

As the Committee knew, Mr. MacLaury said, November turned 

out better for the British than appeared likely at the time of the 

previous Committee meeting. In addition to announcing a reserve 

gain of $64 million they were able to liquidate about $90 million 

in short-term debt, as well as to liquidate a sizable amount of 

forward commitments. It was to be hoped that December would turn 

out as well, and that further repayments of short-term debt could 

be made. There were two hopeful signs. First, at the meeting in 

Basle this past weekend the package of credits of $400 million 

made available to the Bank of England last September, at the time 

the swap network was increased, had been extended for another 

three months. (Those credits had been due to expire at the end 

of this month.) Second, the trade figures announced today were 

the most encouraging for some time. For the first time in at least 

the last three years, there was a surplus even on a crude basis; 

when adjusted to a balance of payments basis the surplus was 80 

million pounds. Part of the improvement was due to the postpone

ment of imports pending removal of the surcharge on November 30.  

Nevertheless, exports were up, and that was encouraging.  

Mr. MacLaury then referred to two other developments, the 

first of which was the recent sales of marks by the System. During 

the period the German Federal Bank took in a total of $152 million 

as repatriation of bank funds came on top of a strengthening German



12/13/66 -7

balance of payments. With marks in demand in New York the Reserve 

Bank sold a total of $16.7 million equivalent in the New York 

market, and in addition sold $15 million equivalent to the Federal 

Bank on one day, December 7, when the latter had picked up $60 

million in Frankfurt, All of those sales were financed by drawing 

down the System's mark balances. Second, the Account had continued 

to make progress in reducing the swap drawing from the Bank of 

Italy. Lira purchases of $45 million equivalent in New York 

during the period had enabled that commitment to be brought down 

to $25 million from the original $100 million.  

Mr. MacLaury added that there had been a discussion of 

multilateral surveillance, insofar as it impinged on the swap net

work, at the recent Basle meeting. He did not know the details; 

however, Mr. Coombs had reported that the discussion went well 

and that he thought there would be a minimum of interference with 

the swap network through multilateral surveillance in the future.  

Specifically, the Netherlands and Belgium agreed to extend their 

supplementary swap arrangements with the System for another three 

months.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether Mr. Coombs had commented on the 

German attitude with respect to their tight money policy and on 

the possibility of their attaining a little more balance in their 

mix of monetary and fiscal policies. He gathered that the inflow



12/13/66 -8

of dollars to Germany reflected both year-end operations and 

general monetary tightness.  

Mr. MacLaury replied that the Germans had been taking in 

dollars fairly steadily for several months due to the sharp up

turn in their trade surplus. Each year in the past the German 

Federal Bank had taken in sizable amounts of dollars in December, 

as much as $500 million. The repatriation of dollars by German 

banks was partly for year-end window-dressing purposes, but also 

because the largest tax payments came due December 15. This year, 

because of changes in reserve requirements for German banks, it 

was less clear that there would be a complete reversal of the in

flow after the year-end.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
November 22 through December 12, 1966, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury noted that the $500 million swap agreement 

with the Bank of Canada, having a term of twelve months, would 

mature on December 28, 1966, and he recommended renewal.  

Chairman Martin asked whether there had been any use of 

that swap this year, and Mr. MacLaury replied the Bank of Canada 

had drawn on it this fall for a small amount for a brief period.  

Renewal of the $500 million swap 
agreement with the Bank of Canada for 
12 months was approved.



12/13/66

Mr. MacLaury then said that the System's swap agreement 

with the Swiss National Bank, and the two with the BIS, in the 

amount of $200 million each, would reach the end of their six

month terms on January 20, 1967. He recommended renewal in each 

instance, adding that there was outstanding a $75 million drawing 

under the Swiss franc arrangement with the BIS and $15 million 

under the arrangement with the Swiss National Bank.  

Renewal of the three swap agreements 
for further periods of six months each was 
approved.  

Mr. MacLaury then reported that there were three outstand

ing drawings by the British under the swap agreement with the 

Bank of England, all with terms of three months, as follows: one 

in the amount of $100 million maturing December 29, 1966; one in 

the amount of $50 million maturing December 30, 1966; and one for 

$100 million maturing January 20, 1967. If the latter two were 

renewed, those would be second renewals. It was hoped that the 

British would be able to make repayments on their short-term debt 

this month and in January. They had already taken in $50 million 

today on market anticipations of good trade figures. He recommended 

that insofar as they were not able to make full repayment, the 

drawings be renewed.  

Mr. Mitchell inquired what the position would be if third 

renewals should be requested, and Mr. MacLaury recalled that some



12/13/66 -10

time ago, after a second renewal, a letter was written to the 

Bank of England expressing the Committee's philosophy on renewal 

of swap drawings and emphasizing that they were of short-term 

character. The Bank of England made it clear that they agreed.  

He did not mean to imply there should be a second letter, but the 

British were well aware of the System's philosophy on the matter.  

Renewal of the drawings by 
the Bank of England, if requested, 
was noted without objection.  

Finally, Mr. MacLaury said, a System drawing on the Bank 

for International Settlements in the amount of $50 million would 

mature January 13, 1967. At present the Swiss franc was not at 

its ceiling, as normally might be expected at this time of the 

year. He hoped it would be even easier after the end of the year 

and some progress might be made in paying down the drawing. In 

the event that the Account was unable to do so, he would recommend 

that the drawing be rolled over a second time.  

Renewal of the drawing, if 

necessary, was noted without ob

jection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

November 22 through December 7, 1966, and a supplemental report



12/13/66

for December 8 through 12, 1966. Copies of both reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

The comfortable money market conditions that 
have developed since the Committee last met have 
generally been interpreted by the market as a sign 
that the Federal Reserve has moved in the direction 
of less monetary restraint. This interpretation has 
been strengthened by continued discussion of a possible 
tax increase and reports of somewhat less exuberant 
economic growth. Despite seasonal pressures, the 
change in market expectations has led to a sharp 
decline in Treasury bill and other short-term rates, 
and, equally important, to a ready flow of funds in 
the capital market in an atmosphere of rising prices.  
Three weeks ago underwriters were looking with trepida
tion at the heavy calendar of corporate and municipal 
issues to be sold. By last Friday the atmosphere had 
changed to the extent that market soundings by the 
FNMA with respect to an early sale of participation 
certificates were received with enthusiasm. Indeed, 
in the market for Treasury issues prices advanced very 
sharply, with gains of 1/2 to 1 full point recorded in 
yesterday's ebullient trading session.  

In the short-term sector of the market dealers 
were aggressive bidders for Treasury bills in the 
regular weekly auctions and also in the special auction 
of $800 million tax anticipation bills, which completed 
the Treasury's financing program for calendar 1966. By 
Friday night the three-month bill was 5.11 bid and the 

six-month bill 5.22 bid. The market moved decidedly 
lower in rate again yesterday with the average issuing 
rate on three- and six-month bills established at about 
5.05 per cent and 5.13 per cent, respectively. This 
represented declines of 20 and 37 basis points from 
the auction held the day before the last Committee meeting.  

The decline in short-term rates is, of course, 

providing a major assist to the banks in limiting the 

run-off of the $5.5 billion CD's maturing during December.  

We have heard of some corporations that have changed their

-11-



12/13/66

approach to CD's since the beginning of the month.  
Given the heavy maturity schedule a substantial 
decline in CD's is inevitable, but it now seems 
likely that the run-off will be towards the lower 
end of the $700 million - $1 billion range mentioned 
in the blue book.1/ 

Despite the improved atmosphere in the money 
and capital markets there are a number of hurdles to 
be crossed before the year-end. Dealer positions in 
bills are at a high level, and rate stability over the 
rest of the year depends on the continued availability 
of financing at reasonable rates, and on continued 
investor demand for bills. While new corporate and 
municipal issues have moved out quickly there have 
undoubtedly been sizable dealer takedowns and some 
of the buying has been at least semi-speculative in 
nature. As payments are made for the new issues some 
pressure may become evident. Tax date pressures are 
just upon us, and there are still uncertainties about 
the international flow of funds over the year-end.  
The fact that the year-end falls on a weekend could 
also cause a knot in the money market if banks adhere 
to their traditional reluctance to show substantial 
borrowings on statement dates. Thus, although the 
underlying atmosphere is much improved, we can still 
expect considerable churning in the money market over 
the rest of the month.  

As the blue book notes, the decline in market 
rates and reduced marginal reserve pressure on banks 
has not, as yet, been reflected in any notable impact 
on bank credit expansion. December estimates at the 
New York Bank show less of a decline in the bank credit 
proxy than anticipated three weeks ago, and our estimates 
would now be close to the Board staff estimate of within 
two percentage points either side of zero. Banks' 
holdings of Euro-dollar deposits have so far held up 
better than some had feared, reflecting in part the 
concerted efforts by European central banks and the 
System to avoid extensive repercussions of December 
window-dressing activity. The year-end, however, will 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-12-



12/13/66

probably bring certain special and temporary problems.  
The relatively high cost of Euro-dollars cannot help 
but influence some major banks to switch their borrow
ing to the Federal funds market at rates around 5-1/2 
per cent. While bank credit has showed no signs of 
real strength, banks have been aggressive bidders for 
new municipal issues, and a better CD outlook could 
bring about resumed expansion after the regular 
seasonal pressures have passed.  

Open market operations have been described in 
detail in the written reports to the Committee and I 
will not dwell on them here. In general, we tried to 
anticipate reserve needs and to head off any tendency 
for the money market to tighten, rather than offset 
tightness after it had emerged. This shift of emphasis 
in the conduct of operations was fully understood by 
the market. Repurchase agreements proved a particularly 
useful operational tool in the light of the reserve 
supply stemming from the Treasury's cash position and 
of seasonal uncertainties. Given the improved outlook 
for Treasury bill rates, dealers felt little pressure 
to cut back bill inventories, and the substantial supply 
of repurchase accommodation available from the System at 
the discount rate helped the performance of the bill 
market over the period. The use of repurchase agreements 
during this period also provided the opportunity for the 
Desk to make use for the first time of the new authority 
to purchase Government agency issues under such agree
ments. The System also took advantage, on occasions, 
of the aggressive bidding in the weekly bill auctions 
to run off a portion of maturing Treasury bills, thus 
keeping what at times appeared to be a substantial future 
need to absorb reserves through outright bill sales at 
a minimum.  

The Treasury has done a bit better in maintaining 
its cash position than seemed likely three weeks ago.  
As you know, there was borrowing of $169 million over 

last weekend against a special certificate issued at 
1/4 per cent below the discount rate. It now looks as 
if no further direct borrowing will be necessary, 
although the balance at Reserve Banks will be at a low 
ebb through the 15th and 16th. By the 19th the Treasury 
balance should begin to work its way back towards more

-13-



12/13/66

normal levels. All in all, the supply of reserves 
through the forced decline in the Treasury balance 
at Reserve Banks did not prove overly disturbing to 

open market operations, and, from a broader point of 
view, it was desirable for the Treasury to make use 

of the special arrangement which had remained dormant 
since 1958.  

The debt ceiling remains a continuing though not 
insurmountable problem to the Treasury, with the latest 
daily Treasury statement showing debt subject to the 

ceiling at $329.7 billion compared with the ceiling 

of $330 billion. It seems clear that an increase in 
the ceiling will have to be an early item on the new 
Congressional agenda.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 

and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 

the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 22 through 

December 12, 1966, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic 

conditions: 

For several meetings now, the Committee's staff 

has been stalled in coming to grips with the economic 

outlook, since so much of the future course of the 

economy rested on the still unknown spending plans of 

business and Government. We have been alert to unfold

ing developments that have indicated, since early fall, 

a marked slowing in economic expansion, but we've 

hesitated to project these trends into the future as 

long as the possibility existed that capital expenditures

-14-



12/13/66

and defense outlays--the two most expansive forces 
driving GNP this past year--might continue to provide 
significant upward thrust to the economy in 1967.  

Now the veil has been partially lifted, and the 
staff can no longer dodge the critical policy issues 
involved. First, let's review the major new items 
of information in terms of their impact on the course 
of the economy. Business capital spending plans, as 
revealed in the latest Commerce-SEC survey, indicate 
a distinct tapering off of the investment boom. It 
is not only that anticipated expenditures rise so 
much more slowly through mid-1967 than the pace of 
these outlays this past year. Perhaps more significant 
are the indications that actual spending is beginning 
to fall short of earlier anticipations, a development 
which in only small degree can be attributed to supply 
difficulties. In the present situation, such shortfalls 
must represent a distinct and significant change in the 
outlook among many business planners. The intent of 
monetary restraint and of the fiscal actions taken 
this fall was to cool off the investment boom; these 
policies seem to have succeeded, perhaps too well.  

The less ebullient outlook of businessmen seems 
matched by consumers. The latest Census survey of 
consumer buying intentions, and recent evidence of 
sluggish retail sales, suggest little thrust from con
sumer expenditures over the near- and intermediate-term 
future, especially for durable goods but also for housing.  

Finally, as to Government spending plans, hard 
numbers are not yet available, but one can deduce from 
the range of numbers leaked to the press, and from the 
size of the supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 
1967 the President has announced he will request, that 
the rate of expansion in Government spending may also 
decelerate. The green book 1/ number on Federal spending 
in the first quarter of 1967 is but a guess, and we 
tried to flag it as such. But it is a guess from which 
not too much dissent is likely to be found among 
Washington crystal-ball readers.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-15-



12/13/66

Of course, we all recognize that military spending 

requirements can depart suddenly and widely from budget 

projections. Even though valiant efforts are being made 

to pin down this major element in Government spending 

with more precision this year, one can still legitimately 

harbor reservations. But one must also credit budget 

planners with enough intelligence to learn from mistakes.  

If, for the moment, one is willing to accept current 

private and Government spending plans at face value, one 

comes up with a relatively soggy economic outlook, one in 

which GNP rises at a slower rate, over the winter and 

spring, than even the current moderate pace, with capacity 

use drifting off, hours of work cut back and, possibly, 

the unemployment rate beginning to creep up. While all 

GNP projections must be regarded only as point estimates 

within a probability range, it seems to me that, barring 
an upward revision in defense spending, deviations around 

this point are more likely to be on the down side than on 

the up side. Under the circumstances postulated earlier, 

for example, we may be relatively optimistic in assuming 

only a moderate decline in business inventory accumulation 

in the months ahead, particularly since the October figures 

on inventories, sales, and business attitudes towards 

inventories suggest that the recent high rate of accumula
tion was in part involuntary. One can easily visualize a 

much sharper reduction in inventories than was projected 

in the green book, with repercussions on output and 

employment that could cumulate.  

If such an over-all expenditure outlook were the only 

determinant of economic policy making, the prescription 

would be fairly simple--forget about tax increases and 

gear up for the possible need to stimulate the economy 

some time next year. At the last FOMC meeting, President 

Ellis asked me whether I thought a tax increase was still 

needed. After hedging and qualifying in the time-honored 

fashion of staff economists, I recall admitting that I 

did think a rise in taxes would be needed. I'm not sure 

I can give the same answer today; if I did, it certainly 

would be for different reasons.  

But it's not crystal clear as to what the right 

answers should be, since anticipated domestic spending 

plans cannot, in themselves, provide all of the bases 

for policy making. There are balance of payments, wage, 
and price implications to consider. Short of an actual 

recession, for example, it is likely that wage rates and

-16-



12/13/66

wage costs would continue to rise over the next half 
year, despite further slowing in economic activity.  
The levelling off in industrial output--which started 
in early summer and has extended into November, accord
ing to preliminary estimates of the production index-
has been accompanied by continued strong advances in 
employment. This implies a marked drop in the rate of 
productivity gain, which in turn has been reflected in 
a significant rise in unit labor costs.  

While producers may be willing to suffer some 
further narrowing of profit margins, I suspect that the 
reaction to continued rise in labor costs will be a 
tendency to try to pass them on, thus keeping upward 
pressure on industrial prices. Once the offset from 
declining food prices ends--a development which some 
analysts think is about on us already--the broad price 

measures, at both wholesale and retail, will begin to 

reflect more of the industrial price creep.  

Many current and prospective economic symptoms, 

then, are the classic ones of a cyclical peak--inventory

sales ratios rising, business investment tapering off, 
consumer demand sluggish, capacity use beginning to 

drift down, and wages and prices continuing to push up.  

Unfortunately, the Government's freedom of maneuver in 
dealing with these developing symptoms is limited by 

two major constraints: a continued serious balance of 

payments problem, and the heritage of last year's fiscal 
failure, i.e., a large budgetary deficit that is hobbling 

the choice of appropriate fiscal and debt management 

policies.  

Having done their share of the job this year, 

monetary policy makers have somewhat more room for 

maneuver, assuming that more rigorous capital control 

programs will limit our balance of payments losses to 

tolerable levels. It seems to me, in light of domestic 

economic developments and prospects, that at least the 

direction in which monetary policy has to move is clear; 

fiscal decisions, or the lack of them, will merely 

condition the extent and pace of the monetary move. In 

a more tranquil economy that appears to be heading 

toward less intensive resource use, monetary policy can 

appropriately continue to ease, and not be diverted by 

"last gasp" wage and price increases that reflect 

earlier sins and don't portend an acceleration. If the 

size of the prospective budget deficit forces the

-17-



12/13/66 -18

Administration to ask for higher taxes, then the 
monetary easing could be prompt and substantial. If 
the fiscal decision is not to ask for higher taxes, or 
if the decision is postponed, then monetary easing 
could be more gradual and moderate.  

For it's not as though we're starting from a 
position of only mild monetary restraint. Interest 
rates are still historically high, and bank credit has 
been contracting, on balance, for five months now.  
These are far too restrictive a set of policy results 
to be appropriate to the current moderate pace of 
economic expansion, let alone the prospect of even more 
moderation in output and incomes. I would recommend, 
therefore, continuing to press ahead with the policy 
initiated at the last meeting, with sufficient vigor to 
achieve easier credit conditions and, through this, some 
expansion in bank credit.  

Mr. Daane asked, with reference to Mr. Brill's suggestion 

that the rate of increase in defense spending might decelerate, 

whether there was any firm basis for that expectation. Mr. Brill 

replied that it reflected the best information he could obtain from 

those associated with the formulation of the budget. The numbers 

might change; they had been changing over time in recent months, but 

the changes were in the direction he had indicated.  

Mr. Daane then asked whether informed judgments were involved 

or simply guesses, and Chairman Martin observed that what Mr. Brill 

had reported reflected the most informed judgments available, which 

he felt might be regarded as fairly accurate at this stage. Mr. Brill 

commented that it should be borne in mind that a military operation 

was involved, rather than a civilian-type program. Various develop

ments, such as a new anti-ballistic missile program, of course could



12/13/66 -19

cause the figures to be adjusted upward, but the responsible parties 

had been pressing to get as good a set of figures as possible for 

the budget, and what he had reported reflected the best current 

judgments.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that it should be remembered that certain 

basic questions of military strategy were still open. On the other 

hand, it appeared from the press and other sources of information 

that some basic decisions had been made recently on strategic ques

tions that offered a better basis for making judgments about military 

spending over at least the next six months. He understood that the 

people in the Department of Commerce who worked on national income 

statistics had reached the same judgment as Mr. Brill.  

Mr. Brill then commented on the apparent pace of defense 

spending thus far in the fourth quarter as it could be read from 

the Treasury's daily statement, following which Mr. Daane inquired 

about the possibility of a repetition of last year's experience--an 

unanticipated upsurge in defense spending. Chairman Martin indicated 

that he felt that would be likely only if major new decisions were 

made that would change the whole picture.  

Mr. Hickman commented that he assumed there was likely to 

be enough feed-back of information in the event of such decisions 

to enable the Committee to alter policy. In his judgment the 

situation probably would be unlike that of last year when the



12/13/66

Committee simply did not know the facts and continued a relatively 

easy monetary policy too long. If the Committee became aware that 

the pace of military spending was about to accelerate sharply, it 

could shift policy.  

Mr. Daane said that he doubted whether anyone in Washington 

today could say what size the anti-ballistic missile program might 

assume.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Despite the moderate easing in money market conditions 
achieved on average over the last three weeks, the banking 
aggregates have not yet shown strengthening tendencies.  
In fact, the November figures on total member bank 
deposits are somewhat weaker than was projected just 
prior to the Committee's last meeting. All of the short
fall is accounted for by a significantly weaker private 
demand deposit performance than had been expected, and 
this, along with an indicated decline in demand deposits 
in the current week, has led us to lower our sights for 
December. Little or no increase in the credit proxy 
this month now seems likely.  

November marked the fourth consecutive month in which 
actual deposit expansion fell appreciably below the 
projections made around the beginning of the month. Even 
allowing for some staff bias, which may result from a 
tendency to project past trends into the future, this is 
an impressive string of shortfalls. In August, member 
bank deposits were projected to rise at about a 4 per 
cent annual rate, but they actually fell 3-1/2 per cent; 
in September the expectation was for a 3-1/2 per cent rise, 
but the final result was a fractional decline; in October 
a 5-1/2 per cent increase was initially projected, but 
the outcome was a 3-1/2 per cent decrease; and in November 
the staff started off projecting a 2 per cent decline and 
then at mid-month lowered the figure to 3 per cent, but 
the actual drop turned out to be 5-1/2 per cent.

-20-



12/13/66

Earlier in this period, these shortfalls were 
spread among both demand and time deposits, but in 
both October and November the misses were entirely 
in the private demand deposit category. As a 
result, the money stock has moved further downward, 
on a monthly average basis, and in November was 
lower than at any time since last February and down 
nearly 3 per cent, annual rate, from the June peak.  
The last several weeks have shown some net increase 
in money stock, and we would expect a sizable rise 
in the December average--in both cases reflecting 
mainly outpayments from the Treasury balance--but 
not by very much more than enough to offset the 
November decline. Meanwhile, total bank credit, 
though not quite so weak as the deposit figures in 
view of increased Euro-dollar liabilities, has also 
declined on balance over recent months.  

I have gone into this background in some detail 
in order to emphasize as strongly as possible my 
feeling that something important has been going on 
to affect financial relationships. We have consis
tently overestimated the amount of deposit and bank 
credit expansion that would be associated with a 
given set of money market conditions in recent 
months. Moreover, the banking system has failed to 
respond to the modest easing in conditions that has 
proceeded irregularly going all the way back to 
mid-October. Thus, net borrowed reserves were nearly 
$200 million smaller in November than October, on 
average, and the whole family of shorter-term bill 
rates moved somewhat lower. Nevertheless, the 
decline in member bank deposits was sharper in 
November than in the earlier months. Obviously, 
the relationship between money market variables and 
the banking aggregates has been shifting even faster 
than allowed for in the increasingly pessimistic 
staff projections.  

Three possible explanations for this unexpectedly 
strong shift suggest themselves. First is the pos
sibility that credit demands in the private sectors 
of the economy are diminishing markedly. Certainly 
the bank lending figures of recent months do not 
refute this possibility. Not only has business loan 

expansion declined sharply, with virtually every 
industrial sector showing slower growth than earlier

-21-



12/13/66

in the year, but other types of bank lending also 
have tended to level off. Most of this undoubtedly 
reflects supply constraints rather than reduced 
demands for funds, which are now being reflected 
in heavy current and prospective private flotations 
in the money and capital markets. In the business 
sector, particularly, further increases in capital 
outlays and high rates of inventory accumulation, 
combined with a leveling off--and possibly a 
decline--in internal funds, should be producing 
record external financing needs. Nevertheless, 

it is only reasonable to assume that the slowing of 
economic expansion generally over recent months is 

having its financial counterpart in a less intense 

demand for borrowed funds.  

A second possibility is that bank credit is 

being curbed as a result of the attitudes of bankers 

themselves. By this I mean something more than just 

that terms, lending standards, and other methods of 

rationing credit have been tightened, which obviously 

has occurred. It may be that the developments of 

recent months--deposit losses, sharply declining 

liquidity, the September 1 letter, and other Federal 

Reserve restraining actions--have created so many 

uncertainties that banks are not pushing so hard 

to use the credit available to them. Many banks 

may now be inclined to use any modest easing in 

their positions to repay short-term indebtedness 

to the Fed and others, rather than to make invest

ments or ease up on lending policy. And if the 

banks do not push to expand loans and investments, 

deposits are not created and new reserves are not 

required. In this situation, even a gradually 

easing net reserve target could fail to produce an 

expansive policy effect, since reserves might have 

to be absorbed through open market operations in 

order to keep borrowings from declining as rapidly 

as bankers desired.  

The third possibility is that the demand for 

deposits may have declined. This is clearly the 

case in the time deposit field, where the 4 per cent 

savings rate, the 5 per cent consumer CD rate, and 

the 5-1/2 per cent negotiable CD rate remain out 

of touch with the best yields on competitive instru

ments. And it also is probably a factor in the

-22-



12/13/66

sluggishness of demand balances, in view of the high 
yields available on cash substitutes. But the behav
ior of deposits is also probably influenced by the 
very limited availability of bank credit, one effect 
of which is to force holders to live with cash 
balances below desired levels. Many businesses may 
be working their available funds harder than they 
otherwise would, for example, simply because they 
are inadequately financed. Support for this view 
is provided by the exceptionally large decline in 
liquidity reported by the SEC-FTC survey of corporate 
manufacturers for the third quarter.  

Whatever the relative weights assigned to these 
three possible explanations of weakness in the banking 
aggregates, the general policy prescription seems 
clear. If the Committee wishes to foster a resumption 
of moderate growth in bank credit, some further easing 
in restraints on the banks is needed. An overt and 
highly visible move would be most certain to alter 
the attitudes of "reluctant" bankers. But barring 
this, a continued easing in money market conditions-
including some further reduction in short-term 
rates--may accomplish the objective of bank credit 
expansion more gradually. A renewed inflow of CD 
funds, especially one of size, should serve to 
stimulate credit growth both directly, through 
increased intermediation, and indirectly, through 
improvement in banker expectations.  

Given the range of rates available on broadly 
competitive money market instruments, as well as the 
reduced pool of liquidity to be shared, I believe 
that it would take a 3-month bill rate at or slightly 
below 5 per cent--with enough follow-through to 
bring commensurately lower rates on other money 
market instruments--to re-establish a reasonable 

competitiveness for 5-1/2 per cent CDs. Even so, 

not much CD expansion could be expected before 

January, in view of the heavy December pressures on 
liquidity positions. A gradual easing in money 
market rates over coming weeks would also tend to 
help bank and other savings institutions hold on to 

their consumer-type time and savings deposits in 
the important January interest-crediting period.  

And an improving money market should help to main

tain a receptive tone in the long-term bond markets,

-23-



12/13/66 -24

which continue to face a prospectively heavy financing 
calendar from corporate borrowers and also probably 
from the Treasury.  

Mr. Daane asked the Manager when he would expect the 

seasonal peak in short-term rates. Normally it had been thought 

that the peak occurred around the 16th or 18th of December, and he 

wondered whether that was still applicable.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that that had been the normal pattern.  

Whether it would prevail this year, he did not know.  

Mr. Daane then requested clarification of Mr. Partee's views 

about the role of supply constraints on bank credit expansion.  

Mr. Partee replied that he thought one would have to say 

that supply constraints--that is, constraints on the supply of 

reserves available to the banking system--had been the major factor 

in limiting growth in bank credit and deposits. But there also 

had been some demand effects on both the bank credit and deposit 

sides of the balance sheet. The various influences had all been 

mixed together.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments and related matters: 

This morning I would like to comment on some 

developments abroad that have a look of recession 

about them, and then try to see what implications 

these developments have for Federal Reserve policy 
or--on a different level--for appraising the 

economic situation in the United States.



12/13/66

Unemployment in Britain and Germany has been 
rising this autumn at a pace, in each country, that 
seems to have surprised the governments as well as 
other observers. True, the levels of seasonally 
adjusted unemployment are still very low: in 
November still below 2 per cent in Britain and below 
1 per cent in Germany, but these lines will be 
broken through very soon if the rises continue.  
The industrial production indexes are not available 
for October and November; in September, industrial 
activity was clearly falling in both countries.  
In both countries domestic plans and orders for 
business capital expenditures began to decline 
gradually in real terms early in 1965, and the 
declines have become faster lately. The picture 
for inventory investment is similar. Residential 
construction has also been falling off gradually 
for some time. Monetary policy has made credit 
and capital market conditions extraordinarily tight, 
and this is an important key to what is happening.  

At the moment the world economic situation 
bears no resemblance to the 1957-58 downturn, which 
involved a transition from world-wide shortages of 
materials to ease of supply, on top of the unwinding 
of the 1955 investment and automobile boom. Japan 
and Italy now play much larger roles than in earlier 
years, and both of them, as well as France, are in 
the early stages of strong new domestic upswings.  
On the other hand, several other European countries 
and also Canada have been experiencing a leveling 
off in industrial production this year.  

For Britain and Germany, the present situation 
somewhat resembles the pause during 1961 and 1962, 
in the second half of a previous four-year cycle, 
but there are more elements of outright recession now 
than then. It has taken the British longer this time 
to get some slack in their economy; but now that the 
turn has been made some kinds of demand appear to be 
shrinking with some speed. In Germany, the previous 
pause involved hardly more than a slowing of rise 
in industrial production; this time, after slowing 
for a year and a half, German industrial production, 
as seasonally adjusted by the OECD, fell 5 per cent 
in three months from the high reached last spring.

-25-



12/13/66

These developments abroad may require some 
rappraisal of U.S. balance of payments prospects 
for coming months. The slide-off in German demand is 
a bearish factor for our exports; if continental 
European countries as a group now let their economies 
cool off, or in some cases keep them from heating up, 
more successfully than it had previously seemed they 
could, that would tend to dampen our export growth 
for a time. On the other hand, recession, or a pause, 
in European economic expansion now might conceivably 
be just the catalyst needed to cause American manufac

turers to review and reject some of their projects for 
enlargement of operations in Europe.  

Another whole series of questions relates to the 
timing of changes in monetary policies in Britain or 
continental Europe, as compared with the timing of 
any movement toward lower interest rates in the United 
States.  

In thinking about the relevance for Federal Reserve 
policy of all such questions about the U.S. balance of 
payments next year, we may well come to the conclusion 
that the objective of working toward long-run equilibrium 
in international payments will be served best by policies 

aimed wholeheartedly at the two-fold domestic objective 

of sustaining growth and minimizing inflation of 

prices and costs, without much concern about short-run 

variations in our balance-of-payments prospects or 

results, so long as the rise of domestic prices slackens.  

Two main lines of argument can be advanced to support 

such a conclusion at the present time.  

First, even on balance-of-payments grounds, a 

recession in the United States could have harmful 

long-run effects if it were to tilt the whole demand-and

supply situation in the world at large toward recession.  

Under present conditions, we can look for some slackening 

of import expansion as excess demand diminishes. But 

the further benefits our balance of payments might get 

from depression of our imports in a U.S. recession 

might well be cancelled off in the longer run by 

subsequent unfavorable repercussions on our exports 

through a related recession abroad. In short, the 

United States stands the best chance of enlarging its 

exports in an expanding world economy, and the size of 

our country gives us a special responsibility for helping 

to maintain noninflationary growth in the world economy.

-26-



12/13/66

Second, the prestige of the dollar stands well 
enough for the moment, and the Administration's 
voluntary programs, plus the I.E.T. and the related 
arrangements with Canada, will give us some protection 
again next year. Under these conditions, the United 
States will be doing all we can properly be asked 
to do towards restoring order in international pay
ments if we follow policies that can be seen by 
everyone to be the right ones for maintaining 
noninflationary growth. If one consequence of what 
we do and of what others do is a sharp rise next 
year in the reserves of Germany or other Common 
Market countries, so be it. It should then become 
clearer to the whole world than ever that the chronic 

and semichronic surplus countries must play a more 
positive role than they have yet done to restore 
international equilibrium.  

With regard to the specific, narrow, question of 

U.S. banks' borrowings from the Euro-dollar market, 

it would be far better to let this money flow back 

to Europe as soon as that tendency develops, rather 

than try to hang on to it at a cost of keeping 

interest rates higher than domestic conditions might 

call for.  
These few thoughts about the balance of payments 

and monetary policy under current and prospective 

conditions do not help judge how to stay on the 

tight-rope: to minimize price and cost inflation on 

the one hand and to maintain growth on the other.  

The first essential--easier said than done--is 

to appraise current domestic developments accurately.  

As we make our appraisals, perhaps the recent develop

ments abroad have some usable lessons for us. One 

lesson is the reminder that a slide-off in activity 

can begin quite suddenly and almost unexpectedly, when 

investment decisions and inventory policies are being 

revised under the pressures of very tight money and 

capital markets.  

In conclusion, let me come back to the policy issue.  

We are fortunate that our gold reserves are larger 

than Britain's, and our basic payments position stronger.  

We are fortunate also that our wage inflation, up to 

now at least, has been less rapid than Germany's.  

Thus we have some freedom of maneuver to deal, in a 

cautious way, with the danger that the economy may be

-27-



12/13/66 -28

moving toward recession--while keeping on the look-out 
to avoid the opposite danger of a new build-up of 
inflationary pressures.  

Mr. Daane asked, if the Committee followed the policy 

prescription advocated by Messrs. Brill and Partee, what sort of 

capital outflow might be expected, taking into account the extent 

of recent borrowing by American banks from the Euro-dollar market 

and the leeway available for foreign lending by U.S. banks under 

the new guidelines of the voluntary foreign credit restraint 

program.  

Mr. Hersey said he supposed, if there was an easing of 

rates here, that there would be a tendency for U.S. banks to turn 

more to the Federal funds market and to repay borrowings in the 

Euro-dollar market. However, he did not feel he could make a very 

good judgment on how and when that might happen. He thought the 

tightness in the Euro-dollar market was due, to a large extent, to 

the American banks' demands and that if those demands lessened 

Euro-dollar rates might decline. If at the same time there was an 

easing of rates in the national money markets in Europe, the Euro

dollar might come to seem less expensive, and the shift might be 

neither rapid nor far-reaching. It was difficult to predict what 

might happen; the gist of what he had said in his statement was 

that, given current economic conditions here and abroad, the 

Committee probably should not place great emphasis on short-run



12/13/66 -29

movements in the balance of payments. As to foreign lending by 

U.S. banks, a moderate and gradual easing of domestic monetary 

policy was not likely to lead to a sudden rapid rise.  

Mr. Brimmer commented that this might be a good point at 

which to discuss the new 1967 program of voluntary restraints to 

improve the balance of payments position, which he understood was 

being announced today.  

In answer to a question from the Chairman, Mr. Robertson 

said that the Board's new guidelines for financial institutions 

had been announced this morning. He suggested that Mr. Brimmer 

might want to discuss the Commerce Department program.  

Mr. Brimmer said that the Commerce program would be of 

essentially the same type as in 1966. For direct investments, 

which was the critical area, the 1962-1964 period would still be 

used as a base, and the two years 1966 and 1967 would be combined 

for the purpose of providing a quota for the companies partic

ipating in the program. However, the rate of investment permitted 

within this quota--which for 1965-1966 was 135 per cent of the 

average during the base period--would be reduced to an average of 

120 per cent for 1966-1967. That was a substantially more 

restrictive program, as far as percentages were concerned, than 

was anticipated a few weeks ago. The quantitative result expected 

under the program should be in the neighborhood of a $2.4 billion



12/13/66 -30

direct investment outflow. Earlier it had been thought the figure 

would be $2.8 billion, the same as 1966, so the program had been 

tightened substantially in the last week or so after discussion 

within the Administration. There seemed to be some $400 or $500 

million of direct outflow covered by neither the Commerce Depart

ment program nor the nonbank financial institution part of the 

Federal Reserve program, and the question of how to deal with 

those flows was still open. Nevertheless, the further tightening 

of the Commerce Department program would provide an additional 

barrier to capital outflow, and thus was a favorable development.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that Mr. Daane give the 

Committee a summary report on the meeting on international monetary 

reform held recently in Washington.  

Mr. Daane said that the meeting, held November 28 and 29, 

was interesting and significant. It was the first of a series of 

four joint meetings of the Executive Directors of the International 

Monetary Fund and the Deputies of the Group of Ten. He thought a 

fair sum-up of the meeting was that given by the Chairman of the 

Group of Ten Deputies, who said that the results exceeded the most 

optimistic expectations. The Chairman of the meeting, Mr. Schweitzer 

of the Fund, made a similar comment. Despite some earlierfears that 

the meeting would simply elicit a Group of Ten view and a Fund 

view, that was not the case. Instead of bloc positions, the



12/13/66 -31

participants presented their individual views in a frank and 

effective exchange.  

As he had indicated at the last Committee meeting, 

Mr. Daane continued, an agenda had been agreed on earlier, and 

it served as a guide to the discussions. The first item related 

to the aims of reserve creation, including the need for reserves 

and its relationship to adjustment policies and the supply of 

conditional liquidity. That discussion was sparked by Under 

Secretary of the Treasury Deming. On the basis of the work 

that the Group of Ten had previously done, he made the case for 

the need for reserves to provide adequate growth in liquidity.  

Mr. Deming stressed secular considerations, emphasizing the 

global need for reserves to be provided over a period of time.  

He cited past experience in terms of annual increments in reserves 

required and noted that gold and reserve currencies could not in 

the future be expected to satisfy fully needs of the magnitudes 

foreseen. It was implied by Mr. Deming's comments--and clearly 

recognized by the non-U.S. participants--that the U.S. was moving 

away from its earlier stand in favor of a dual approach involving 

a combination of drawing rights and reserve units.  

Mr. Daane added that the French position, stated by 

Mr. Perouse of the Finance Ministry early in the sessions and 

maintained throughout, was essentially that there was no imminent



12/13/66 -32

shortage of reserves and, therefore, that it was more important to 

focus on "more fundamental problems" than on reserve asset creation.  

Mr. Perouse listed five such problems, which were: The adjustment 

process--in discussing which he focused on the deficits in the U.S.  

balance of payments; the holding of reserve currencies, and whether 

some restrictions should be placed on the holding of national cur

rencies as international reserves; the relationship between conditional 

and unconditional liquidity; the role of gold, including the price of 

gold; and the question of stability of international commodity prices 

and the organization of international commodity markets. Throughout 

the sessions the French urged that the group should focus on those 

issues rather than on the matter of reserve asset creation. But no 

other country, either in or outside the meeting, accepted that 

diversionary tactic. It was the consensus that a clear need existed 

to proceed with contingency planning to provide for adequate secular 

growth of international liquidity.  

The second agenda item, Mr. Daane said, had to do with the 

nature and form of deliberately created reserves. The Chairman of 

the Group of Ten Deputies, Dr. Emminger, tried to make a case for 

an asset specifically designed for a limited group of countries, 

on the basis that only a limited group held gold in their reserves 

and were interested in having a gold-like reserve asset. There

fore, he (Dr. Emminger) proposed having a gold-like asset for that



12/13/66 -33

group and a different type of asset for other countries. The 

representatives of non-Ten countries convincingly presented their 

views on the need for universality in all aspects of reserve 

creation. They clearly were not interested in accepting "separate 

but equal" treatment. They received support around the table for 

universality, and there was clear adherence to the view that it was 

desirable, particularly with respect to the distribution of new 

assets. A major question left open here, however, was the desirabil

ity of universality in decision-making.  

Distribution of deliberately created reserves was the third 

topic on the agenda, Mr. Daane continued. There was very little 

disagreement with the view that there should be some form of 

across-the-board distribution, according to an objective formula 

such as Fund quotas.  

The fourth item on the agenda concerned the utilization of 

new reserve assets, including such questions as insuring acceptability 

and preventing misuse, and the kinds of safeguards needed, Mr. Daane 

said. There was a fairly clear consensus that what the group was 

striving for was an unconditional asset. With respect to safeguards, 

the Emminger position in favor of having a gold transfer ratio 

attached to the asset was clearly rejected, not only by the U.S.  

but by the non-Ten. On the last day of the meeting Chairman Emminger 

indicated that while a gold transfer ratio might be the more elegant



12/13/66 -34

way of providing a safeguard, one could not always have elegance.  

Thus, there was evidence of some re-thinking on the part of the 

Group of Ten--particularly by such people as Messrs. Emminger and 

Ossola--on how to provide safeguards without a gold link.  

The fifth topic on the agenda, Mr. Daane said, concerned 

conditions and circumstances of activation of a contingency plan, 

but that topic was not discussed. The second joint meeting would 

be held in London on January 24-25, 1967, and among the items on 

the agenda probably would be the questions of decision-making and 

of the holding and use of the reserve asset.  

Mr. Daane added that the Group of Ten Deputies had a separate 

session on November 30, largely procedural in nature, at which two 

working sub-groups were set up looking forward to the agenda in 

January. One of those, on which he was included as a U.S.  

representative, was to consider the question of reserve policies.  

The other sub-group would deal primarily with the holding and use 

of the reserve asset, but also with the entire range of questions 

having to do with the construction of the asset. It was not entirely 

clear to him whether the sub-groups were simply to look back at 

the record and pull together the relevant considerations or whether 

they were to do some thinking of their own, looking forward.  

Mr. Solomon, whose comments were invited by Mr. Daane at 

this point, noted that after the meeting there were quite a few



12/13/66 -35

releases from Paris, not all official, commenting on some of the 

same issues that were raised at the meeting by the French represent

ative. Two questions were included that had not been discussed 

specifically at the meeting. One had to do with the price of gold, 

which the French representative had passed over lightly at the 

meeting. The French seemed now to be saying through the Paris press 

that, if and when there were a need for additional liquidity, thought 

should be given to raising the price of gold, which had not been 

changed in more than 30 years. The second factor brought in was 

that there was one major country with an interest in these matters-

the Soviet Union--that was not a member of the IMF. He did not know 

whether the introduction of those two new considerations would lead 

anywhere or not. On the gold price question, the French were trying 

to be responsible by saying that any need for a price increase lay 

at some point in the future, and therefore the gold market need 

not become disturbed now. At the same time, however, they were 

trying to keep the issue alive. It was clear to everyone who had 

been at the meeting that the price of gold had not been on the agenda 

at joint or separate meetings of the Group of Ten or the Fund, nor 

would it be.  

Mr. Daane added that both Dr. Emminger and Mr. Schweitzer 

had stated categorically at their press conference that the price 

of gold was not on the agenda for the London meeting or any other



12/13/66

meetings of their respective groups. The French then asserted 

that Messrs. Emminger and Schweitzer had no authority to make such 

a statement, but the fact that they did have full authority was 

subsequently confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

An accurate reading on the economic outlook seems 
even more difficult at this time than usual because of 
the abundance of uncertainties and conflicting cross
currents. For the moment, demand pressures in the 
economy continue to moderate at the same time that cost 
pressures appear to be mounting. Despite the further 
evidence of a slower rate of expansion in the private 

sectors of the economy provided in the latest surveys 

of plant and equipment spending plans and of consumer 

buying intentions, I am not at all convinced that 

anything resembling a recession is in prospect for 
next year. In fact, several elements in the current 

picture suggest that the pace of the advance may 

accelerate again early next year. The precipitous 

housing decline should level off, the drag on produc

tion of the currently much slower rate of inventory 

accumulation should diminish, and most of the 

adjustment to a higher and more normal savings rate 

should be completed. With every prospect for a further 

large rise in defense spending in 1967--in the absence 

of any definite word to the contrary from the 

Administration--a strong and even excessive expansion 

seems to be in the cards. Our economists see a good 

likelihood that GNP growth may be of roughly the same 
order of magnitude next year as in 1966. I might 

add, parenthetically, that it is amazing to me how 

different economists can look at the same figures and 

come out with varying conclusions.  

Even during the current quarter of slower GNP 

growth the price situation is distinctly unsatisfactory.  

Consumer prices continue to increase and overall

-36-



12/13/66

industrial wholesale prices are likely to resume their 
rise. Declines in crude material prices seem to be 
leveling off as prices of finished products remain 
on the uptrend. I have been struck by the number of 
individual wholesale price increases announced in 
the last week or so. Labor costs per unit of output 
have advanced sharply since July, and with growing 
wage pressures and a slowdown in productivity growth, 
the outlook for such costs is disturbing. As we have 
all recognized, today's general business situation is 
very different from the nicely balanced growth of the 
early 1960's. There is no assurance that such a well
balanced growth can be re-established within the near 
future. Rather, we may have to face the fact that 
somewhat slower than ideal real growth may be required 
if we are to avoid grossly excessive inflationary 
pressures.  

The balance of payments statistics for October, 
showing a liquidity deficit of $770 million, underlined 
the continued imbalance in our international accounts.  
Following the November deficit of perhaps $300 to $400 
million, a substantial surplus may be achieved in 
December, but only as a result of prepayments on 
military orders and other special transactions. If 
so, the full year liquidity deficit may be only moderately 
greater than the $1.3 billion of 1965. However, as we 
look ahead the chances for avoiding a considerable 
worsening of the deficit in 1967 do not seem favorable.  
Some deterioration on capital account seems inevitable.  
I was glad to hear Mr. Brimmer's report on the direct 
investment program, but I still feel that some deterio
ration on total capital account is ahead. And military 
outlays abroad will probably rise substantially. I 
see no assurance that our trade surplus will improve 
enough to offset these adverse factors, more particularly 
if the business expansion accelerates again and if 
appreciably higher labor costs become built into the 

economy during the year. Finally, it goes without saying 
that we are likely to incur a sizable official settle
ments deficit in contrast with near-balance for 1966.  

I confess that I am still puzzled by the general 
weakness of the credit and monetary statistics over the 
past few months. In my judgment, the extent of their 

weakness is not matched by any visible development of 

the real economy. It still seems quite likely that our

-37-



12/13/66

seasonal adjustments have given an exaggerated picture 
of the slowdown by failing to take adequate account of 
tax-related and anticipatory borrowing in the first 
seven months of the year. There is no doubt that there 
has been a significant slowing of bank credit growth, 
but if we look at the year as a whole the rate of 
slowdown is reasonable and more or less in line with 
what we have been trying to achieve right along. One 
question of particular interest is whether the current 
slowdown in loan growth is still related primarily to 
the supply restraints imposed by the banks, or whether 
there is a slackening of underlying loan demand. Both 
elements are doubtless present, but most New York 
bank lending officers believe that their own restraint 
policies are the major cause. The banks generally 
view Federal Reserve policy as still restrictive, and 
they are acutely aware of their liquidity problems.  
Thus their conservatism in dealing with loan requests 
is quite understandable. There has not yet been 
sufficient time for them to react to the easing of 
their marginal reserve positions in November nor to 
the decline in short-term rates in recent weeks.  
Clearly, some modest resumption of bank credit growth, 
as compared with the apparent cessation of growth in 
the last few months, now seems very much in order; and I 
hope that the somewhat easier money market conditions 
that now prevail will lead to that result.  

It was suggested that it would be helpful for the 
Reserve Bank Presidents to comment briefly at this time 
on the construction and mortgage loan situation in their 
Districts.1/ It was the general feeling of most of the 
senior loan officers surveyed that new commitments for 

1/ In a wire dated November 29, 1966, to the Presidents of 
all Federal Reserve Banks, the Secretary of the Committee 
stated that some members had indicated it would be helpful 
to have comments at this meeting concerning the degree to 
which the construction and mortgage loan situation in the 
respective Districts was showing signs of change. It was 
suggested that a small sample of representative bank and 
nonbank lenders be asked several questions relating to current 
flows of new commitments for construction and mortgage loans.

-38-



12/13/66

such loans are at or near the low point for the year.  
At best, only a moderate recovery can be expected in 
the immediate future. Savings and loan associations 
were the most pessimistic of the four groups of 
lenders contacted, and mutual savings banks were 
probably the most optimistic. Life insurance companies 
are presently willing to commit themselves for permanent 
mortgage loans, but at a reduced pace and only in the 
quite distant future--no earlier than late 1967. Commer
cial banks report that they have not tightened up on 
construction lending to any greater degree than on 
other types of business lending; nevertheless, the 
cutbacks have in fact been substantial, possibly reflecting 
the fact that the construction industry has many nonprime 
borrowers. The commercial banks continue to grant a fair 
amount of homeowner mortgage loans, but the relatively 
few large banks that had actively sought to expand their 
role in this field during the past few years have cut back 
on their efforts in this direction.  

Under all the circumstances, I think it is reasonably 
clear that credit policy should remain unchanged over the 
next four weeks. The underlying strength of the economy 
and the unsatisfactory balance of payments position argue 
effectively against any further easing of policy. On 
the other hand, while I felt that we were moving a little 
too overtly toward a policy of greater ease at the last 
meeting, I would not advocate at this time a return to 
a posture of greater firmness in view of some further 
evidence of a slowdown in the rate of economic expansion, 
the weakness of the credit and liquidity indicators, 
and the prospect of the usual year-end churning in the 
money market. As for specific instructions to the Manager, 
I think we should stress maintenance of current money 
market conditions, with Treasury bill rates in a 5 to 
5-1/4 per cent range and a Federal funds rate of around 
5-1/2 per cent or less. I would hope that net borrowed 
reserves of around $200 million would be consistent with 
these money market conditions. In any event, conditions 
in the money market should take precedence over net 
borrowed reserves, and the Manager should again be given 
considerable leeway to use his judgment as to how best 
to maintain stable market conditions.

-39-



12/13/66

With respect to the directive, I think that the 
staff's draft alternative A is entirely satisfactory.1/ 

I would just like to make one further comment with 
respect to our longer-term policy considerations and the 
so-called policy mix. I believe a general tax increase 
is still highly desirable as a sort of insurance against 
finding ourselves again facing problems similar to those 
of last summer if the economy should gain speed next 
year. On the other hand, I believe we should not encourage 
any tendency to think that a very major easing of monetary 
policy might be considered as a sort of "trade off" against 
a tax rise. I say this because I am convinced that our 
continuing balance of payments difficulties place a rather 
strong limitation on how far we can go in easing monetary 
conditions for domestic purposes. Unfortunately, we 
find the flexibility of monetary policy curtailed in 
both directions, insofar as major swings of policy are 
concerned. This is not to deny, of course, that there 
is still considerable room within which to exercise an 
important influence on business and credit developments.  

Mr. Ellis commented that quite clearly the major propellent 

driving the New England economy had been and continued to be the 

stimulus to manufacturing that derived from Federal spending, 

especially the defense and space programs. A tally of published 

defense contracts--which showed sharp expansion last spring--plus 

application of an established lag period of six months or more, 

suggested that New England manufacturers would continue under 

delivery pressure for some time. Such pressure was showing up in 

employment, which registered its twelfth seasonally adjusted 

1/ The two alternative draft directives proposed by the staff 
for consideration by the Committee are appended to these minutes 
as Attachment A.



12/13/66 -41

increase in October; in manhours of production workers, which 

increased in October to a new record of plus 7.2 per cent 

from October last year; and finally in personal income payments, 

which showed New England exceeding the nation in year-to-year 

percentage gains. In the construction field, declines in the 

residential category were just barely offset in the totals by 

gains in other categories for a 3 per cent year-to-year gain in 

October. The ten-month total now measured a 20 per cent gain 

over a year ago--for the U.S. it was 4 per cent.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that in response to the Reserve Bank's 

queries concerning present and prospective mortgage flows, both 

the banks and insurance companies reported that their new commit

ments remained very low. After a period of rebuilding their 

liquidity and gaining assurance about the probable flow of deposits 

and policy loans, they hoped to resume mortgage lending. A very 

few banks reported that they did have money and were still granting 

mortgages, but most reported only extending commitments to long

established customers that they felt they must serve.  

Mr. Ellis stressed (1) the desire of the insurance companies 

to see a halt in policy loans before they resumed new commitments; 

(2) the desire of the mutual savings banks to see their loan-deposit 

ratios recede from the 85 per cent legal limit before they resumed 

new committing; and (3) the desire of the commercial banks to



12/13/66 -42

rebuild liquidity before turning their loan officers loose. A 

year ago liquid asset ratios of New England banks matched or 

exceeded the national average; today they ran 2 percentage points 

below. While such ratios had declined perhaps 2 percentage points 

for the national average, they had declined 5 or 6 percentage 

points for the Boston banks.  

Looking ahead, Mr. Ellis said, his economic perspective 

agreed more nearly with that of Mr. Hayes than what he judged 

the staff to be presenting. In deliberating the proper course of 

monetary policy for the next four weeks, the Committee had two 

major kinds of confirmation that it was looking for at its last 

meeting. On the one hand, it had a further confirmationof slow

down in the rate of expansion of the economy to what used to be 

called "a more sustainable rate of expansion." That was now 

called "soggy," which he judged meant a qualitative evaluation of 

a strong possibility of an actual turndown in the economy some 

time in 1967 unless emerging trends in the private economy were 

reversed. On the other hand, the Committee had confirmation of a 

large, and probably still growing, volume of Federal outlays. As 

expected, the delay in availability of information about Federal 

outlays traced not to possible shortfalls but rather to how large 

they should be allowed to appear to be. He appreciated Mr. Brill's 

measurement of the maneuvering room left for monetary policy.



12/13/66 -43

Failure to accompany the deficiency appropriation request with 

any request for a tax increase suggested that the maneuvering 

room for the Committee to lessen monetary pressures in favor of 

fiscal restraint was narrower than it would be otherwise. The 

Committee's choice of policy now seemed confined to the question 

how much monetary restraint remained appropriate given the 

conditions of private and Government demand emerging in the 

present fiscal and debt management context.  

The principal effect of the Committee's policy change 

to date, Mr. Ellis judged, had been to demonstrate that the 

Committee was flexibly sensitive to the desirability of less 

monetary restraint if the economy could accept it without resur

gence of the earlier excesses. With the Committee's having 

demonstrated that awareness, he would be prepared to see it rest 

on its oars and initiate no further change in policy until the 

course of fiscal policy became more clear.  

Mr. Ellis suggested that the two draft directives were 

not really different alternatives. The blue book projected a 

failure to expand or little change (plus or minus 2 per cent) in 

the bank credit proxy for December. Alternative A provided that 

"somewhat easier conditions shall be sought if bank credit appears 

to be failing to expand." So, if the staff projections were 

correct, the Manager was directed to ease further. Alternative B



12/13/66 -44

without equivocation directed the Manager toward "attaining 

somewhat easier conditions." In effect, therefore, both alter

natives called for easing. To provide language that would afford 

more choice, he suggested that alternative B be left as it was 

but that alternative A be converted to a "no change" directive by 

substituting the word "declining" for the words "failing to 

expand," with the understanding that "declining" would mean something 

more than the plus or minus 2 per cent projected by the staff.  

With that change his choice would be alternative A.  

Mr. Irons commented, with regard to the construction and 

mortgage loan situation in the Eleventh District, that 41 banks, 

insurance companies, savings and loan associations, and other lenders 

had been contacted. Of the 41, 25 indicated that the flow of 

commitments was at its lowest level for the year. Seven of the 

25 expected it to go still lower; 18 of the 25 felt that there 

might be some signs of recovery within the next two or three months.  

The remaining group was about evenly divided, with 8 taking the 

position that they were at the low point of the year but anticipating 

recovery and the other 8 already experiencing recovery from the low 

point. He would caution with respect to the over-all figures, 

however, that the views reflected the situation of the particular 

lender interviewed. For example, the answers of the two largest 

banks in the District did not jibe. The same thing was true of the



12/13/66 -45

two largest locally-based insurance companies; and one of the two 

largest mortgage bankers was optimistic while the other was 

pessimistic.  

Moving to District economic conditions, Mr. Irons said that 

the various elements of the economy seemed to be basically strong 

but not advancing with the same strength as some time ago. Employ

ment continued to rise, inching up to record levels each month.  

It was estimated that in Dallas the unemployment ratio was slightly 

over 2 per cent and would go to 1.9, while Houston was already at 

1.9, so there was a very tight labor market. The index of production 

continued to move up. Construction was stronger last month and 

department store sales were regarded as generally favorable, although 

it was again a matter of obtaining the expressions of particular 

department stores. Agricultural conditions were quite good, but 

there was a general need for rain in the area. Cotton production 

was going to be about 25 per cent below a year ago, largely because 

of the new cotton program. Livestock conditions were good, but the 

lack of rain was having its effect on winter wheat in the District.  

A couple of months ago, two West Texas banks asked if they could 

obtain six-month discount accommodation for grazing on winter wheat, 

but they had not been heard from since. Credit demands in the 

District might be affected somewhat depending on whether winter 

wheat was sufficient to meet grazing requirements.



12/13/66 -46

On the financial side, Mr. Irons reported that bank loans 

in the District had been drifting down a bit. Total deposits were 

down, but time and savings deposits were up slightly. Borrowings 

from the Reserve Bank had not been large; over the past four weeks 

they had declined by some $10 million. Throughout the fall period 

there had rather surprisingly not been a demand for credit through 

the discount window from the usual seasonal country bank borrowers.  

Some small country banks had come in that had never been in before, 

having been referred by their city correspondents, but generally 

there had not been the usual demand from country banks.  

The cautious conclusion of businessmen and bankers in the 

major District cities was that there had been an easing of monetary 

policy, Mr. Irons said. They thought the worst of the tight money 

period was over. But they were still cautious and were worried 

about the outcome in Vietnam and about the tax situation. On 

balance, the majority probably would favor an increase in taxes 

if they were told why it was necessary. In his opinion, the public 

probably was more ready to move in that direction, if they knew 

what was needed, particularly in terms of the cost of the Vietnam 

involvement, than the politicians seemed to suppose.  

On the national side, Mr. Irons noted that there had been 

some further slackening in the growth of the economy, although 

high levels of employment, output, and income were being maintained.



12/13/66 -47

The recent slackening in the pace of business plant and equipment 

expenditures was of some significance. The strength in that area 

had been compensating for several weaker sectors such as housing, 

automobiles, and heavy durables. On the other hand, income and 

employment continued to rise, there continued to be almost full 

utilization of plant capacity, and a high volume of trade was 

expected over the holiday period. In summary, there was some 

indication of lag in the private economy, but an offsetting trend 

in the public sector, and the private sector did not appear to be 

fundamentally weak. One should not rule out the possibility of a 

re-appearance of general strength. Also, he had some doubt that 

inflationary pressures had been calmed to the point of being more 

or less canceled out as a problem. There were still price pressures 

in the economy, and wage pressures could be expected over the 

coming months. While bank credit had not increased in line with 

the availability of reserves, it did not always follow that bank 

credit would expand just from putting reserves into the market.  

There are a number of factors that cause businessmen and bankers 

to decide whether to borrow or lend, and they must be taken into 

consideration.  

Mr. Irons suggested that credit policy until the next 

meeting of the Committee be directed toward maintaining about the 

same money market conditions as had prevailed over the recent



12/13/66 -48

period. He would avoid further easing, especially any overt move 

in that direction. He considered alternative A of the draft 

directives as the more desirable of the two, although he was some

what concerned about the proviso clause, which specified that if 

bank credit appeared to be failing to expand, somewhat easier 

conditions should be sought. He did not think the problem was as 

direct and simple as that language implied, especially when a 

short-term period was involved. This was a period of great uncer

tainty in a number of ways, and one would hardly expect the direct 

relationship to prevail that seemed implied by the proviso clause.  

Nevertheless, he would accept alternative A. He would expect that 

within a reasonable margin of error the three-month Treasury bill 

rate would be around 5.10 per cent, the six-month bill rate around 

5.20 - 5.25 per cent, the Federal funds rate around 5-1/2 per cent, 

and net borrowed reserves around $200 million, possibly less.  

Mr. Swan reported that October saw a rather broadly based 

increase in nonagricultural employment in the Twelfth District, 

despite the possibility of a fractional increase in the unemployment 

rate, and it appeared that that trend may have continued in 

November on the basis of the total employment figure for California.  

However, the projected employment gains in December and January in 

the aerospace industry were quite modest, in part because of 

expected shortages and delivery delays for various components,



12/13/66

including engines. There had been a further considerable decline 

in construction contract awards in October in all categories, and 

in the first ten months of 1966 there had been a decline of 8 per 

cent in total awards from the similar period in 1965, compared 

with a gain of 7 per cent for the U.S. as a whole. Residential 

contract awards were down 26 per cent compared with a 4 per cent 

increase in nonresidential awards and a 5 per cent increase in 

heavy construction awards.  

Twelfth District weekly reporting banks showed an increase 

in total credit in the three weeks through the end of November, 

Mr. Swan said, primarily because of acquisitions of Government 

securities. Business loans were up a little more than in the U.S.  

as a whole, reversing the trend during the earlier part of the 

year, but the increase was substantially less than for those same 

weeks a year earlier. He gained the impression from some of the 

major banks that they still felt loan demand was strong. In the 

business loan area they were not supplying all the potential 

borrowers, but at the same time there was some willingness to 

admit that demands were somewhat less intense than a few months 

ago.  

In the three weeks through the end of November, Mr. Swan 

continued, the principal weekly reporting banks showed a large gain 

in time deposits of States and political subdivisions and a better

-49-



12/13/66 -50

picture in the behavior of large CD's than banks in the rest of 

the country, although that was perhaps related to the State and 

municipal deposits. Large denomination CD's in total showed a 

gain of some $66 million, although there was a loss of $2 million 

in such certificates issued to individuals, partnerships, and 

corporations. In October the savings and loan institutions in 

California apparently accounted for more than the total loss of 

funds for all savings and loan institutions in the country as a 

whole. That was somewhat surprising, and he had no specific 

explanation.  

As to the survey relating to construction and mortgage 

loans, Mr. Swan reported encountering much the same experience 

as reported by Mr. Irons in terms of differences between the same 

types of institutions in the same areas. Over all, respondents 

indicated that mortgage commitment activity was now at about its 

lowest point, with some slight improvement expected over the next 

several months but not necessarily the next two or three months.  

Activity would still be at a rather low level even with the improve

ment anticipated. As to the various types of institutions, with 

few exceptions commercial banks and insurance companies seemed to 

be still headed downward in their commitment volume. The banks 

had not reduced their lending in the same proportion as the others, 

so they accounted for a smaller part of the decline thus far. The



12/13/66 -51

savings and loans had cut back sharply in the spring and now 

expected some improvement, with a few expecting to increase their 

lending substantially, from the present low level, in the next 

few months. There seemed to be more differences between areas 

within the District than among types of institutions. The Los 

Angeles and Salt Lake City areas saw little expectation of early 

recovery; those were areas where overbuilding had been pronounced 

in the past. In the northern California area there was some 

indication of improvement over the next several months. In the 

Northwest the optimism seemed to be greatest. The decline in 

Oregon had been more modest than in California. In Seattle it 

was doubtful whether there was any real decline due to the substan

tial increase in demand for housing during most of 1966.  

It was pointed out by some lenders, Mr. Swan said, that 

second mortgages taken by sellers had filled part of the gap.  

Data on loan records that the Reserve Bank had been able to obtain 

for certain areas tended to bear that out. Recorded loans made by 

lenders other than financial institutions were up about one-third, 

in terms of the share of the total, from August 1965 to August 1966.  

Mr. Swan said he had nothing specific to add to what had 

been said about the national picture. There were still uncertainties 

in the situation, although some aspects of the over-all picture 

were not as weak as the financial picture seemed to be. He would



12/13/66

translate that into a view that any further monetary easing should 

be quite modest; he would not favor any substantial move in that 

direction. It seemed to him that the Committee would have a much 

better perspective when the budget figures were available and 

when it could see whether the seasonal decline in the early part 

of next year was orderly.  

In terms of the directive, Mr. Swan felt somewhat like 

Mr. Ellis: given the proviso clause, there was not a great choice 

between the two draft directives. That led him to favor, although 

not strongly, alternative A as originally written. If alternative 

A were modified as Mr. Ellis has suggested, however, he (Mr. Swan) 

would prefer alternative B.  

Mr. Galusha reported that last week's survey of Ninth 

District mortgage lenders yielded a rather confused outlook. Mort

gage commitments, well below the 1965 total in May, had continued 

to decline, and many of the lenders were inclined to believe that 

commitments would not increase again soon. But the situation of 

the savings and loan associations appeared, when seasonally adjusted, 

to have improved somewhat; and on that count one could reasonably 

look for an increase in the level of mortgage commitments fairly 

soon. Also, mortgage terms appeared to have stabilized, at least 

in the Twin Cities area.

-52-



12/13/66 -53

Mr. Galusha added that he had, surprisingly enough, 

received a few reports of country banks being on the look again 

for business loans. The situation of District city banks, as 

measured by their combined basic reserve position and combined 

loan-deposit ratio, had eased of late, but not enough to send 

those banks looking for loans. According to reports, city banks 

still felt themselves strapped.  

From what the authors of the green book had to say, 

particularly about banking developments nationally, it appeared 

to Mr. Galusha that the Committee should continue the recently 

initiated trend to easier monetary conditions. With the plant 

and equipment survey results in, it was possible to be more con

fident today than a couple of weeks ago about the economic outlook.  

And that outlook, being bearish, called for an easing of the 

position of commercial banks--an easing which, even allowing for 

lags, had apparently not yet been effected. There were still some 

important fiscal decisions to be made, but that fact seemed to 

provide no reason for the Committee to pause now. The point, of 

course, was that if tax rates were increased, the need would be 

for a sharply easier monetary environment.  

The September 1 letter was a constraint in the Ninth 

District on the operation of the discount window, Mr. Galusha 

said. An obvious written withdrawal would be difficult enough to



12/13/66 -54

write in the best of circumstances, and in the context of these 

perilous times might well be impossible. But interment of the 

letter in other less structured ways could be encouraged.  

Mr. Galusha added that with the U.S. balance of payments 

position being what it was, a reinstatement of the investment tax 

credit would seem to make more sense than a sharply easier monetary 

environment. But that was looking rather far down the road. The 

balance of payments problem, however serious it might be, would 

not seem to preclude some modest easing of monetary restraint now.  

To be a bit more precise, he personally would have no misgivings-

assuming the blue book authors were right--about a level of free 

reserves close to zero or better.  

Mr. Galusha commented that he shared Mr. Hayes' perplexities 

but not Mr. Hayes' conclusions. He favored draft alternative B.  

He liked the way it was written and the fact that it had no proviso 

clause.  

Mr. Galusha suggested a need to begin looking closely at 

prospects for the second and third quarters of next year. He had 

a feeling that there was in process a substantial slowing up of 

domestic Federal programs, at least in the Ninth District, that 

would begin to show up clearly next spring and summer. Cutbacks 

in Federal spending were particularly important in areas like the 

Ninth District where so much of the economy was dependent on Federal



12/13/66 -55

programs and their absorption of labor displaced from other lines 

of work such as construction. Highway construction, for example, 

had done a remarkable job of absorbing carpenters no longer engaged 

in building houses.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that the past several weeks had 

witnessed growing uncertainty among Seventh District businessmen 

and lenders with regard to economic prospects for the coming year.  

Forecasts by prominent economists had emphasized that the restric

tive monetary policy of the past several months made a slowdown 

in 1967 almost inevitable. The business community was in a mood 

to make downward adjustments in inventories, capital expenditures, 

and new hirings. Output cutbacks had occurred in building materials, 

steel, autos, and household appliances.  

Forecasts of auto output for next year had been reduced 

to about 8 million units, Mr. Scanlon noted, compared to 8.6 million 

in 1966, Steel orders had been very slow in December and output 

was expected to be off 5 to 10 per cent from the fourth quarter 

to the first quarter. District orders for machinery and equip

ment were at the lowest level in several months in October, with 

construction machinery orders down sharply. The outlook for 

construction had not improved. Despite all of that, little easing 

had been noted in District labor markets except for those heavily 

involved in output of autos. New claims for unemployment compensation



12/13/66 -56

in October and November were well above last year in the State of 

Michigan and in some Wisconsin centers, but otherwise labor short

ages persisted.  

Credit developments at Seventh District banks closely 

paralleled the national picture, Mr. Scanlon said. Although the 

evidence suggested that some weakening in demand for credit 

probably had taken place, much of it was undoubtedly attributable 

to monetary restraint and to continued restrictive loan policies 

of the major banks. Moreover, low bank liquidity might keep banks 

reluctant to reverse those loan policies for some time ahead. The 

large Chicago banks continued to show quite large basic deficit 

positions although they had managed to cover them with relatively 

little resort to the discount window. Some gradual attrition in 

CD's had continued despite the current interest differential over 

3-month bills, and there had been no net inflow of funds from 

consumer-type certificates in recent weeks.  

With respect to Mr. Holland's wire of November 29, Mr. Scanlon 

said that inquiries had been made of 21 lenders (12 savings and loan 

associations, 4 commercial banks, and 5 mortgage and life insurance 

companies). Three savings and loan respondents indicated that 

the year's low in new commitment volume had passed and one bank 

indicated that volume had been on the rise throughout the year.  

All of the other lenders (9 savings and loan associations, 3 banks,



12/13/66 -57

and the 5 life and mortgage companies), reported commitments now 

at their low points for the year, with respondents about evenly 

divided between the wire's categories A and B combined (volume 

projected as falling further or remaining at the present level) 

and C (some recovery anticipated in next two or three months).  

Several of the savings and loans reporting some improve

ment in savings inflow since October 1 indicated that they had 

been holding back on new commitments and expected to continue to 

do so until the reaction to the year-end dividend payout had been 

felt, Mr. Scanlon added. Signs of weakness in the demand for 

mortgage loans were reported by a sizable proportion of the 

respondents, who cited the sharp decline in used home sales 

associated with the construction slowdown as responsible factors, 

along with the persistence of a rate level (with contract rates 

commonly in the 6-1/2 to 7 per cent range), fees and charges, and 

credit worthiness/security requirements related more appropriately 

to the exuberance of early 1966 than to currently prevailing 

conditions. No marked differences turned up among classes of 

lenders or kinds of property financed (or areas) in the survey 

responses, although the smallness of the sample might conceal such 

differences.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said that while he would prefer 

to see the figures reflect some moderate growth in aggregate



12/13/66 -58

monetary and credit measures, he believed that in view of the 

uncertainty over tax policy and the course of military expend

itures and the year-end churning in the markets, a policy of 

maintaining currently prevailing money market conditions was 

appropriate for the next four weeks. He favored alternative A 

of the draft policy directives.  

Mr. Clay said that information obtained from a survey of 

23 financial institutions located in the six largest cities of 

the Tenth District indicated that mortgage market conditions had 

eased slightly since mid-summer. In some cities, interest rates 

on conventional mortgages and discounts on Government-underwritten 

loans had declined slightly from the high levels prevailing last 

summer. A moderate improvement in net savings flows was reported 

by a majority of the savings and loan associations queried, but 

the availability of mortgage funds at commercial banks appeared 

to be unchanged or moderately lower and the availability from life 

insurance companies remained at previous low levels.  

Mr. Clay also said that the recent improvement on the 

supply side did not appear to be fully reflected in new commitment 

extensions. In part, that reflected a deficiency in demand result

ing from unsold new houses, houses on the market from defaults on 

FHA and VA loans, and various special supply situations. The



12/13/66 -59

demand deficiency further reflected reported unwillingness or 

inability of many buyers to borrow at present rates and terms.  

Another reason why the increased availability of funds 

was not fully reflected in new commitments was a cautious approach 

adopted by the lenders, Mr. Clay continued. Although savings and 

loan institutions might have funds available, they were concerned 

about their liquidity positions and were taking steps to reduce 

their Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings. In some cases they had 

increased their extensions of loans to purchase existing homes but 

were not yet willing to make commitments for new construction.  

In summary, Mr. Clay said, the present flow of new commit

ments extended by savings and loan associations appeared to exceed 

the low established in the preceding months, but, due in part to 

deficiency in demand and to lender caution, new permanent financing 

and construction had not kept pace with improved fund availability.  

If the improvement in net savings flows continued, an increase in 

commitments was anticipated as the market adjusted to new conditions.  

At commercial banks, Mr. Clay said, the availability of 

funds was unchanged or down moderately from levels in preceding 

months. That development on the supply side together with condi

tions of demand already mentioned had reduced the level of new 

commitments extended by banks to the low point of the year. Most 

banks were expecting little change in their commitment extensions



12/13/66 -60

during the next few months. The flow of new commitments extended 

by life insurance companies remained at its low level of the year.  

Some market participants expressed a weak expectation that life 

insurance companies would increase their commitments in coming 

months.  

In view of recent economic developments, Mr. Clay continued, 

the decision made at the last Committee meeting to reduce the degree 

of monetary restraint appeared justified. The shift in policy 

brought significant response in the money markets. While the 

resulting developments in bank reserves and bank credit might have 

been less than hoped for, note must be taken of the advance in 

nonborrowed reserves as member banks reduced their borrowing from 

the Federal Reserve Banks.  

With the prevailing uncertainties concerning Government 

spending and fiscal policy, Mr. Clay thought any further action 

toward credit easing at the present time should be of moderate 

proportions. It would appear appropriate, however, to proceed 

somewhat further in the process of relaxing the degree of monetary 

restraint. In the period ahead, targets might include a Treasury 

bill rate of 5 to 5.15 per cent, an effective Federal funds rate 

of 5 to 5-1/4 per cent, and net borrowed reserves ranging downward 

from recent levels toward zero.



12/13/66

Open market operations conducted in accordance with those 

goals should contribute to member bank reserve expansion, as 

desired under present circumstances. The most recent weekly data 

suggested to Mr. Clay that that development might now be in 

process. Such money market conditions also should substantially 

reduce or possibly remove the incentive to liquidate CD's for 

interest rate differentials, although there could be no assurance 

that substantial CD liquidation would not take place to obtain 

funds apart from interest rate considerations.  

Alternative B of the draft economic policy directives 

appeared to Mr. Clay to be in line with the foregoing policy 

approach. Such a policy prescription for the period until the 

next meeting, including the directive choice and the rough targets 

for implementing policy, should be thought of in comparison with 

the interval since the last meeting.  

Mr. Wayne commented that on the basis of results obtained 

from a small sample (18 lenders), it appeared that most mortgage 

lenders in the Fifth District felt that the flow of new loan 

commitments had reached its lowest point. Half of the lenders saw 

no recovery in sight, slightly less than half (7) felt that some 

improvement might be expected in the next two or three months, and 

two respondents felt that the recovery had already begun.

-61-



12/13/66 -62

In a personal contact apart from the survey, Mr. Wayne 

continued, one large mortgage company reported that within the 

past two weeks it had received several unsolicited calls from 

financial institutions that had bought mortgages in the past.  

The callers indicated clearly that they were not buying at present, 

but wanted to know what offerings were available and intimated 

that they might be buying before long.  

The slower rate of advance that had characterized over-all 

economic activity in the Fifth District for the past two or three 

months had continued and perhaps deepened slightly, Mr. Wayne said.  

Over half of the textile and durable goods manufacturers included 

in the Reserve Bank's latest survey reported declines in new orders 

and backlogs; on balance, the same trend was noted among manufac

turers of other nondurables but the proportion was somewhat less.  

A larger number of respondents reported shorter work weeks and 

slight reductions in prices received. Paradoxically, in the face 

of those reported declines, businessmen's expectations for improve

ment had increased. Gains in nonagricultural employment had been 

reported and the insured unemployment rate continued to be very 

low.  

In terms of the national economy, Mr. Wayne agreed with 

the analysis presented by the staff: the trend toward less vigorous 

growth seemed to be continuing slowly but steadily. Except for the



12/13/66 -63

slightly higher growth of payroll employment and the drop in the 

rate of unemployment, the latest data suggested a progressive 

easing in the private sector. The cutback in automobile sales 

and output now appeared to have spread to other consumer durable 

lines and the recent survey of consumer buying intentions provided 

no basis for expecting any early improvement in automobiles or 

home appliances. A significant new development was the reporting 

by several large companies of the laying off of sizable numbers 

of workers and a considerable reduction of overtime. Steel and 

lumber producers, other suppliers of building materials, and the 

furniture industry were feeling the effects of the long decline 

in residential building. Retail sales continued to move at a 

rather subdued pace and the irregular but persistent downward 

trend in the growth rate of instalment credit for the past 16 

months suggested a more than temporary decline in the demand for 

durable goods. The construction industry might be depressed 

further by proposed reductions in Federal spending recently announced 

by the President, especially the large cut in the highway program.  

Nor could the builders derive much encouragement from the latest 

surveys of planned capital outlays by business and consumer plans 

to build homes. While the economy would certainly receive a signif

icant stimulus from defense spending over the next six months, it



12/13/66 -64

was by no means clear that strength in the Government sector would 

offset entirely the developing weakness in the private sector.  

In any event, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that the recent behav

ior of aggregate reserves, bank credit, and the money supply was 

not appropriate to the current business environment. The Committee 

had moved gradually toward slightly less restraint in its policy, 

but the money supply and bank credit had shown no significant 

response. He felt the Committee should seek to encourage moderate 

rates of growth in both; to attain that goal, he would favor contin

uing the policy of slightly less restraint.  

Mr. Wayne also suggested that serious consideration be 

given to an orderly withdrawal of the restrictive implications in 

the September 1 letter. There was never an ideal time for making 

such a move, but the longer the wait the more difficult it would 

be to abandon that position. He was aware that such action at 

this time might suggest to the market more ease than was wanted, 

but he believed that the danger of an undue increase in business 

loans had been reduced by the banks' recent experience with CD's, 

by the easing in economic activity, and by the much slower growth 

of capital outlays planned for next year. Further, he saw a moral 

obligation to the member banks. In response to conversations 

last spring and the September 1 letter, some Fifth District banks 

had, in good faith, carried out an effective policy of curbing



12/13/66 -65

business loans. In return, they had asked to be advised when 

the restriction ended so that they would not be at a competitive 

disadvantage. If their cooperation was to be expected in the 

future, the System should keep faith with them on that matter.  

Finally, he would be happy to get back to what he considered more 

appropriate methods of implementing monetary policy.  

Mr. Wayne said, in conclusion, that alternative B of the 

draft directives was appropriate to his view of a proper policy 

for the next few weeks.  

Mr. Shepardson said it seemed to him that the action taken 

at the last meeting of the Committee had resulted in some easing 

as indicated by some of the rate movements that had occurred and 

by the prospect of an upturn in the money supply, which he thought 

was appropriate. Admittedly, credit expansion still lagged in 

light of the liquidity situation of the banks, but it might be 

expected that the banks would try to improve their liquidity before 

undertaking any significant credit expansion. Recognizing the 

somewhat lesser degree of pressure in the private economy, it 

nevertheless seemed to him that there was still a great deal of 

uncertainty in what the Government's fiscal program might be.  

Therefore, in the weeks prior to the next meeting there was still 

reason for proceeding cautiously. He thought that in view of the 

rate levels achieved, the report of the staff that some growth in



12/13/66 -66

the money supply was indicated, and the probability of a lower 

net borrowed reserve figure this week, it would be appropriate 

to continue for the coming period in about the status quo.  

On the directive, Mr. Shepardson agreed with Mr. Ellis 

that with the proviso clause included there was not much difference 

between the two draft directives. His preference was for alter

native A, either without the proviso clause or with Mr. Ellis' 

suggested change.  

Mr. Mitchell said he regarded today's staff analysis as a 

strong warning against showing too little concern about the danger 

of slipping into recession. Several people had commented that the 

performance of the economy was still good. However, the accelera

tion of the economy had lost its momentum several months ago. The 

question now was whether the economy was decelerating, a state not 

far from that of slipping into a downturn. There was evidence in 

the GNP figures, in the industrial production index, and in the 

specifics given by Mr. Scanlon, for example. It was necessary to 

keep in mind the lags in policy. Members of the Committee were 

now apprehensive about the recent lag in achieving growth in the 

money supply and bank credit. He did not think the Committee 

could afford any longer to take a relaxed position on that score; 

it must do something sufficiently drastic to achieve the desired 

growth. Maybe, as some people suspected, growth had already begun,



12/13/66 -67

but from the information the staff had supplied he doubted that 

the liquidity barrier had yet been pierced. Until that barrier 

was pierced the desired results would not be obtained.  

Mr. Mitchell also expressed the view that the housing 

situation was more serious than some seemed to assume. Recovery 

in that area was necessary, but the question was how to achieve 

it. One way would be to put the financial intermediaries back 

in business and give them confidence that they could compete 

with rates in the market. Another way would be to make it possible 

for the larger banks to warehouse some mortgages so that the insur

ance companies would come back into the market.  

Mr. Mitchell said he believed that everyone at this meeting 

shared a common objective, although that fact tended to be obscured 

by semantics. He was interested in what Mr. Ellis had said about 

the directive, and agreed that the staff's two alternatives did not 

give the Committee much choice. However, he (Mr. Mitchell) doubted 

that the staff could conscientiously offer the Committee any real 

alternative to easing, considering the nature of their economic 

analysis. He recalled that at the last meeting Mr. Robertson had 

suggested a directive calling for operations "with a view to encour

aging moderate expansion in aggregate reserves and bank credit, 

provided that money market conditions do not ease sharply." He 

(Mr. Mitchell) now wished he had supported that proposal more



12/13/66 -68

strongly then. He would favor a modified version of alternative B 

today, calling for operations "with a view to attaining a moderate 

expansion in the money supply and bank credit." 

Mr. Daane commented that he wished he could share the 

staff's seeming sense of certainty as to the economic outlook and 

its implications for monetary policy, but he could not. As an 

economist and long-time member of the System's forecasting committee 

on business developments, he recalled well an occasion at the end 

of May 1950 when a former member of the staff assured that committee 

that the one certainty that could be depended upon was that there 

would be no intensification of the "cold war." Only a few weeks 

later the Korean conflict began.  

On the substantive side, Mr. Daane said he remained skep

tical about a deceleration of defense spending. He did not doubt 

the credibility of the figures that would shortly appear in the 

budget, nor would he impugn the motives of anyone involved in the 

presentation of those figures. He simply doubted that a war was 

waged that way, and he would be surprised to see an actual decelera

tion. As to the tapering off of capital spending, he thought that 

reflected the situation on the financial supply side and also the 

physical supply side, and that it was in the interest of sustainable 

expansion. As to the domestic outlook, he agreed with Mr. Irons 

that the private sector was not fundamentally weak. While he



12/13/66 -69

conceded the weight of evidence on the staff side, he would not 

rule out a resurgence of pressures.  

Similarly, Mr. Daane said, he was impressed by the thought

ful views presented by Mr. Polak of the International Monetary 

Fund at the conclusion of this year's Article VIII consultation 

with the U.S. Mr. Polak had said in part that: ". . . if monetary 

conditions should ease in 1967, whether because of a tax increase 

and a shift in the policy mix or because of subsiding domestic 

credit demands, there would be a great need to avoid redundancy 

of bank reserves, bank credit, and general domestic liquidity 

thoughout the system. In contrast to the 1961-62 policy, for 

example, the banks would have to be kept 'snug' enough, as domestic 

loan demands subsided, to minimize the external leakage. Even so, 

we find it hard to envisage an easing of credit conditions suffi

cient to promote a revival of home building that would not at the 

same time encourage banks to give up the expensive accommodation 

they have obtained from the Euro-dollar market. Also to be borne 

in mind is a problem of timing, in that a deterioration in the 

capital account could happen with some rapidity whereas any improve

ment in the current account during the course of 1967 is likely to 

proceed gradually." One further comment from the observations of 

Mr. Polak, relating to the voluntary foreign credit restraint 

program, was as follows: "The bank program has, of course, been



12/13/66 -70

only on a stand-by basis during the past year, while the banks 

have accumulated a large leeway under their credit ceilings; it 

would seem to us important that the program be formulated in such 

a way that the amount of net credit that the banks could extend 

during 1967 would be kept small." 

Carrying his divergence from the staff view to a logical 

conclusion, Mr. Daane said, he found himself questioning the view 

he understood to have been stated by Mr. Hersey that the Committee 

could ignore the consequences on the capital account side of the 

balance of payments in continuing to push for monetary ease. He 

questioned such a conclusion, particularly in the light of the 

formulation of the bank portion of the voluntary restraint program 

for the coming year. He thought the Fund representative was more 

nearly correct in appraising the immediacy of the outflow on the 

Euro-dollar side.  

On balance, Mr. Daane thought the action taken by the 

Committee last time had resulted in some significant easing in the 

money market, as gauged by the financial variables looked at most, 

including bill rates and net borrowed reserves. Therefore, he 

would once again conclude that the better course of wisdom was to 

stand steady. To carry that out in the framework of a directive, 

he would choose alternative A, but he would couch it in a "no 

change" version as suggested by Mr. Ellis with slightly different



12/13/66 -71

phraseology. He would say that operations ". .. shall be con

ducted with a view to maintaining the currently somewhat easier 

money market conditions, unless bank credit appears to be 

declining." That would carry the flavor of validating what the 

Committee had done, yet leave the Committee in a position of not 

pushing further toward ease at this juncture.  

Mr. Maisel said that he agreed fully with the staff 

analysis today. With reference to Mr. Galusha's comments about 

cutbacks in domestic nondefense programs, he would add that 

apparently the Secretary of Defense was cutting back a number of 

the normal ongoing defense programs to make room for Vietnam 

requirements.  

It was not surprising to him, Mr. Maisel continued, that 

the money and credit figures had not risen as the result of a 

modest easing of monetary policy. It was necessary to take into 

account that the Committee was operating against record high 

interest rate levels. Bill and other interest rates were a good 

half point above what might have been expected a year or even six 

months ago. The actual level of rates was clearly a more important 

influence on demand than was a relative fall from extremely high 

levels. The Committee should not fool itself by what had occurred 

over the last two or three months. It had to move against condi

tions as they now prevailed with unusually high rates rather than



12/13/66 -72

against the situation as it stood several months ago when rates 

were more modest.  

Mr. Maisel suggested that the Committee should be more 

concerned about the future than about this immediate point in 

time. It should endeavor to remove the present distortions in 

the economy and achieve a normal expansion of money and credit.  

Even if the Committee were not concerned about a downturn in the 

private sector of the economy, it should make sure that it moved 

to obtain expansion in money and credit simply to get rid of the 

existing distortions, which would otherwise become worse.  

Mr. Maisel thought that housing was heading into the 

definite danger of an inflationary situation, given the working 

of supply and demand factors in that particular industry. If 

housing starts remained at the prevailing low levels, one could 

expect run-ups in rents, prices, and therefore in the cost of 

living, along with a wage push resulting from the increase in the 

cost of living.  

In summary, Mr. Maisel felt that the Committee would have 

to move more vigorously. At the last meeting he had handed the 

Secretary of the Committee a note proposing language for the 

directive along the same lines as Mr. Robertson's subsequent 

suggestion. As he understood it, Mr. Mitchell was now recommending 

that alternative B of the draft directives be changed to call for



12/13/66 -73

operations with a view to attaining a moderate expansion in bank 

reserves, money, and bank credit. He would support that point of 

view. In other words, he would support alternative B with a change 

to that effect in the last line.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would like to make an additional 

comment on the balance of payments. He had worked along with 

Mr. Daane on the formulation of the Government's program and had 

also tried to keep in touch with balance of payments developments 

generally. From time to time he had expressed his concern about 

the slow progress that was being made toward attaining a somewhat 

more viable equilibrium. As he had mentioned at the last Committee 

meeting, those working on the Government program were exerting 

every effort to make certain that the voluntary program was put 

together in a way that would give the central bank as much 

flexibility as possible in the management of domestic affairs.  

They had tried to forestall the possibility that a weak balance 

of payments program would make it necessary for the central bank 

to carry an additional burden in domestic policy making. While 

he did not have any indication of the extent to which the voluntary 

program would be workable next year, especially the Commerce Depart

ment program, he was convinced that it would be quite helpful. The 

pressure that had been brought to keep the direct investment out

flow to less than $2.5 billion should prove helpful.



12/13/66

With respect to the Federal Reserve program, Mr. Brimmer 

shared Mr. Daane's concern that the leeway permitted to accumulate 

20 per cent of the quota each quarter was a point of danger. At 

the same time he saw no reason why the situation could not be 

corrected by tightening the program further if necessary. So he 

shared Mr. Hersey's conclusion that it was not necessary to panic 

at the prospect of a short-run outflow and a return of the funds 

that had come in through overseas branches of U.S. banks. The 

Committee ought to shape its policy to the needs of the domestic 

economy and rely on the voluntary foreign credit restraint program 

to the fullest extent possible.  

In view of the announcement today of the voluntary 

programs for 1967, Mr. Brimmer suggested a modification in the 

first paragraph of the draft directive to say that "The balance 

of payments remains a serious problem and the voluntary programs 

have been strengthened and extended through 1967." He thought 

it appropriate for the Committee to take note that the program 

decisions had been made and that one element of uncertainty in 

policy making had thereby been removed.  

With respect to the domestic situation, Mr. Brimmer shared 

the views advanced by the staff and many others around the table.  

He, like Mr. Hayes, was impressed by the fact that different 

economists sometimes reached different conclusions from the same

-74-



12/13/66

figures. At the same time he was also impressed at this time by 

the overwhelming proportion of economists who had come to the 

same conclusion as the staff had.  

With respect to policy making, Mr. Brimmer said he would 

like to focus both on the period immediately ahead and on the 

longer run. It was his understanding that there might well be 

some additional debt management operations, perhaps before the 

end of the year, involving participation certificates. There 

were rumors to that effect in the market, with some feeling for 

the possible configuration. Those operations might exert some 

upward pressure on interest rates. If the amount to be offered 

to the public was of the magnitude that had been suggested, the 

Committee ought to be concerned about the possible need for some 

further easing in the short run to maintain the same policy stance.  

For the longer run he thought that further easing was absolutely 

necessary. It was not surprising that the banks had been sluggish 

in responding to the easing of monetary policy thus far; over the 

years economists had learned something about liquidity preferences.  

The Committee should not overlook the need to make the banks feel 

a little more liquid. It also was necessary to provide some head

room for banks to achieve an increase in their CD's.  

Mr. Brimmer went on to say that another look should be 

taken at the September 1 letter, not only in terms of agreeing

-75-



12/13/66 -76

that there was no longer a need for it but in terms of taking 

an overt step to rescind it. The letter was made necessary by 

conditions prevailing in the late summer and early fall, but 

those conditions had passed. It was sent out as a signal that 

the System wanted some restraint on the expansion of business 

loans, and he thought it desirable now to have an explicit state

ment that the letter was no longer in effect. Mr. Wayne had made 

the point that the banks felt they needed some indication of 

System attitude, and he (Mr. Brimmer) hoped an appropriate letter 

could be gotten out.  

Mr. Hayes had mentioned the policy mix for the longer run, 

Mr. Brimmer noted. He (Mr. Brimmer) hoped that monetary policy 

would play an active part in that mix. If conditions required it, 

and he thought they did, there should be a shift toward greater 

ease. Monetary policy had the advantage of being flexible. It 

should also be timely, and he thought now was the time to get on 

with further easing. Accordingly, he favored the approach of 

alternative B of the draft directives, and would subscribe to 

Mr. Mitchell's proposed change in its wording.  

In concluding, Mr. Brimmer observed that the Manager had 

executed a rather difficult maneuver under a directive that was 

not abundantly clear.



12/13/66

Mr. Hickman commented that the flow of business and finan

cial news in recent weeks showed clearly that the policy shift at 

the Committee's last meeting was appropriate. Nevertheless, the 

latest data indicated to him that the Committee should push further 

in the direction of ease. Whether one looked backward or forward, 

monthly data on the monetary variables showed a nearly uniform 

series of minus signs. The bank credit proxy, total reserves, 

required reserves, and the money supply had been moving downward, 

indicating that the supply of credit was declining relative to the 

less intensive demands of recent months. In that environment, it 

seemed to him an inescapable conclusion that net borrowed reserves 

had been too deep, and the money market too tight, to support 

continued economic expansion. He therefore recommended that the 

Committee aim for a zero, or even a positive, level of net free 

reserves, as needed to get back on the high road of balanced money 

and credit growth.  

Since economic activity in the Fourth District had a wider 

amplitude of cyclical variation than that of the U.S. as a whole, 

Mr. Hickman thought it might be timely to review briefly business 

and financial conditions in that region. Evidence had accumulated 

that heavy industry in the Cleveland-Cincinnati-Pittsburgh triangle 

was beginning to feel the impact of economic slackening. That was 

revealed clearly at the joint directors' meeting last week, where

-77-



12/13/66 -78

important cases were cited of a slowing in new orders, resulting 

in reduced backlogs and less pressure on resources and capacity.  

The Cleveland Bank's monthly survey of manufacturers in 

the Fourth District, plus a number of regional series collected 

by the research staff, also reflected the more moderate tempo of 

local business activity, Mr. Hickman said. Manufacturing activity 

in major areas, as measured by industrial consumption of electric 

power, had either turned downward or had slackened its growth.  

Production and new orders in steel declined in November to the 

lowest levels since August. Insured unemployment in November 

increased slightly in 9 out of 14 major District labor markets, 

and declined in only 3 markets (in one market the decline was 

caused by a strike settlement). Department store sales seemed to 

have leveled off, after an almost uninterrupted period of steady 

growth since late 1962. The decline in construction contracts 

thus far this year had been more severe than in the nation. The 

seasonal expansion in bank credit at the weekly reporting banks 

in November was only about one-fourth as large as in the comparable 

period a year ago.  

Mr. Hickman went on to say that early returns from a 

confidential survey of recent and anticipated borrowing by a 

sample of large midwestern business corporations showed that about 

three-fourths of the respondents had unused commitments at banks,



12/13/66 -79

which most planned to draw upon next year. Respondents indicated 

that credit needs would be large in the second quarter of 1967, 

but that the purpose of the borrowing would be largely to meet 

taxes, rather than for asset expansion.  

With reference to the recent mortgage survey, Mr. Hickman 

said that the responses from 23 financial institutions were not 

reassuring. Only one-third of the lenders reported a recovery in 

commitments or anticipated a pickup in the near future. Although 

a general increase in availability of funds had occurred recently, 

demand for real estate and construction loans had fallen off, 

partly because of the cool reception given borrowers by lenders 

earlier this year. Respondents indicated that new commitments 

would be allocated largely to the residential mortgage market.  

Mr. Hickman favored whatever net credit availability was 

needed to produce pluses in the major monetary variables. The 

staff's alternative directive B was satisfactory to him, as it 

stood or as amended by Messrs. Mitchell and Maisel. He thought 

the September 1 letter should be rescinded.  

Mr. Patterson reported that while business activity in 

the Sixth District was still at a high level, data that had become 

available since the last Committee meeting indicated additional 

signs of a slowing down. With November auto sales in the District 

off sharply from a year ago, the District was sharing in the recently



12/13/66 -80

announced auto layoffs. Even the agricultural sector was begin

ning to lose some of its glow, now that cotton had been reduced 

in output and prices for livestock and other products were lower.  

In Florida, the price of oranges had dropped from $2.86 to 83 

cents a box. Residential construction volume was also turning in 

a progressively deteriorating performance, although total construc

tion volume was still slightly ahead of last year and was outpacing 

the national average. That the softness in autos, construction, 

and agriculture was becoming one of swelling proportions was further 

suggested by the most recent reports from head office and branch 

directors, who seemed to be less optimistic than in several years.  

On the other hand, Mr. Patterson continued, the nine 

commercial banks, five mortgage bankers, and handful of savings 

and loan associations contacted on the question of mortgage lending 

seemed to be slightly more cheerful than they had been over the 

past several months. Savings flows for October and November were 

better than many had expected earlier, although not good enough to 

improve commitments in most local lending markets. The majority 

of lenders indicated that flows of new commitments were at their 

low for the year. Most of them thought the bottom had been reached 

and fairly early recovery might be in sight. While commercial 

bankers were the least optimistic, the savings and loan people did 

not expect an early turn in the market without clarification of the



12/13/66 -81

new Home Loan Bank program. A minority of mortgage bankers, on 

the other hand, said that their flows of new money had already 

shown some recovery; and about one-third of all respondents antic

ipated some recovery in the next two or three months. Many 

indicated that, with the exception of large commercial properties, 

money had become more readily available, but that cost remained 

high. In single family residential housing, most new originations 

by mortgage bankers were being sold to FNMA. A number of mortgage 

bankers were retaining one-year options to repurchase them, and 

some permanent investors had indicated their willingness to absorb 

or share that cost in order to insure the availability of mortgages.  

Commitments for large commercial projects were being restricted 

in some District markets because the permanent investors wanted 

to defer takeouts for as long as two years. Commercial banks were 

unable or unwilling to carry them for that length of time.  

It seemed quite clear to Mr. Patterson that the picture 

of insignificant growth in bank lending had not changed in the 

past several months after allowing for seasonal changes. Loans 

at the largest banks increased less this November than in comparable 

past periods. Many bankers with whom he had talked recently said 

that their loan demand was still very high, but an increasing 

number of them were also beginning to say that it was not as strong 

as it had been, possibly because inventory growth had slowed. The



12/13/66 -82

bankers were, however, of one mind in complaining that their 

deposit growth had ceased--a fact borne out by statistics. They 

still worried about whether they would be able to satisfy the 

loan demand of their good customers and in many cases were trying 

to find ways to repay their indebtedness to the Reserve Bank and 

to reduce their dependence on the Federal funds market. Under 

those conditions, it would probably be difficult for them to buy 

municipals on a large scale, even if the Committee were to let up 

further in its policy of restraint. Sixth District banks also 

would be slow to benefit from the effects of lower bill rates vis

a-vis CD rates, since even the largest ones were not too active 

in the CD market and were less sensitive to changes in short-term 

rates than banks in many other sections of the country.  

Turning to the national scene, it seemed clear to 

Mr. Patterson that with the further slowing down that had occurred, 

his own position at the last meeting, and that of the Committee, 

had been eminently correct. He believed the thrust of that new 

policy should be continued, the Treasury financing calendar permit

ting, although the uncertainty of fiscal policy and balance of 

payments considerations demanded that the Committee not let up on 

monetary restraint to an extreme degree. On the other hand, it 

must be remembered that the delayed effects of the restrictive 

policy were still leaving their imprint. Therefore, the Committee



12/13/66 -83

should not be under any illusion that slightly lower rates and a 

reversal in money supply statistics would be likely to have a 

significant impact on future financial flows unless it continued 

to lift its policy targets. He would like to see a return to the 

moderate expansion rate in money and credit experienced in the 

first half of 1966. He was neutral as to whether the Committee 

tried to accomplish that by couching its instructions in terms of 

money market conditions or aggregate reserves, but he preferred 

alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Lewis reported that most lenders surveyed in the Eighth 

District indicated that new commitments for construction and mort

gage loans were at low points for the year. They foresaw no early 

recovery. A few expected further reductions in the near future.  

Savings and loan associations in St. Louis reported a net inflow 

of funds approximating that of a year ago. However, they were 

making few new commitments because the Federal Home Loan Bank was 

requiring payoff of borrowingsof last summer. There were indica

tions that some insurance companies would like to pick up more 

mortgages at higher interest rates but were prevented from doing 

so because of lower cash inflows resulting from a marked reduction 

in prepayments of old loans.  

Most of the commitments made were for commercial, industrial, 

and multi-dwelling units, Mr. Lewis continued. Few funds were



12/13/66 -84

flowing into the single-unit residential market. Several lenders 

indicated a marked reduction in the number of loan applications, 

but they felt that if they made known that they had funds available 

for mortgages, applicants would readily come forth. That was 

particularly true for insurance companies and savings and loan 

associations.  

Total demand for goods and services was continuing to rise, 

Mr. Lewis observed, but less vigorously than in late 1965 and 

early 1966. The contraction in bank reserves and money beginning 

last spring probably had contributed to the slowing in private 

demand, despite the stimulative budget situation. The mix of fiscal 

and monetary policy, although leading to a desirable slowing in the 

growth of expenditures, had fostered high interest rates. While 

probably beneficial for balance of payments purposes, such rates 

appeared to be causing hardship on the housing market and private 

investment, and as a result might be hampering economic growth.  

As to the future, it appeared to Mr. Lewis that total 

public policy--fiscal and monetary--might not need to be so restric

tive in coming months as it had been since spring. If the policy 

mix should include a less stimulative budget in the future than 

since mid-1965, monetary actions could be relaxed, and interest 

rates would become less of a drag on economic growth. Even if the 

fiscal stance remained stimulative, a case might be made, although



12/13/66

with less confidence, that some relaxation of monetary restraint 

was in order. Total demand had slowed and the Committee would not 

want to overkill the inflationary pressures.  

For the next month, Mr. Lewis said, he would like to see 

still easier conditions in the money market with a view to obtain

ing a moderate growth in bank reserves, bank credit, and money.  

He preferred alternative B for the directive.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

Developments that have emerged since the last 
meeting of this Committee seem to me to have confirmed 
the wisdom of the judgment we reached at that time to 
begin a modest but overt easing of monetary policy.  
Almost every statistic that has since become available 
is indicative of a little more slackening in final 
demand pressures. On the financial side, our slight 
easing to date has brought down a few interest rates, 
and improved bank liquidity positions a bit, but it 
has not yet been able to halt the persisting decline 
in bank credit. Meanwhile, we still await a clear 
declaration of the future fiscal intentions of the 
Administration. The budget figures revealed to date 
support a further but slower rise in expenditures, but 
no official position is yet definite regarding a tax 
increase.  

In these circumstances, I think our best policy 
is to continue what I have been calling in previous 
meetings a "tentative but gradual and progressive kind 
of let-up of monetary pressures". What I would like 
us to achieve, in the weeks ahead, is at least a full 
offset of any tendencies for the money market to firm 
under the expected seasonal pressures between now and 
year-end; and thereafter enough further easing of bank 
liquidity positions to encourage the gradual resumption 
of orderly, moderate growth in bank credit and money.  

I read the "blue book" and the staff directive 
notes as saying, in effect, that there is a good chance

-85-



12/13/66

of achieving these objectives by continuing virtually 
unchanged our current directive to the Manager; that 
is, by adopting the draft alternative B. This, I take 
it, might involve net borrowed reserves around zero and 
a three-month bill rate and Federal funds rate around 
5 per cent before the Committee meets again.  

I am prepared to accept that kind of prescription 
for now, recognizing that the many end-of-year uncer
tainties make any elaborate specification of targets a 
matter of guesswork. However, recent developments do 
suggest to me that it was not amiss at the last meeting 
to explore ways of giving more weight to the performance 
of the monetary aggregates. This could be accomplished 
in the directive by using the traditional form of the 
proviso clause, if we continue to direct the Manager to 
vary the degree of ease or tightness in the money market 
according to the degree of weakness or strength in bank 
credit and aggregate reserves. Thus, in that light, it 
would not bother me if the three-month bill rate or the 
Federal funds rate fell somewhat below 5 per cent in 
the month ahead if bank credit were showing no tendency 
to expand in, at least, the 2 -to-4 per cent range.  

Mr. Robertson added that he still felt that the suggestion 

for the language of the directive that he had made at the last 

meeting was a good one. However, he thought there was probably 

more sentiment today for alternative B as drafted by the staff.  

Consequently, he would opt for alternative B, with the understand

ing that the objective was substantially the same as the objective 

contemplated by the language he had suggested.  

Chairman Martin remarked that he read alternativesA and 

B in about the same way as Mr. Ellis: there did not seem to be too 

much difference between them. However, he continued to feel, as 

he had before today's discussion, that alternative B was preferable.  

Like Mr. Galusha, he found the way it was written appealing.



12/13/66 -87

The Chairman went on to say that while he did not pretend 

to know exactly what the leads and lags were, he did not think 

that the Committee, in moving either toward restraint or ease, 

could force the statistics in a brief period. It seemed to him 

the Committee had made the right decision at the last meeting. He 

questioned, however, whether it would be desirable now to move to 

net free reserves; it seemed preferable to move more gradually.  

In his opinion the Desk had performed well over the past few weeks.  

There had been a general understanding, without news releases, of 

what the Committee was trying to do, and that was salutary. With 

the year end approaching, and with all the cross currents involved, 

he thought the Committee would be running a real risk if any 

substantial amount of net free reserves appeared. That might be 

taken to indicate that the Committee had become panic-stricken, 

and the move would become self-defeating in terms of what the 

Committee was trying to do. There was always that risk when policy 

was being changed. As things stood, the Committee had started a 

gradual move three weeks ago and the statistics so indicated.  

The Chairman went on to say that he did not happen to be 

bearish. He thought the economy was still strong, and he was glad 

that monetary policy had gotten out of the posture it was in until 

recently. The pace of the expansion in the private sector of the 

economy clearly was tending to turn down as long ago as September



12/13/66 -88

and October, and it was not good for the System to be in a position 

of forcing restraint in those circumstances.  

Chairman Martin noted that there were probably going to 

be some tests of public psychology and business sentiment when the 

Government's general budgetary posture became fully understood.  

The figures might be rather startling to a lot of people who had 

not yet achieved the degree of sophistication necessary to accept 

deficit financing with complacency.  

The Government, Chairman Martin continued, had made a lot 

of progress in the use of its tools of policy and its methods of 

operation, but it should not force the issues unnecessarily. Per

sonally, he hoped the President would recommend a tax increase, 

partly because he thought the budgetary situation would call for 

one and partly because he saw a psychological advantage and, in a 

sense, a moral advantage in having people share in the cost of the 

Vietnam effort in one way or another. He thought the country ought 

to follow a "pay as you go" principle for a lot of things.  

Chairman Martin expressed the view that the Committee should 

keep steady in the boat and not appear unduly concerned. The damp

ening that had occurred in the excessive pace of economic growth 

was much to be desired, but he did not think monetary policy should 

claim the full credit. As he saw it, inflationary tendencies had 

gotten a foothold at a certain stage, and they in turn produced



12/13/66 -89

counter tendencies. The Chairman also referred to the gold situa

tion, saying it was of more concern to him than the balance of 

payments statistics per se.  

Chairman Martin repeated that he liked alternative B of 

the draft directives as written. While he would not object strongly 

to the changes that had been suggested, he did not think one could 

expect to achieve precise results, particularly in a four-week 

period. It was perfectly normal, as had been pointed out, that 

when banks became worried about their liquidity positions they would 

not go out looking for loans at the first opportunity. In fact, he 

did not believe that that would be desirable under present conditions.  

The September 1 letter concerned him a little, the Chairman 

continued. His personal preference, however, would be to take no 

overt action and simply let the Presidents talk to people in their 

respective Districts on an individual basis. Issuance of a state

ment would attract more attention than seemed warranted and might 

lead a lot of people to believe that the System was calling upon 

banks to send their men out to seek business loans. He would just 

let the matter rest for the moment, although the Presidents could 

talk with people who came to them with questions.  

Mr. Wayne said that in the Fifth District certain banks 

had in good faith exercised self-restraint. They would like to 

know when the September 1 letter was no longer in effect. He would 

not have to say much for the word to get around.



12/13/66 -90

Chairman Martin repeated that his preference would be to 

talk with such parties individually rather than to issue a state

ment saying the September 1 letter was no longer in effect. There 

was no reason a Reserve Bank President could not talk to people 

about general credit conditions, but the issuance of a statement 

might be read by the press and others as a blanket invitation to 

the banks to go out and seek business loans.  

Mr. Brimmer expressed reservations about such a procedure.  

The September 1 letter was a policy statement reflecting a System

wide credit control program. It announced to the public an explicit 

objective of System policy. Therefore, it would not seem sufficient 

for the President of a Reserve Bank to talk quietly to each banker 

who called upon him about the matter. In his judgment, that was 

not the way System policy should be made or changed. He appreciated 

the difficulties of letter-drafting and the problem of timing, but 

when a public policy matter was involved an announcement ought to 

be made.  

Chairman Martin said that he had some question about the 

wisdom of such a move. The letter of September 1 had been widely 

misconstrued, and its public withdrawal might likewise be widely 

misconstrued.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he saw no difficulty in discussing 

the credit situation with bankers. However, the moment a President



12/13/66 -91

began to talk with one or two bankers in terms of the September 1 

letter, that was going to become known and other banks were going 

to be critical of the System for not having advised them directly.  

While there were not very many banks deeply involved, some smaller 

banks who perhaps had taken the matter seriously might not get 

the word promptly. He would not hesitate to discuss the general 

change in credit conditions, but he would hesitate to talk about 

the September 1 letter without being sure that all interested banks 

would have the same message at approximately the same time.  

Mr. Daane said he subscribed to the view that a formal 

rescinding of the letter at this time might lead to more repercus

sions than desirable.  

Mr. Hayes also agreed on the inadvisability of sending 

out another letter at this time. A considerable amount of 

confusion had resulted from the issuance of the original letter, 

and in retrospect he was not sure that it was an entirely wise 

move. While he recognized that the need for the letter no longer 

existed, rescinding it formally might lead to the same confusion 

and uncertainty that accompanied the issuance of the original letter.  

More broadly speaking, he would be reluctant to see the System get 

into a position of feeling that it must issue letters to the member 

banks advertising its policy decisions. He thought the System had 

been on sounder ground in the past in letting its actions speak 

for themselves.



12/13/66

Mr. Hayes also said that by a formal withdrawal of the 

September 1 letter the System could hardly fail to highlight 

whatever policy change had been made. He felt that that would 

make the change more overt than a majority of the Committee 

members desired. He could appreciate that it would be useful to 

get across the idea that the System was taking the attitude that 

the need for the letter had faded away. But he hoped a formal 

withdrawal of the letter could be deferred until the idea gradually 

got across that the letter was no longer operative. It might be 

useful for the Chairman, in answering questions from the press or 

in making a speech, to include a comment that the program described 

in the September 1 letter was designed to meet conditions as of 

that date, that those conditions had changed in many respects, and 

that the letter had outlived its usefulness. Gradually that would 

sink in, and the letter could then be rescinded formally at some 

later date.  

Mr. Galusha subscribed to that view. He noted that there 

were many ways in which a Reserve Bank President could communicate 

ideas without having a public gathering or making a general announce

ment. The only question he had was whether the way was now clear 

to indicate, in whatever manner seemed appropriate, that a reduction 

of business loans was no longer considered essential. If that 

point of view was expressed in conversation with individual bankers,

-92-



12/13/66 -93

the word would soon get around. If the question came up, as it 

had the other day from the head of one of the larger District 

banks, and if the Presidents were free to handle the situation in 

whatever way appeared necessary, the September letter would grad

ually die. It could be disposed of formally at a later date. But 

the issuance of a withdrawal letter at this time could cause many 

problems.  

Mr. Wayne said that although he shared Mr. Brimmer's views 

about the advantages of a public statement, he also recognized the 

danger of creating an erroneous impression at this time. The 

question was one of responsibility to the banks that had cooperated.  

The September 1 letter was essentially a System statement indicating 

that under the circumstances as they prevailed at that time the 

Federal Reserve thought the banks ought to display a high degree 

of statesmanship. All he would have to say in conversation was 

that the banks had done a good job, and the word would get around.  

Mr. Robertson commented that the System, in issuing the 

September 1 letter, had deviated from the normal use of monetary 

policy instruments in a manner that was unique, and the operation 

had succeeded. If the System was going to terminate the operation-

and he thought it should--the only question was how to go about it.  

If it was true that another letter could be misconstrued, he would 

not favor that procedure, but the approach should be uniform for



12/13/66 -94

all banks. If the operation was to be terminated, he would let 

each President do what he thought necessary, either through 

conversation or written communication as he believed best, so 

long as equal treatment was assured for all banks.  

Mr. Maisel also spoke in favor of a uniform approach. He 

agreed that the timing could be delayed and was not concerned with 

the form of statement. He did feel, however, that the policy 

should be terminated by an official and public action of the System.  

Mr. Wayne then suggested that everyone think about the 

problem, with a view to further discussion at the next Committee 

meeting, and there was general agreement with that suggestion.  

Returning to the question of the directive, Chairman Martin 

suggested that the Secretary poll the Committee on alternative B 

in the form drafted by the staff. Question was raised whether the 

vote should be taken instead on alternative B as it would read with 

the change suggested by Messrs. Mitchell and Maisel, and upon request 

the Secretary read the language reflecting that suggestion. Mr. Clay 

commented that he would prefer to have the vote taken on alternative 

B as written by the staff because in his opinion there was a virtue 

in continuing along the line of the policy instituted at the preced

ing meeting.  

Chairman Martin observed that the problem seemed to get 

into semantics to a certain degree. As he had said many times,



12/13/66

words meant different things to different people. He happened 

to prefer alternative B as written by the staff because he found 

it easier to understand. It specified operations with a view to 

attaining somewhat easier conditions in the money market. He 

doubted whether bank credit would resume a rapid rate of expan

sion at this stage, but if it should the directive also made 

provision for that contingency. He again proposed voting on 

alternative B as prepared by the staff. That procedure, he felt, 

should afford a fair opportunity for expression of opinion because 

those members who opposed the staff draft no doubt would also 

oppose the suggested revision of it.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Messrs. Hayes, 
Daane, Irons, and Shepardson dissenting, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 

this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 

activity is continuing to expand, with rising defense 

expenditures but with additional evidences of moderating 
tendencies in the private economy. While there has been 

some slowing in the pace of advance of most broad price 
measures, upward price pressures persist for many finished 

goods and services. Bank credit and money have shown no 

net expansion in recent months. Although demands on bond 

markets have increased, upward pressures on long-term 

interest rates have moderated. The balance of payments 

remains a serious problem. In this situation, it is the

-95-



12/13/66 -96

Federal Open Market Committee's policy to foster money 
and credit conditions conducive to noninflationary 
economic expansion and progress toward reasonable equili
brium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to attaining somewhat easier 
conditions in the money market, unless bank credit appears 
to be resuming a rapid rate of expansion.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, January 10, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 12, 1966 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on December 13, 1966 

FIRST PARAGRAPH 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is contin
uing to expand, with rising defense expenditures but with additional 
evidences of moderating tendencies in the private economy. While 
there has been some slowing in the pace of advance of most broad 
price measures, upward price pressures persist for many finished 
goods and services. Bank credit and money have shown no net expansion 
in recent months. Although demands on bond markets have increased, 
upward pressures on long-term interest rates have moderated. The 
balance of payments remains a serious problem. In this situation, it 
is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to foster money and 
credit conditions conducive to noninflationary economic expansion 
and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 
of payments.  

SECOND PARAGRAPH 

Alternative A 

To implement this policy, and taking into account the widely 
fluctuating seasonal pressures at this time of year, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining about the currently prevailing 
money market conditions; provided, however, that somewhat easier 
conditions shall be sought if bank credit appears to be failing to 
expand.  

Alternative B 

To implement this policy, System open market operations until 
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 
attaining somewhat easier conditions in the money market, unless bank 
credit appears to be resuming a rapid rate of expansion.


