









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 7, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Martin, Chairman
Brimmer
Clay
Daane¹
Irons
Maisel
Mitchell
Robertson
Shepardson
Scanlon, Alternate for Mr. Hickman
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Wayne, Alternate for Mr. Bopp

Mr. Swan, Alternate Member of the Federal Open
Market Committee

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta,
and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr. Holland, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Brill, Economist
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee,

Tow, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board, Board of

Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and

Statistics, Board of Governors

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated in these minutes.



6/7/66 -2-

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors

Mr. Forrestal, Senior Attorney, Legal Division,
Board of Governors

Messrs. Hilkert, MacDonald, and Lewis, First
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis,
respectively

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Ratchford, Brandt,
Baughman, Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively

Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis

Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on May 10, 1966 were approved.

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies

for the period May 10 through June 1, 1966, and a supplemental report

for June 2 through 6, 1966. Copies of these reports have been placed

in the files of the Committee.

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs

said the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this week. The



6/7/66 -3-

Stabilization Fund had acquired $50 million in gold from Canada,

which increased its holdings to nearly $100 million, but that entire

amount seemed likely to be used up over the next few weeks by a sale

of $75 million to France, plus other miscellaneous sales. Consequently,

it probably would be necessary to show another reduction in the gold

stock of $75 or $100 million before midyear. The way things were

going, it would not be surprising if the gold stock declined below

the $13 billion level by year-end. In fact, recent balance of payments

trends suggested that might occur sooner rather than later.

On the London gold market, Mr. Coombs said, demand had been

restrained by the very tight money market conditions prevailing

throughout world financial markets. Nevertheless, the resources of

the gold pool had been drawn down by $94 million since the beginning

of the year, and there seemed to be a growing impression that the

Russians might be able to hold off selling until the latter part of

the year. The situation in that market remained dangerous; serious

speculative pressures could materialize from one day to the next.

During the past two days, for example, there had been a wave of

speculative buying apparently arising out of the British maritime

strike and the devaluation of the Indian rupee.

On the exchanges, Mr. Coombs continued, at the beginning of

May the Bank of England paid off month-end swaps totaling $100 million

with the U.S. Treasury and the German Federal Bank, and in the course



6/7/66 -4-

of the month it paid off another $50 million of short-term central

bank credit to the Bank for International Settlements. In addition to

such debt repayments of $150 million, the Bank of England suffered

further reserve losses of about $100 million and thus at month-end

was down a total $250 million. Their published reserve statistics

showed the true loss of $106 million as of the month-end; the

remaining $150 million, reflecting central bank debt repayments, was

refinanced by new borrowings of $50 million from the System under the

standby swap line and $100 million from the U.S. Treasury on a one-day

swap. May was the third month in succession in which the published

figures had shown Britain's actual reserve loss, with drawings on

credit lines limited to refinancing central bank debt.

The main feature in the sterling market, of course, had been

the effects of the maritime strike, Mr. Coombs commented. Although

negotiations seemed to be more or less on dead center at the moment,

the market had been sustained by the hope that the British Government

might finally be taking a firm line against a continuation of the

wage-price spiral. Meanwhile, however, the payments deficit was

deepening as exports were choked off, and the longer the strike

continued the greater the danger of a new speculative outburst. In

fact, developments of the last few days might reflect the beginnings

of a speculative drive. The Bank of England had allowed the rate to

drift down in response to selling pressure, and yesterday the rate



6/7/66 -5-

went through the $2.79 level which had been firmly defended last

summer. This morning it was $2.7884. On Friday the British lost

$50 million of reserves; on Monday somewhat more than $100 million;

and thus far today about $50 million. The New York market had been

quiet on Friday and Monday but there was some indication that selling

might now develop--the market had been alerted to the fact that there

was a problem and might react accordingly.

With respect to other markets, Mr. Coombs continued, the

earlier capital outflows from Switzerland had reversed themselves as

the Swiss market had tightened, and the Swiss National Bank had taken

in $135 million during the past few weeks. That inflow had increased

the Bank's uncovered dollar holdings to a level $70 million in excess

of their usual ceiling, and further large inflows might occur in

connection with window-dressing operations in Switzerland at the end

of June. Accordingly, it might be necessary for the System to draw

upon the Swiss franc swap line before long. Also, he anticipated very

sizable dollar accruals by the Bank of Italy during the summer tourist

season, which might necessitate drawing upon the lira swap line again.

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said

that Britain had not received assistance from central banks other

than the Federal Reserve during the past month. At the end of May

they considered the possibility of attempting to raise some funds

from the Italians, Swiss, and Germans. They decided against that

course, however, on the grounds that it might muddy the waters at



6/7/66 -6-

a time when agreement on the new sterling balance credit package

appeared close. Instead, they drew on the System and U.S. Treasury.

If their reserves were still down at the end of June, which seemed

likely, and if the sterling package was approved, the British probably

would draw on the new credit lines, with parallel drawings on the U.S.

equaling 31 per cent of the total.

Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the System open market transactions in
foreign currencies during the period
May 10 through June 6, 1966, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.

Mr. Coombs then recommended renewal of a $50 million drawing

on the swap facility with the National Bank of Belgium, which would

mature on June 22. As the Committee would recall, the arrangement

with the Belgium Bank was unique in that it provided for that $50

million to be fully drawn at all times, with renewals at six-month

intervals. There was no use of the swap line at present in the sense

of disbursements from the amount drawn.

In response to questions, Mr. Coombs indicated that while

the drawing in question was for six months, the underlying swap

agreement had a term of twelve months. He had not been able to

persuade the Belgians to change the terms of the agreement to conform

to those of the System's other swap arrangements, which were wholly

on a standby basis until activated by three-month drawings.



6/7/66

Renewal of the drawing on the swap
arrangement with the National Bank of
Belgium, for a further period of six
months, was noted without objection.

Chairman Martin then noted that on June 3 Mr. Coombs had

distributed a memorandum to the Committee concerning the Basle

negotiations on the British sterling balance credit package as

well as copies of the final draft of the agreement itself, and

he asked Mr. Coombs to comment on the negotiations.1/

Mr. Coombs observed that, as the Committee knew, it had

been hoped for some time that it might be possible for the United

Kingdom to negotiate a swap network similar to the System's which

would assure that other central banks would join the U.S. in

providing support in the event of a sterling crisis, making it

unnecessary to rely on last-inute negotiations. The Committee

would recall that the November 1964 package of credit assistance

was for a six-month period, and that it was not renewed at the

expiration date. Thus, in the summer of 1965 the Bank of England

was dependent entirely upon the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasury

for any necessary credits. Efforts had been underway since last fall

to develop a supplementary British network with central banks under

which credits would be made available for any purpose.

1/ Copies of the documents referred to have been placed in

the Committee's files.



6/7/66

The new package that had been negotiated went only part way

toward that objective, Mr. Coombs said. Partly as a result of the

record of the continuing problems of sterling over the past twenty

months, the attitudes of the European central banks toward sterling

had hardened. They had taken the line that they would be willing

to make credits available to the Bank of England but only to protect

sterling against drains resulting from its role as a reserve currency--

i.e., drains occasioned by liquidation of foreign-held sterling

balances. They were not prepared to offer assured financing for

other purposes. In effect, they would underwrite the institutional

role of sterling but not Britain's balance of payments deficits. Staff

at the New York Bank and at the U.S. Treasury thought that those terms

were undesirably restrictive, but they--as well as the Bank of England

people--were persuaded that the choice was between such arrangements

or none at all.

Mr. Coombs saw one advantage to the nature of the arrangements--

the link to a long-run problem increased the likelihood that they

would be renewed at maturity. And whatever restrictions might be

written into the agreement, in the event of a real crisis the

European central banks were likely to permit use of the credits for

more general purposes. There would be a real advantage in having

the credit lines in being, even if under terms that limited their

use. The agreement would not exclude other special ad hoc credits

that might be arranged if circumstances justified them.



6/7/66

In conclusion, Mr. Coombs noted that with the latest turn

in the sterling situation the System had a real interest in seeing

the agreement adopted. The British were likely to have to draw on

credit lines in some volume, and existence of the new arrangements

would substantially reduce the amounts they would have to draw on

the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve. As he had mentioned,

the U.S. share under the package would be 31 per cent. At the Basle

meeting next weekend Mr. Hayes presumably would be expected to

indicate whether or not the proposed arrangements were acceptable

to the Federal Reserve, and he (Mr. Coombs) recommended that the

Committee note them without objection.

Chairman Martin observed that the negotiations in question

had been going on for some time, and he suggested that the Committee

members raise any questions they had concerning the proposed agreement.

Mr. Mitchell asked whether there was any doubt as to whether

the sterling credit package would be approved, and whether the total

amount of credits it provided for, which Mr. Coombs' memorandum

indicated was $1 billion, was likely to prove adequate to the fore-

seeable need.

Mr. Coombs replied that it was his impression that the

Europeans, as well as the Canadians and Japanese, had decided to go

along with the package, but he could not say whether recent sterling

developments would change their attitudes. The British might find

themselves subject to a certain amount of questioning when the



6/7/66 -10-

agreement came up for approval at Basle on June 11-12. As to the

adequacy of the package, it was quite unlikely that the British

would lose $1 billion of reserves in a single month. It was true

that they had lost $500 million in a few days in November 1964, but

at that time foreign sterling balances were much larger than they

were now. He would hope they could get through the month of June

with the European credit lines available. There was no question but

that the attitudes of the Europeans had hardened with respect to

assisting the British, and he was afraid that some of that hardening

also was beginning to be reflected in their attitudes toward the

United States.

In response to questions by Messrs. Brimmer and Ellis, Mr. Coombs

indicated that the duration of the propsed standby arrangements was

nine months, with three-month renewable drawings. There was a provision

that all swaps would be terminated by mid-June, 1967, to accommodate

drawings made at the end of the term of the standby arrangements. No

new credit extensions by the U.S. were involved; the $1 billion total

was made up of $75 million from the BIS, $525 million channeled through

the BIS by the participating central banks, and parallel arrangements

involving a new $90 million facility with the Bank of France and an

earmarking of $310 million of the existing U.S. credit lines to the

British for proportionate use along with drawings on the other central

banks. The U.S. lines, of course, consisted of the $750 million swap



6/7/66 -11-

arrangement with the System, which had been renewed for another

twelve-month term on May 31, 1966, and the $400 million authorized

by the Committee and the U.S. Treasury in September 1965. The

question of the source of any U.K. reserve loss--and thus the

availability of the new credits as a means of financing the loss--

would be left to the judgment of the British but, of course, at the

following meeting in Basle they would be expected to defend their

judgments with data on changes in sterling balances. It was his hope

that interpretations in that connection would be reasonably flexible.

Mr. Irons asked whether the earmarked portion of the U.S.

lines would be increased by $90 million if the French decided not

to extend a new facility to the British.

Mr. Coombs replied that he would recommend against such a

procedure. It would be better to have the total package cut back to

$910 million if the French did not participate. Of course, if the

other central banks agreed to increase their contributions the

earmarked part of the U.S. lines might be increased proportionately.

Mr. Galusha asked whether there were indications that the

British would adopt policies that would effectively restrain their

wage-price spiral.

Mr. Coombs responded that the British authorities obviously

were working on that problem, although he did not know what particular

measures they were considering. A great deal of pressure was converging



6/7/66 -12-

on them to take effective steps, and conceivably something might

be done by the United States to encourage them further. It was his

opinion that they were under no illusions with respect to the

seriousness of the situation.

Thereupon, the proposed new
sterling balance credit arrangements
were noted without objection.

Mr. Ellis then remarked that it had been about a year since

the Committee had last discussed the possibility of negotiating

reciprocal currency arrangements with Venezuela and Mexico. Those

two countries had made substantial progress in improving their

financial positions and he asked whether the Committee should not

consider the question again.

In response to the Chairman's request for comment, Mr. Coombs

said the main development in the area since the Committee's earlier

discussion was that the U.S. Treasury had negotiated swap arrangements

with the central banks of Venezuela and Mexico. It would be useful to

learn what the Treasury's experience had been under those arrangements,

and whether the Treasury intended to maintain the relationships or

might prefer to have the Federal Reserve share in them. To his mind,

however, the key question was whether negotiation of swap lines

with the two countries would expose the System to pressures for

similar arrangements with other countries in Latin America that were

in less strong positions. If there was some basis on which a clear



6/7/66 -13-

line could be drawn separating Venezuela and Mexico from the rest of

Latin America, a good case might be made for having swap lines with

the two countries. If not, the System might be well advised not to

enter into such arrangements. In any case, he thought a study would

be useful.

Chairman Martin agreed that such a study should be made.

The Chairman then suggested that the Committee consider further

the proposed new instruments governing foreign currency operations that

had been discussed at the past several meetings. He asked Mr. Holland

to comment on the memorandum on the subject distributed by the

Secretariat on June 1, 1966.1/

Mr. Holland said that on the basis of the discussion at the

meeting of the Committee on May 10 and subsequent conversations with

Mr. Mitchell, the staff had recommended a revision of paragraph 2(B)

of the proposed new foreign currency directive distributed on April 28,

1966. In addition, the staff had noted a possible alternative revision

in which the second sentence of paragraph 2(B) would be deleted and a

new paragraph 5 added. The revision recommended in 2(B) was as follows:

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in spot
exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums and
discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever supply
or demand persists in influencing exchange rates in one
direction, System transactions shall be modified, OR

1/ A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the Committee's
files.



6/7/66 -14-

curtailed, [DEL: or eventually discontinued pending a] UNLESS
UPON REVIEW AND reassessment OF THE SITUATION by the
Committee [DEL: of supply and demand forces] DIRECTS OTHERWISE;

Mr. Treiber remarked that the provisions of paragraph 2(B)

represented a statement of general principles relating to conditions

under which operations in foreign currencies should be undertaken.

In his judgment the language of the paragraph contained in the staff's

April 28 draft was more appropriate than the new language now suggested.

Mr. Daane noted that his view was similar to Mr. Treiber's.

He did not think any useful purpose would be accomplished by the

suggested change and if adopted he would be concerned about the

possibility of adverse reactions when the new language was published.

Mr. Mitchell commented that he felt the proposed revision of

paragraph 2(B) did not involve a substantive change. He thought that

it did involve an improvement in language, and that the Committee had

nothing to lose by adopting it. In his judgment, however, the principal

issue concerned the possible new paragraph 5 noted in the Secretariat's

memorandum. That paragraph read as follows:

5. The System's foreign currency operations are not
designed to counter the effects of basic and persistent
economic forces on flows of international payments or on
movements of exchange rates. Operations undertaken to
deal with forces deemed temporary or transitional shall
be modified or curtailed, unless upon review and reassess-
ment of the situation the Committee directs otherwise, if
the forces persist (a) for six months, or (b) for a lesser
period if the Special Manager concludes that they can no
longer be considered temporary.



6/7/66 -15-

In Mr. Mitchell's opinion that suggested paragraph reflected a

position that the Committee should take publicly, and he recommended

its addition to the directive.

Mr. Daane agreed that the suggestion to add the new paragraph

5 represented the more important issue, but observed that there were

differences in judgment concerning it. In his opinion, to whatever

degree the paragraph would affect the flexibility of operations it

would work in the wrong direction, and he did not think it should be

adopted.

Mr. Treiber concurred in Mr. Daane's view. It was highly

difficult, he said, to distinguish between forces that were temporary

and transitional, on the one hand, and those that were basic and

persistent, on the other; the duration of particular forces often

would depend on the actions of the Governments involved. It had been

the practice of the Committee to review all credit extensions every

three months and to get the judgments of the Special Manager concerning

them at those times. It seemed to him that the workability of the

present arrangements had been demonstrated and he preferred them to

those that would be called for under the suggested paragraph 5.

Mr. Coombs agreed that the key issue concerned the proposed

paragraph 5; the language revision suggested in paragraph 2(B) was

a subsidiary issue. He would note first that foreign central banks

had primary responsibility for influencing the exchange rates of



6/7/66 -16-

their currencies against the dollar. The System could intervene in

the exchange markets, but it did so only in rather extreme circumstances.

The only two occasions on which strong actions had been taken to

influence exchange rates were at the times of the Cuban crisis and

of the assassination of President Kennedy. In sum, he thought the

Committee need not be overly concerned about possible efforts by the

Account Management to influence exchange rates.

Thus, Mr. Coombs continued, the issue to which the proposed

paragraph 5 was essentially directed was the duration of swap

drawings. He agreed with Mr. Treiber that there was a certain ambiguity

in terms such as "temporary" and "persistent" because the nature of

Governmental policy was decisive in determining whether particular

forces lasted two months or twenty. At the outset of a particular

development it often would be impossible to predict its duration. The

real question was how much breathing space should be provided for

effective Governmental actions to deal with the development. The

general policy of the Committee, which he thought was a proper one,

was to allow a six-month breathing space, and to become progressively

more concerned if drawings stayed on the books for a longer period.

Preparations were made to shift to some other form of financing as

drawings approached a six-month term. Some 94 per cent of all

drawings had been repaid within six months and none had gone on for

more than a year.



6/7/66 -17-

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he thought the paragraph in

question said essentially what Mr. Coombs had been saying. The

Committee should be prepared to defend itself against critics by

indicating in the directive that it was not trying to rig markets

when there were basic forces at work that should be dealt with by

appropriate Government policies. If, for example, it appeared that

some foreign country's basic situation was deteriorating, the

responsibility for deciding whether to offer support should lie

with the Committee rather than with the Special Manager. The

proposed paragraph said, in effect, that the Committee should make

the decision in such cases.

Mr. Shepardson observed that he did not read the proposed

language to call for a determination at the outset that a particular

development was temporary.

Mr. Coombs said that the opening phrase of the second sentence--

"Operations undertaken to deal with forces deemed temporary or

transitional"--conveyed such an implication to him. In a typical case,

however, some central bank in the swap network might take in a

substantial volume of dollars in a short period and suggest that the

System absorb those dollars by a swap drawing, as an alternative to

a gold sale. It was appropriate, he thought, to make the drawing to

absorb the initial impact of the development and then to study the

situation to determine whether it reflected a temporary phenomenon.



6/7/66 -18-

It was his practice to report to the Committee before renewing

central bank drawings at the end of their three-month terms.

Mr. Mitchell commented that the procedure Mr. Coombs

described was much like that followed when a domestic bank came

to the discount window; the Reserve Bank accommodated the bank

automatically and then studied the situation. The fact that

Mr. Coombs reported to the Committee on proposed renewals of

drawings seemed to him to have nothing to do with the matter at

issue, which concerned publishing a statement of the principle under

which the Committee operated.

Mr. Robertson indicated that he shared Mr. Mitchell's position.

Mr. Coombs remarked that if the proposed paragraph appeared

in print it could be used against the United States by foreign

countries who might ask, for example, why the U.S. was still employing

short-term credit facilities when its balance of payments deficit had

persisted for nine years. Borrowing as well as lending by the U.S.

was involved, and he would hope that the Committee could preserve a

reasonable degree of flexibility for dealing with possible develop-

ments. By way of illustration, he recalled that early in 1966 System

credits to the Bank of England were reaching the end of their six-

month terms. In the immediately preceding period the System put

considerable pressure on the British to pay off their drawings. That

was rather difficult for them because it required liquidation of a



6/7/66 -19-

large part of their portfolio of U.S. securities. Under other

circumstances he could visualize the U.S. having to borrow and--if

the suggested language was adopted and published--being pressed by

foreign central banks to clear up its debt within a certain time

and under certain conditions that could prove to be highly inconven-

ient. Hence, he would not recommend hardening the requirement that

credits be kept short and repaid within some specific period such as

six months. He thought there should be a general understanding within

the Committee to that effect, but if the Committee could avoid printing

such a rule it would be in a better position to deal with possible

emergencies in which some departure from general rules might be

desirable.

Mr. Daane referred to the final clause of the proposed

paragraph, which read, "or for a lesser period if the Special Manager

concludes that they can no longer be considered temporary." In his

judgment that clause imposed an unreasonable burden on the Special

Manager. Moreover, the Europeans were extremely sensitive with

respect to the short-term nature of swap drawings, and to adopt the

paragraph would simply give them more ammunition to use against the

United States. If, as he believed, the Committee had adhered to

the principle that the swap arrangements were short-term credit

facilities and had maintained proper surveillance over their use,

he saw no reason to change the directive. To do so, in his opinion.

would be hurtful rather than helpful.



6/7/66 -20-

Mr. Mitchell replied that the purpose of the proposed

paragraph was to set forth the practice the Committee had in fact

followed so that the public would be aware of it. He thought the

point was not adequately stated in the record.

Mr. Ellis said he had found that academicians tended to rely

on the Committee's published instruments for an understanding of the

objectives of its foreign currency operations. He had some sympathy

for the proposed paragraph because it provided a clearer description

of the nature of the forces with which the Committee was attempting

to deal. It was true that one could not know at the outset of a

development whether it would prove temporary but whether or not

operations were continued would depend on a subsequent judgment on

that point.

Chairman Martin remarked that he thought the Committee was

dealing largely with questions of intentions and language. Mr. Mitchell

was correct in noting that the suggested paragraph described the

Committee's general policy, and there was merit in Mr. Ellis' point

regarding academicians. It was difficult, however, to formulate

such a policy statement in precise terms and he was not persuaded

that it was necessary to incorporate the paragraph.

Mr. Wayne noted that the network of swap arrangements had been

developed originally primarily because of problems with respect to

international payments of the United States, and that the proposed



6/7/66 -21-

paragraph would apply to drawings by the U.S. as well as by the other

parties to the arrangements. He thought those facts warranted careful

consideration, and he wondered whether the Committee ought to put the

proposed paragraph into the directive. He personally had been impressed

by the points Mr. Coombs had made today.

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he considered odd the argument

that the Committee should do the right thing in limiting the duration

of swap drawings but at the same time it should avoid saying it was

doing the right thing. The Committee did in fact extend swap drawings

beyond six months only with great reluctance, and it did look to more

basic policy measures to deal with persistent problems. The proposed

paragraph specified exactly what the Committee had been doing.

Chairman Martin observed that in view of the differences of

opinion expressed today the Committee probably would not want to change

the substance of the directive unless it was convinced that the change

involved an improvement. He then suggested that the Committee members

indicate whether or not they favored adding the proposed paragraph.

Messrs. Mitchell, Robertson, and Shepardson noted that they did and

the other members indicated that they did not.

Chairman Martin then asked whether there would be any objection

to incorporating the revisions in paragraph 2(B) recommended by the

staff in its June 1 memorandum, and no objections were heard.



6/7/66 -22-

The Chairman then observed that, as indicated in the

Secretariat's memorandum of June 6, 1966, Mr. Swan had offered

some suggestions for change in the language of the proposed authoriza-

tion and the proposed directive.1 / He invited Mr. Swan to comment.

Mr. Swan said his suggestion for the authorization involved

some small changes in wording in paragraph 1B(2) that he thought were

clarifying, as follows:

(2) ADDITIONAL [DEL: other] currencies held spot or
purchased forward, up to the amount necessary for
System operations to exert a market influence BUT
[DEL: and] not exceeding $150 million equivalent; and

His suggestion for the directive was simply to omit from the list of

purposes of System foreign currency operations the statement in

paragraph 1(B), which read "To aid in making the system of inter-

national payments more efficient." The meaning of that statement,

taken by itself, was not clear to him, and unintended implications

might be read into it. The intended meaning seemed to be covered

adequately by paragraphs 1(C) and 1(D).

Mr. Treiber said he thought the System's operations did

contribute to the efficiency of the international payments system

by making additional sources of credit available. The statement in

1(B) of the directive had been included in the Committee's existing

authorization for some time and he would prefer to retain it in the

new directive.

1/ A copy of the memorandum referred to has been placed in the
Committee's files.



6/7/66

Mr. Daane remarked that the revision in the proposed authoriza-

tion that Mr. Swan had suggested seemed to be an improvement. He

agreed with Mr. Treiber, however, that it would be desirable to

retain paragraph 1(B) of the directive, noting that the forthcoming

report of the Deputies of the Group of Ten would make a statement

along the same lines.

Chairman Martin proposed that the Committee accept Mr. Swan's

suggested revisions in paragraph 1(B)(2) of the proposed authorization

but not his suggestion for the directive, and no objections were heard.

Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
Committee replaced its previously existing
instruments governing foreign currency
operations, namely, the authorization
regarding open market transactions in
foreign currencies, the guidelines for
System foreign currency operations, and
the continuing authority directive with
respect to foreign currency operations,
with two new instruments, namely, an
authorization for System foreign currency
operations and a foreign currency directive,
reading as follows:

AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes

and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out
the Committee's foreign currency directive:

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot
or forward transactions on the open market at home and
abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization
Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act
of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, and with the
Bank for International Settlements:

-23-



6/7/66

Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars

Pounds sterling
French francs

German marks

Italian lire
Japanese yen

Netherlands guilders
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in
paragraph A above, up to the following limits:

(1) Currencies held spot or purchased
forward, up to the amounts necessary to fulfill

outstanding forward commitments;

(2) Additional currencies held spot

or purchased forward, up to the amount necessary

for System operations to exert a market influence

but not exceeding $150 million equivalent; and

(3) Sterling purchased on a covered
or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under

agreement with the Bank of England, up to $200
million equivalent.

C. To have outstanding forward commitments
undertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign
currencies, up to the following limits:

(1) Commitments to deliver to the
Stabilization Fund foreign currencies in which the
United States Treasury has outstanding indebtedness,
up to $200 million equivalent;

(2) Commitments to deliver Italian
lire, under special arrangements with the Bank of

Italy, up to $500 million equivalent; and

(3) Other forward commitments to

deliver foreign currencies, up to $275 million
equivalent.

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency
arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that
drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be

-24-



6/7/66

fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount
outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the
Committee, because of exceptional circumstances,
specifically authorizes a delay.

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System
Open Market Account with the following foreign banks,
which are among those designated by the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers,
and with the approval of the Committee to renew such
arrangements on maturity:

Amount of
Arrangement
(millions of Period of

dollars Arrangement
Foreign Bank equivalent) (months)

Austrian National Bank 50 12
National Bank of Belgium 100 12
Bank of Canada 250 12
Bank of England 750 12
Bank of France 100 3
German Federal Bank 250 6
Bank of Italy 450 12
Bank of Japan 250 12
Netherlands Bank 100 3
Bank of Sweden 50 12
Swiss National Bank 150 6
Bank for International Settlements

(System drawings in Swiss francs) 150 6
Bank for International Settlements

(System drawings in authorized
European currencies other than
Swiss francs) 150 6

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken
under paragraph 1(A) above shall be at prevailing market rates

and no attempt shall be made to establish rates that appear to

be out of line with underlying market forces. Insofar as is

practicable, foreign currencies shall be purchased through

spot transactions when rates for those currencies are at or

-25-



6/7/66

below par and sold through spot transactions when such
rates are at or above par, except when transactions at
other rates (i) are specifically authorized by the
Committee, (ii) are necessary to acquire currencies to
meet System commitments, or (iii) are necessary to acquire
currencies for the Stabilization Fund, provided that these
currencies are resold forward to the Stabilization Fund
at the same rate.

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with
foreign central banks for the coordination of foreign
currency transactions. In making operating arrangements
with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall
not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any
agreements or understandings concerning the administration
of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of
Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be
referred for review and approval to the Committee.

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum
working balances. Such investments shall be in accordance
with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.

6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman and
the Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of
the Board of Governors (or in the absence of the Chairman
or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors the
members of the Board designated by the Chairman as alternates,
and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee his
alternate) is authorized to act on behalf of the Committee
when it is necessary to enable the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York to engage in foreign currency operations before
the Committee can be consulted. All actions taken by the
Subcommittee under this paragraph shall be reported promptly
to the Committee.

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice

Chairman of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized:

-26-



6/7/66

A. With the approval of the Committee,
to enter into any needed agreement or understanding
with the Secretary of the Treasury about the division
of responsibility for foreign currency operations
between the System and the Secretary;

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury
fully advised concerning System foreign currency
operations, and to consult with the Secretary on
such policy matters as may relate to the Secretary's
responsibilities; and

C. From time to time, to transmit

appropriate reports and information to the National
Advisory Council on International Monetary and
Financial Policies.

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized
to transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency

operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury Depart-
ment.

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate

in the foreign currenty operations for System Account in
accordance with paragraph 3 G (1) of the Board of Governors'

Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships

of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

10. The Special Manager of the System Open Market

Account for foreign currency operations shall keep the

Committee informed on conditions in foreign exchange markets

and on transactions he has made and shall render such

reports as the Committee may specify.

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE

1. The basic purposes of System operations in

foreign currencies are:

A. To help safeguard the value of the

dollar in international exchange markets;

B. To aid in making the system of

international payments more efficient;

C. To further monetary cooperation

with central banks of other countries having

-27-



6/7/66

convertible currencies, with the International
Monetary Fund, and with other international
payments institutions;

D. To help insure that market
movements in exchange rates, within the limits
stated in the International Monetary Fund
Agreement or established by central bank
practices, reflect the interaction of under-
lying economic forces and thus serve as
efficient guides to current financial decisions,
private and public; and

E. To facilitate growth in
international liquidity in accordance with
the needs of an expanding world economy.

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by
the Federal Open Market Committee, System operations in
foreign currencies shall be undertaken only when necessary:

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations

in the flows of international payments, if such
fluctuations (1) are deemed to reflect transitional
market unsettlement or other temporary forces and
therefore are expected to be reversed in the fore-
seeable future; and (2) are deemed to be disequilibrating
or otherwise to have potentially destabilizing effects
on U.S. or foreign official reserves or on exchange
markets, for example, by occasioning market anxieties,
undesirable speculative activity, or excessive leads
and lags in international payments;

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes

in spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums

and discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever

supply or demand persists in influencing exchange rates

in one direction, System transactions should be

modified or curtailed unless upon review and reassessment

of the situation the Committee directs otherwise;

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions
in exchange markets. Special factors that might make

for exchange market instabilities include (1) responses
to short-run increases in international political tension,

-28-



6/7/66

(2) differences in phasing of international
economic activity that give rise to unusually
large interest rate differentials between major
markets, and (3) market rumors of a character
likely to stimulate speculative transactions.
Whenever exchange market instability threatens
to produce disorderly conditions, System
transactions may be undertaken if the Special
Manager reaches a judgment that they may help
to reestablish supply and demand balance at
a level more consistent with the prevailing
flow of underlying payments. In such cases,
the Special Manager shall consult as soon as
practicable with the Committee or, in an
emergency, with the members of the Subcommittee
designated for that purpose in paragraph 6
of the Authorization for System foreign
currency operations; and

D. To adjust System balances within
the limits established in the Authorization for
System foreign currency operations in light of
probable future needs for currencies.

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements
are appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign currencies
for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by
the Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either
outright or in conjunction with spot transactions, may
be undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or

discounts from giving rise to disequilibrating movements

of short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative
disturbances; (iii) to supplement existing market
supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly, as a
means of encouraging the retention or accumulation of
dollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to

allow greater flexibility in covering System or Treasury
commitments, including commitments under swap arrange-
ments; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for the

settlement of System or Treasury commitments denominated
in other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for

System holdings of foreign currencies.

-29-



Before this meeting there had been distributed to the

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period May 10

through June 1, 1966, and a supplemental report for June 2 through

6, 1966. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of

the Committee.

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes

commented as follows:

The Committee directive adopted at the last meeting

has, I believe, generated a constructive dialogue within
the System on the nature of staff reserve projections
and their use in helping to shape day-to-day open market

operations. Over the recent period, actual results have
been in line with the staff estimates of a reversal during
May of the sharp increases in aggregate reserves that had

occurred in April. In fact, over most of the period
required reserves tended to fall a bit short of the
estimates, suggesting no need to speed up the process
of attaining gradual reduction in net reserve availability.
Thus, net borrowed reserves and borrowings from the
Reserve Banks each increased by about $50 million in the
weekly averages.

I believe most of the staff would agree that we need

much more work and experience before a judgment can be
reached about the effectiveness of permitting short-run

fluctuations in aggregate reserve measures to influence

the course of open market operations between Committee

meetings. June, for example, may prove a more difficult
month than May because of the uncertainties spelled out

in the blue book.1/ The changed pattern of tax payments,
the problems that face the thrift institutions as they

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared

for the Committee by the Board's staff.

6/7/66 -30-



6/7/66

come into their midyear interest payment period, and
the continued pressure of Government agency financing
are all factors to be reckoned with in coming weeks.

With bank reserve positions under greater pressure,
the Federal funds rate has moved into new high ground.
Last Friday the effective rate reached 5-1/4 per cent,
and offerings at 5-3/8 per cent made their appearance
for the first time. The funds rate continues to be
influenced by CD and other short-term money rates, and
by the desire of many banks to avoid borrowing at the
discount window. The discount rate is exerting little
influence. Given the taut reserve situation, banks have
tended to manage their positions cautiously, with con-
siderable pressure in the funds market and heavy borrowing
before the weekend a typical, but not exclusive, pattern.
Over the long Memorial Day weekend borrowing from the
Reserve Banks exceeded $1 billion, and very large
excesses were built up, particularly at New York City
banks. In fact, the New York City banks ended that
statement week with more than $0.5 billion in surplus
reserves, even though country banks took advantage of
the break in the Federal funds rate to accumulate $1.3
billion in excess reserves on Wednesday to carry over
into the final week of their statement period or to
resell on subsequent days to their sophisticated city
cousins at higher rates.

Rates on bankers' acceptances, finance paper,
commercial paper, and short-term agency issues, and
dealer financing rates have all pushed into new high
ground over the period. Treasury bills, on the other

hand, have been on a course of their own despite dealer
financing rates that have touched as high as 5-5/8 per

cent. Strong demand from corporations and public funds,

together with System buying and the investment in bills

by investors seeking a liquidity haven until the course

of long-term rates becomes clearer, has pressed on market

supplies. In yesterday's auction, average rates of 4.57

and 4.74 on three- and six-month bills, respectively,
were established.

At these levels, however, dealers were cautious in

their bidding and there was an unusually wide spread

between the average price bid and the lowest price accepted

by the Treasury.



6/7/66

A heavy atmosphere pervaded the capital markets for
most of the period as investors were choosy in the light
of the growing calendar, and only very attractively priced
issues were well received. The corporate market was under
particularly heavy pressure, with yields on both new and
outstanding issues pushing into new high ground. Some
improvement in atmosphere occurred late in the period when
a triple-A telephone issue with 5-year call protection
priced to yield 5.45 per cent--nearly 30 basis points
above yields on a comparable issue a month ago--was well
received. The weakness in the corporate market adversely
influenced the market for Treasury notes and bonds, as
did the diminishing expectations of a tax increase and
Secretary Fowler's remarks about the possibility of some
revision of the 4-1/4 interest rate ceiling. Despite
these developments, there was a considerable body of
sentiment in the Government market that the February-March
interest rate peaks might be tested, but that rates might
be in the process of bottoming out. Uncertainties about
the future course of monetary and fiscal policy together
with Congressional and Administration expressions of concern
about the competitive position of the savings and loan
associations and the mutual savings banks have tended to
produce an air of caution but no firm sense of direction
in the Government bond market.

In the meantime, the relentless pressure of new
offerings has created a number of problems in the market
for Government agency issues. Prices have given ground
and it has become increasingly difficult to place each

succeeding new issue in investors' hands. On Thursday,
FNMA will be pricing an offering of $350 million Small
Business Administration participation certificates maturing

in 1-5 years and $180 million of their own new participation
certificates maturing in 13-15 years. Current market talk
is for a 5.70 - 5.75 rate on the shorter issues, with
underwriters having only moderate success in lining up buyers

even at these rates. For the longer maturities there appears

to be good demand at a 5-3/8 - 5.40 per cent yield range.

The very high rates on shorter agency issues is becoming a

matter of increasing concern to the Administration, but is
the natural outcome of the crowded calendar of issues that

has been forced into the market. Given the continued

pressure on bank reserve positions, the coming weeks--which

include the dividend and tax dates, a substantial calendar of

Government agency, corporate, and municipal offerings,

-32-



6/7/66 -33-

possible Congressional action on CD rates, the midyear
interest payment period for savings and loan associa-
tions and mutual saving banks, and the current pressure
on sterling mentioned by Mr. Coombs--will provide a
considerable test for both the money and capital markets.

Mr. Swan asked whether the Manager expected the large disparity

between the bill rate and other short-term rates to continue indef-

initely or whether he thought bill rates would advance and narrow the

gap.

Mr. Holmes replied that at current levels of other short-term

rates there was an air of caution about the bill rate, as evidenced

in yesterday's auction. It was hard to forecast bill rates at

present because of uncertainties about the volume of funds seeking

havens in bills. It was known, for example, that some corporations

were instructing their treasurers to place funds only in bills, and

if that continued it could keep rates depressed for some time. He

would imagine, however, that with all of the other pressures existing

in short-term markets bill rates would move up sooner or later.

Mr. Mitchell noted that System purchases had contributed to

downward pressures on bill rates, and asked whether the Desk should

not be buying other types of securities. For example, would it be

desirable for the Committee to authorize purchases of agency issues?

Mr. Holmes agreed that System purchases had contributed to

the recent downward pressure on bill rates, although he thought such

purchases were not the main factor. As to trading in other securities,

the Desk had bought coupon issues from time to time. There were a



6/7/66 -34-

number of problems connected with buying agency issues. First

was the legal question of the System's authority to buy particular

types of issues. Secondly, there were difficulties relating to the

issues themselves; most were small and were not tradable on any

scale. Third, what might be called an "even keel" problem existed.

Five or six agency issues might be offered in a single month, as

well as issues of the new participation certificates, and there

was likely to be a serious risk of giving false signals to the market

by trading in them. Both purchases and sales by the System could

affect rate expectations and operations might have an undesirably

large influence on the market. Finally, the present period, with

the crowded agency calendar and with the problems being encountered

in pricing some issues, would be a difficult one in which to begin

operations in agencies.

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell as to whether the

Committee should consider operating in commercial paper, Mr. Holmes

replied that the System could, of course, trade in any obligations

authorized by law if that served its purposes. He would not want

to make an off-hand judgment on the desirability of trading in

commercial paper; the question warranted careful study.

Mr. Mitchell then asked what was known about the sources of

funds that were being invested in agency issues.



6/7/66 -35-

Mr. Holmes replied the dealers handling such issues had made

good progress in broadening the market, although further broadening

would be desirable. Recent participants included corporations and

financial institutions such as savings banks and commercial banks.

Good strides also had been made in interesting pension and trust

funds as well as other institutional investors, and there had been

some foreign buying.

Mr. Mitchell then referred to the draft directives1/ the staff

had prepared for this meeting, particularly to the phrase in alternative

A for the second paragraph reading "provided, however, that if required

reserves expand sharply more than seasonally expected . . . ." He

asked how the Manager would interpret that phrase.

Mr. Holmes said the first problem would be to specify what

was seasonally expected in June. Seasonal factors based on experience

of prior years would be of only limited usefulness this year because

of the changed pattern of tax payments. As the blue book indicated,

the Board's staff expected the daily average bank credit proxy to be

about 6-1/2 per cent higher, at an annual rate, in June than in May,

and bank credit to rise about 10 per cent from the end of May to the

end of June. The New York Bank staff was projecting increases of

7-1/2 and 15 per cent respectively, in the two series. Those

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.



6/7/66 -36-

differences reflected the degree of uncertainty in expecta-

tions.

Mr. Daane noted that the blue book indicated that a

deepening in net borrowed reserves beyond $400 million could

lead to pressure on the discount rate and Regulation Q ceilings.

He asked whether the Manager thought there was much room left to

reduce net reserve availability further without forcing an

increase in the discount rate.

Mr. Holmes replied that, while it was difficult to judge

how much such room existed, he did not think it was very much in

view of the many pressures in the market. He was inclined to

agree that net borrowed reserves consistently deeper than $400

million would affect expectations and might lead the market to

conclude that a change in the discount rate was inevitable. That

was a personal judgment, of course, and one that might be changed

by developments.

Thereupon, upon motion
duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the open market
transactions in Government securi-
ties and bankers' acceptances during
the period May 10 through June 6,
1966, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had



been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been

placed in the files of the Committee.

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic

conditions:

My predecessor in this job, Mr. Noyes, was
always a source of sage advice. But the soundest
of his counsel was a parting message to me, warning
against the perennial risk of overstaying a tight
monetary policy.

I have taken this message to heart and searched
each nugget of information for signs of economic
weakening that should trigger a change in policy.
The slowdown in auto sales beginning in April
caused my antennae to quiver, and their vibrations
intensified with news of the drop in new orders,
the further cutbacks in auto production, and the
reports of housing construction grinding to a halt.
They shook violently when the May rise in the
unemployment rate was reported.

What does it add up to? Is the economy
really slowing down? I think the answer to this
is a qualified yes. Is the Fed overstaying its
tightening? I think the answer to this is an
unqualified no.

Let me elaborate on this paradox, first
giving some reasons for qualifying the answer on
the state of the economy. The weak spot in cur-
rent economic activity is autos. Soon residential
construction will be in this category, but, at the
moment, the slowdown in activity and spending is
largely limited to the auto sector. It's showing
up in a variety of economic indicators, however,
and followers of driblets of economic intelligence
have a tendency to add these fragments, rather than
to question whether they often are multiple reflec-
tions of the same phenomenon. For example, autos
account for the April-May drop in retail sales,
the May drop in the workweek, and the second-quarter
slowing in GNP. If one abstracts from autos, retail
sales in May continued to rise as rapidly as earlier,
the workweek stayed at its postwar peak, and the

6/7/66 -37-



6/7/66

second-quarter rise in GNP is proceeding as fast as
that in the first quarter.

One has to be cautious, therefore, to avoid
going overboard about the auto slowdown, particularly
when consumer anticipation surveys suggest the
possibility of some rebound in auto sales later
this year, and particularly because consumers
currently are showing no signs of keeping their
wallets closed with respect to other types of
spending. Appliance and furniture sales have been
very strong, and consumer purchases of nondurable
goods continue to rise steadily.

Buttressing consumer spending plans in the
months ahead is the scheduled introduction of
Medicare payments at midyear, and the likely rise
in Federal civilian and military pay. Even if
auto sales do no better than level off at current
rates--a more pessimistic outlook, indeed, than
that held by most observers--the rise in other
consumer spending should keep businessmen happy
with their plans for new plant and additional
stocks.

On the other hand, the housing dip lies
ahead of us. Housing activity currently is
being maintained on the basis of financial
commitments made earlier. Judging from Reserve

Bank reports on new commitment flows, we should
expect the residential construction figures to

slide more rapidly and by autumn to show a
decided reduction. Some temporary relief may

be afforded by an enlarged FNMA purchase program,
if Congress appropriates the funds, and by
possible actions to limit commercial bank

invasion of savings and loan fund sources.

But short of a major shift in the posture of

policy, or an unexpected decline in other credit

demands, housing will probably turn out to be a

much weaker area of activity over the balance of

this year than our current worry--automobiles.

Now let's turn to some of the bright spots

(depending upon what one construes as a good

omen these days). The new plant and equipment

survey shows no indication of a cutback in

business capital outlays. True, during booms

we have gotten accustomed to expecting business

-38-



6/7/66

spending plans to rise in successive surveys,
and the fact that the two most recent surveys
are not far from the February reading suggests
somewhat less than usual ebullience, cyclically
adjusted. Perhaps monetary restraint is having
some effect--along with Presidential exhortations,
delivery delays, and rising machinery prices and
construction costs. But before chalking up plant
and equipment as another victim of tight money,
let's keep in mind that at close to midyear,
business plans call for plant spending to remain
a driving force for economic expansion over the
next two quarters.

One always hesitates to go out on a limb
about so volatile an area as business inventories,
but at the moment it's hard to see this as a

major drag on the economy. Some involuntary
accumulation of auto stocks at dealers is in
process, but these should be worked off during

the model changeover period. Outside of autos,
inventory-sales ratios continue low and favorable

to maintenance of the recent pace of inventory

investment.
Hovering over all judgments as to the economic

future is the question of defense spending. The

January Budget Message implied a pattern for
defense spending of a fast rise in the first quarter,
a slowing in the second quarter, and an abrupt

leveling off after midyear. Such an abrupt change

in the defense tempo would undoubtedly give private

spending plans a jolt, but it appears unlikely to

develop. Not that we as yet have any definite

clues on the course of military needs. But

piecing together the available information on

new defense orders and on draft calls, it seems

more likely that defense spending will continue

to rise next quarter at least as rapidly as it

has in the current quarter.
Adding this to the prospects for private

spending noted earlier, and abstracting from

the possibility of a financial crisis stemming

from the situation with respect to savings and

loan associations, one comes up with a picture

of a still-strong economy, one in which real

output would be rising less rapidly than in



6/7/66

the first half of the year, but with resource use
sufficiently intense to maintain pressure on costs
and prices. Even with capacity continuing to grow,
manufacturing plant would continue to be used
intensively--a 92 per cent rate is our guess for
the third quarter. With unemployment among
experienced workers continuing at rockbottom
levels, wages would likely continue to drift up
and productivity to drift down, and, as a result,
unit labor costs to rise further. In the context
of continuing strong over-all demand, it would
not be surprising if these cost increases were
passed through into rising prices. It's hard
for me to see any significant slackening in
the rate of advance in industrial prices over the
summer and fall.

In time, we might expect a deceleration in
defense spending, substantial growth in industrial

capacity, and the training of new workers--all
factors favoring a return to price stability.
Unfortunately, neither the domestic nor the
international situation affords the time to permit
natural forces to work their way through the economy.
Important wage contract negotiations begin this
summer and carry through next year; the price and
profits background surrounding these negotiations
will not be conducive to moderate settlements.
Monetary policy may be a poor tool to use to
ward off a cost-push inflation threat, but in

the absence of more efficient restraints, it
doesn't seem to me that the Fed can abdicate its

responsibilities. Indeed, if it weren't for the
financial market conditions Mr. Axilrod will be

discussing in a moment, I would submit that this

would be an appropriate time to tighten the policy

screw another notch.

Following his presentation Mr. Brill responded to questions

on the consumer savings rate.

Mr. Mitchell then noted that the first sentence of the

staff's draft directive read, "The economic and financial develop-

ments reviewed at this meeting indicate that the domestic economy

-40-



6/7/66 -41-

is continuing to expand, with industrial prices rising further and

credit demands remaining strong." He asked whether, in view of

the projection for a lower rate of growth in GNP in the second

quarter, it would not be more accurate to say, " . . . although the

domestic economy is expanding at a less rapid rate than in the

first quarter, industrial prices are rising further and credit

demands remain strong."

Mr. Brill replied that he would be reluctant to see the

directive cast in terms of projections because they often were

highly uncertain. Moreover, it appeared likely that GNP growth

would return to the first-quarter pace in the third quarter. In

view of the apparent slowdown in the second quarter, however,

the staff did suggest dropping the word "vigorously" in describing

the current pace of the expansion.

In response to questions by Mr. Maisel, Mr. Brill said

that the latest survey results on planned business capital out-

lays implied less of an increase in real investment than the

previous survey because of the rise in machinery prices and

construction costs. Capital spending was still expected to be

a strong expansive force, however. The GNP price deflator was

projected to rise substantially in the third quarter, from about

a 3 per cent annual rate of increase to 4.2 per cent. That was

mainly because of the expected Federal pay raise and the



6/7/66 -42-

inauguration of the Medicare program, which together contributed

significantly to the third-quarter figure.

Mr. Maisel then asked whether growth in real GNP in the

second quarter was less than the staff had projected early in

the year. Mr. Brill indicated that he was not certain, but

would undertake to determine the facts on the question. (Note:

Following the meeting Mr. Brill informed Mr. Maisel that the

staff's estimate of second-quarter GNP in current dollar terms

had proved accurate but growth in real GNP had been overestimated;

there had been a larger than expected rise in the price deflator.)

Mr. Axilrod made the following statement concerning

financial developments:

Since around mid-April interest rates on
virtually all securities and financing instruments
outside the Government securities market have
either regained earlier highs or continued their
advance to new highs for the year. Demand pressures
have been a driving force in some markets, but
restraints on supply appear to be more pervasive
than earlier, particularly in the mortgage market.

Yields on U.S. Government securities have
recently lagged behind the rise in other market
rates. Apart from the impact of the 4-1/4 per
cent interest ceiling on Treasury bond yields,
the relatively low level of U.S. Government
security rates can be mostly explained by the
unusually large cash surplus the Federal Govern-
ment is running in the second quarter--projected
to be about $9 billion, or $4 billion more than a
year ago--and the consequent relatively large
reduction in debt outstanding--some inadvertent, as
in the May refunding--which has been only partially



6/7/66

replaced by new agency issues for cash. Part of
this large surplus is the result of tax speed-
ups and some is the result of a faster growth in
GNP than was anticipated in the January budget
document. But while tax speed-ups and the more
rapid GNP growth have taken some pressure off
the Government securities market, they have
generated additional private credit demands in
the market and hence a widening of rate spreads
between private and U.S. Government securities.

The general upward movement in the over-all
level of rates has been accompanied by a reshaping
of the yield curve. It now once again shows yields
relatively high at the short end and lower at the
long end. In the U.S. Government securities
market, this is the result of the rise of yields
in the 1 - 3 year area to new high levels for the
year. That was the end of the market hit hardest
by the recent rash of agency issues and it also
was the area of the May refunding. And at the
very short end of credit markets, while the 3-
month Treasury bill rate is relatively low,
yields on commercial paper and bankers' acceptances
have risen over 1 percentage point since the
December discount rate increase and are more
representative of pressures in the short-term
sector.

Barring any change in the economic weather

or in the outlook for fiscal policy, I would
suspect that over the next few weeks there will
be a tendency for the yield curve to flatten
out more as a result of an upward rate movement

at the long end rather than a downward movement

at the short- and intermediate-end. Such a
conclusion is consistent with what we know

about the corporate, municipal, and Federal
agency calendar ahead and with the generally

restrained availability of investment funds at

some major financial institutions.
It is also consistent with the view that

the relatively high cost of short-term funds to

banks may impel them, as it did in early winter

(before the prime loan rate was raised), to

make portfolio adjustments or to tighten loan

terms as strong loan demand continues. This,
too, would add to upward pressures on long-term

market rates, not to say on banks' own lending rates.



6/7/66

The pressure for banks to undertake further
portfolio adjustments and to restrain lending
would become very intense if growth in aggregate
reserves was considerably restrained. The leeway
banks have under Regulation Q ceilings to become
aggressive in competing for short-term funds in
the CD market has been progressively reduced and
the competition of other short-term instruments
is becoming more fierce. Banks have been offering
the 5-1/2 per cent ceiling rate on shorter
maturities (some reported in the 3 to 4 month
area) and secondary market trading in CD's is
taking place above the ceiling rate in the 3 to
6 month area. Thus, banks are close to becoming
very cramped in their ability to accommodate
loan demand, especially if investors find it
increasingly preferable or necessary to utilize
competing instruments such as Treasury bills
for liquidity purposes.

By combining the picture described above
with uncertainties facing nonbank savings
institutions after midyear interest crediting,
with legislative uncertainties overhanging

banks, with the possibility that credit demands
in June and July will be very large partly for
temporary reasons, with the need for the agency

market to digest a very large supply in a very
short period, and with sizable bank CD maturities,
one is driven to the conclusion that open market
policy should chart an unusually cautious course
in the period immediately ahead--recognizing that

a considerable amount of restraint is already

in the financial system.
It is possible, though, that net borrowed

reserves could be deepened somewhat further--say

closer to $400 million--in the face of a tendency

for reserve aggregates to grow rapidly without

leading to a substantial risk of a short-run

bind in the money markets. Any significant

further tightening beyond that point threatens
to bring up a whole host of problems very similar

to those the Committee, and monetary policy
generally, faced last December. In principle,
the problem is that the availability of bank
reserves cannot be very much more constrained

-44-



6/7/66

without raising very difficult further issues
about the sustainability of time deposit ceilings
and the discount rate--and all the complicated
questions of timing that are involved in the
relationship of such rates to open market policy
and to other actions by the Administration and
the Congress.

I think the problem of relationships between
official and market rates is most dramatically seen
in the Federal funds market, where the trading
level recently has often been 50 basis points or
more above the discount rate as large city banks
have used this market rather than the discount
window to obtain additional reserve funds. If
the flow of nonborrowed reserves to the banking
system is reduced while loan demand stays large,
it is very likely that the availability of Federal
funds will decline. The volume of Federal funds
transactions has shown signs of declining in May
even with the Federal funds rate rising to 5-1/4
per cent at times. Intensification of such a
development would make it more necessary for
large city banks to borrow at the discount window.

Thus, a further tightening of monetary policy
will be accompanied by stronger demands on the
discount window from all classes of member banks
at the same time as market interest rate adjust-
ments are occurring--and time deposits are becoming
harder to buy. It seems clear, therefore, that
open market policy's next significant step toward
restraint will mean that Regulation Q will produce

anguish from banks, as they find their CD's squeezed
into shorter and shorter maturities, as well as from

nonbank savings institutions. And the discount
rate and discount administration will become even

more of a problem than they are now.

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the

balance of payments:

Last March, Mr. Hersey reported to this Com-

mittee that Government technicians foresaw a

payments deficit on the liquidity basis of as much



as $2-1/2 billion this year--double last year's
deficit--if aggregate demand were allowed to
produce a GNP of $735 billion. At the time, the
$2-1/2 billion figure seemed startling. And such
an outcome still seemed avoidable, provided that
the domestic boom were brought promptly under
control by an appropriate mixture of fiscal and
monetary restraints. But this was not done.
And now we are having to become accustomed to
the $2-1/2 billion figure, and even to brace
ourselves for the possibility of a larger figure.

The liquidity deficit in the first four

months of the year was already at a rate of
about $2-1/2 billion. It would have exceeded
a $3 billion rate if the Treasury had not per-
suaded some foreign central banks and inter-

national institutions to shift from liquid
dollar assets into over-one-year time deposits
and into Federal agency securities--items that
are classified in the statistics as nonliquid.

The alternative measure of the deficit,
based on official reserve transactions, is
not a suitable one for identifying recent

trends, because special influence have caused
it to swing widely from quarter to quarter.
In the fourth quarter of last year, it was the

largest it had been in nearly three years. Not
only were private holders giving up dollars to

shift back into sterling, but there were very

large year-end shifts by foreign commercial

banks out of dollars into their own currencies,
with consequent accretions to central bank

holdings of claims on the United States. In
January-April of this year, the rate of deficit

measured by official reserve transactions was

roughly $1-1/2 billion, but it would have been

higher if there had not been reversals of the

previous year-end shifts.
If the domestic boom should roar ahead in

the second half-year after the current slight

hesitation passes, as projected in the green

book,1/ it would be prudent to expect some further

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions,"

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

6/7/66 -46-



6/7/66

increase in the payments deficit, on either basis
of calculation. The only source of improvement
about which one can now feel at all confident is
a decline in new Canadian security issues, following
the January-April bulge. Against that, and probably
outweighing it, further deterioration seems likely
on at least five fronts.

(1) Further shrinkage of the surplus on
merchandise trade is a strong possibility. The
trade surplus was already down to an annual rate
of less than $4 billion in January-April, compared
with more than $5 billion in the fourth quarter of
1965.

(2) Direct investment outflows are thought
to have fallen off to an annual rate of about $2-1/2
billion in the first quarter; they will probably be
larger than that during the rest of the year.

(3) The available evidence points toward a
further expansion of U.S. military expenditures
and economic aid outlays in Asia.

(4) Even with Treasury encouragement, shifts
of foreign funds from liquid to nonliquid assets
will not continue at the April-May rate of some
$200 million a month.

(5) The reflow of U.S. bank credit may not be
sustained at the $1 billion annual rate that has
prevailed since last fall, at least not without a
further substantial tightening of domestic credit
conditions. The recent sharp tightening of credit
in several foreign countries, reported in the green
book, makes a relative tightening in the United
States more difficult to achieve.

If all that were at stake was another one-year
setback in our progress toward payments equilibrium--
this time attributable mainly to a war that will
someday end and a boom that is sure to fade--one
might hope to ride it out with equanimity. One
could take comfort in the fact that some other
leading countries have also been experiencing
accelerated inflation. Also, reserves are now
accruing more to the developing countries and less

to the traditional gold-buying countries (although
sometimes developing countries also buy gold).
Further U.S. recourse to the International Monetary

Fund could limit our gold losses for a time, as it
has during the past year, permitting other countries

-47-



to exchange unwanted dollars for claims on the
IMF instead of for gold.

But, unfortunately, much more than a one-
year setback is likely to be at stake. If, as
seems possible, we are now seeing the beginning
of a domestic price-wage spiral that could gather
momentum right into the next recession, as

happened in the late 1950's, and if some other

leading countries are about to be successful in
slowing down their inflations, also as in the
late 1950's, then we may be risking a ten-year

setback rather than a one-year setback. It is
unlikely that we shall be allowed to repeat the
gradual, one-decade approach to payments adjust-
ment. We would be starting this time from a

much weaker reserve position than in 1957, and
against a long background of doubt and disappoint-

ment.
It seems to me that the risk of a lasting

setback on the payments front is very much more
serious than the opposite risk of stepping a
little too hard on the brake.

Chairman Martin reported briefly on the recent meeting of

the American Bankers Association in Madrid, which he had attended

along with Messrs. Bopp, Daane, and Hayes. The meeting was the

ABA's thirteenth Monetary Conference. About 125 people had

attended, including about 30--a larger than usual number--from

foreign countries.

There was an underlying note of concern at the meeting of

a kind that he had not seen for some time, the Chairman remarked.

The concern was hinged on the belief that the balance of payments

problem of the U.S. was out of hand. A number of foreigners had

commented during the course of the meeting about the necessity for

6/7/66 -48-



6/7/66 -49-

increasing the gold holdings of their countries and reducing their

dollar holdings. While it would not be right to say there was any

real distrust of the dollar in Europe as yet, the seeds of such

distrust were there. And the latest sterling developments might

well have been forecast from the discussions at the meeting.

One competent commentator had remarked, Chairman Martin

said, that America's present problem in Vietnam was analogous

to France's problem in Algeria; despite French claims that the

Algerian hostilities were not a real war, they eventually led to

the devaluation of the franc. The Chairman did not think the

analogy was necessarily an accurate one, but it pointed up European

apprehensions about the U.S. situation. Those apprehensions

should be borne in mind because they could lead to serious

consequences unless some means was found for dealing with

inflationary pressures in the U.S. It was possible that the

crest of the domestic boom had been passed, although he personally

was not ready to pass a judgment on that question. But the

interesting point was that virtually all of the Europeans who

had been through a similar experience were convinced that whatever

pause was occurring in the economy now was just a prelude to

another strong upswing. Also to be borne in mind was the

possibility of real financial pressures developing over the next

several months.



6/7/66 -50-

In response to an inquiry by Chairman Martin, Mr. Daane

said he had nothing to add regarding the Madrid meeting. He

thought the Chairman's report reflected accurately the feeling of

pessimism in Europe regarding U.S. efforts to resolve its balance

of payments problem.

The Chairman then invited Mr. Daane to comment on the

Rome meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten that had been

held prior to the ABA meeting in Madrid.

Mr. Daane noted that the Deputies had met in Rome on

May 17, 18, and 19. The meeting was held against the background

of a rather sharp exchange of views, which had been reported in

the press, between Chairman Emminger of the Deputies and Mr. Schweitzer

of the International Monetary Fund. Mr. Schweitzer had charged

publicly that the Group of Ten was dragging its feet on the whole

question of international monetary reform. Also, he had scathingly

compared the proposal for a set-aside, for the use of countries

outside the Group, of any new reserve assets created to the

outmoded "separate but equal" accommodations treatment of minority

groups in the U.S. In his reply Chairman Emminger had emphasized

that, because the Deputies were engaged on a long-run task, the

difference of a few months one way or the other in completing

their preparatory work was not of great importance. With respect

to the "separate but equal" charge, he observed that the ten countries



6/7/66 -51-

of the Group would always have to bear the main responsibility

and financial burden involved in the functioning of the system.

Mr. Daane noted that Chairman Emminger had prepared a

draft report, organized into five chapters, for the consideration

of the Deputies. The introductory chapter referred to the need

for a better balance of payments adjustment mechanism, the

instability in the present system related to shifts in composition

of reserve assets, and the probable inadequacy of gold for future

reserve needs. The flavor of the introduction was that there was

no general shortage of international liquidity now but that it

was the consensus of the Group that there was likely to be a

problem in the future. The introduction also referred to the

role played and the contribution made by short-term credit

facilities, and to their potential for further development.

The second chapter dealt with possible improvements in

the international payments system, Mr. Daane said. It included

considerable discussion of the need for strengthening the process

of multilateral surveillance to bring about better adjustments,

perhaps even going as far as suggesting review and coordination

of national reserve policies. Chapter 3 dealt with the elements

of various proposals for the creation of reserve assets. There

was little discussion of the first three chapters at the Rome

meeting.



6/7/66

Chapter 4, Mr. Daane continued, involved an attempt to

get away from a simple cataloguing of views on individual elements

of various proposals and to put forward the most desirable "package

plan" or plans. Most of the attention at the meeting was centered

on a draft of chapter 4 prepared by the British delegation in an

effort to get the Group to coalesce around a proposal for a

reserve unit for the limited group, setting aside for future

discussion appropriate provision for other members of the IMF.

While the British proposal would retain the principle that an

expansible inner group would have responsibility for insuring

the acceptability of the new reserve units, it would permit

units to be issued to nonparticipating countries. On the unresolved

issue of acceptability the proposal provided for a compromise

involving upper and lower holding limits. If a country accumulated

new units above an upper holding limit it could convert them,

100 per cent, into gold. Transfer of units below the lower limit

would be at a ratio to either gold or dollars. Thus, the proposal

contained some of the acceptability elements of both the U.S.

proposal and that of Chairman Emminger.

The Group did not coalesce around the British proposal,

Mr. Daane remarked. The French took their usual position that

there was no need to do anything at present, particularly in view

of the continuing U.S. balance of payments deficit. The U.S.

-52-



6/7/66 -53-

delegates demurred on the grounds that they still preferred their

own "dual" proposal, which included provisions for drawing rights

as well as new reserve units. The conclusion was that chapter 4

would still leave open the options of going toward drawing rights,

new units, or some combination of the two. The European view

now involves new units for the limited group and possible

drawing rights for others, while the U.S. proposal involves

drawing rights for everyone. The issue of universality was

definitely in the minds of the Deputies as well as of the people

at the IMF.

There was some discussion also of the form and content of

chapter 5 on Conclusions and Recommendations, Mr. Daane observed.

An understanding was reached that a new draft of this Conclusions

chapter would be prepared by Chairman Emminger on the basis of

suggestions sent in to him before the next meeting of the Group,

scheduled for Frankiurt, Germany, June 21-24, 1966.

The other question discussed, Mr. Daane reported, was how

and when to move ahead into the second stage. His personal view

was that the U.S. balance of payments picture might well affect

the willingness of the Europeans to take that step. The U.S.

had proposed moving into a second stage involving an Advisory

Committee of Ministers and Governors in the Fund, with about 38

Ministers and Governors to cover the whole Fund membership. He



6/7/66 -54-

understood that in Fund Board discussions subsequent to the

Group of Ten meeting the IMF Executive Directors had resisted

that idea.

He might note one other point, Mr. Daane said, that might

have partly reflected the effects of the current U.S. balance of

payments position. When the Deputies turned to chapter 3, dealing

with elements of reserve asset creation, the discussion brought

out clearly the considerable interest on the part of the continental

Europeans in establishing preconditions, both procedural and

substantive, that would prevent early or excessive activation of

machinery set up to create reserves. In that respect they were

moving in the direction of the French position. Among the sug-

gestions made for preconditions for activation were a rule of

unanimity, an initial date not earlier than 1970, or a two-year

period in which there were no net additions to world gold stocks.

In addition, the Europeans talked about setting up some qualitative

criteria that would very rigidly limit the amount of reserves

created. The restrictive flavor of the discussion of activation

was similar to that evident in the questioning of the desirability

of moving into the second stage and in the repeated emphasis on

the need for tighter multilateral surveillance.

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with

Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement:



6/7/66

Business activity continues strong. The
demand for autos is less intense than earlier, but
it is too soon to say whether this is more than a
temporary dip. More striking are the indications
that capital spending plans continue to be very
strong--despite moral suasion, tighter credit,
shortages of labor, and slower deliveries. A
rapidly growing aggregate demand for goods and services
continues to press on the limitations imposed by more
slowly growing capacity.

The most recent survey of consumers' buying
intentions shows no significant change; while
consumers have reduced their automobile buying
plans from the very high level of the previous
survey, their buying plans still are at the high
level of a year ago. On the price front, nonfood
prices--at both wholesale and retail--moved sharply
higher in April. The highly tentative May figures
indicate that industrial wholesale prices have held
about constant. There has perhaps been some reduction
in inflationary psychology, but the inflationary
pressure of demand on resources continues to be
present.

The balance of payments outlook is unsatis-
factory, and the prospects are gloomy. The annual
rate of the deficit for the first quarter of 1966

was much greater than the deficit for the year 1965.

The trade balance has deteriorated and could deteriorate

a good deal more unless inflationary forces at home

are checked. There appears to be little prospect of

any significant reduction in direct investment outflows,
and the tourist gap is likely to widen. The Vietnam

conflict promises to be a continuing drain. It seems

probable that there will be a substantial increase in

the balance of payments deficit for 1966 as compared

with 1965. Success in the Treasury's effort to induce

a further shift of foreign official and international

funds out of liquid dollar instruments into nonliquid

assets will serve merely to improve the balance of

payments statistics. The worsening of our balance

of payments could undermine foreign confidence in

the ability and determination of the United States

to rectify its balance of payments problem; and

attempts at window-dressing are not likely to help

the situation.

-55-



6/7/66

Bank credit growth slowed in May. The rise
so far this year is still very substantial, though
less so than in 1965. In April the loss of funds
at thrift institutions was large. The mortgage
market is very tight. But so far the effects on
residential construction activity have not been
great. Bank liquidity has dropped further as banks
have continued to liquidate U.S. Government secu-
rities. The demand for business loans continues
strong. There is concern about financial strains
that may occur at the June tax payment date and at
the end of the first half of the year when thrift
institutions will be crediting interest on savings
accounts.

The present situation calls for coordinated
restraint by fiscal policy and monetary policy.
Monetary policy has been working. The big policy
issue, it seems to me, continues to be fiscal
policy. The Federal Government is still providing
a considerable fiscal stimulus in a setting marked
by excess demand. It seems to me that the prompt
announcement and enactment of a program for a
simple increase in Federal individual and corporate
income taxes would help to reduce the inflationary
pressures and to promote the maintenance of an
orderly and balanced economy now, thus contributing
over the long run to sustainable economic growth
and the expansion of employment. More fiscal
restraint would, of course, lessen the need to
place too great an anti-inflationary burden on
monetary policy, and would reduce the inevitable
pressure on interest rates.

Continuing monetary restraint is called for.
With interest rates on time deposits pressing
closer to Regulation Q ceilings, with the recent
advance in several money market interest rates,
and with a generally taut tone in the money market,
there is not much room for increasing the pressure
on bank reserve positions without endangering the

current viability of the discount rate and Regu-

lation Q ceilings. It seems to me that it would
be desirable to maintain as much restraint as is

feasible without creating strong expectations of

a change in the discount rate. Such a course

would involve continued firm conditions in the

-56-



6/7/66

money market and continued pressure on bank reserve
positions, with net borrowed reserves perhaps in the
$350-$400 million range.

Alternative A of the draft directives prepared
by the staff with the proviso clause would seem to
fit the prescription I have in mind. The proviso
clause constitutes a fitting reminder in the directive
of the basic thrust of policy. Under the proviso, we
should move toward lesser reserve availability Land
firmer money market conditions if bank credit expands
more rapidly than expected. Yet the Manager should
not be expected to react automatically to purely
statistical short-range changes in required reserves.
With the stresses of the tax date and the approaching
interest payment date for thrift institutions, a
further increase in restraint under the proviso clause
should be approached with caution.

I will now comment on member bank borrowing in
the Second Federal Reserve District.1/

As regards borrowing by country banks, the System's
program of monetary restraint is now finally reaching
down into the country banks, and beginning to bite.
The country banks, like the reserve city banks, are
faced with a continuing heavy demand for loans, which
the have met and are continuing to meet through
whatever means are available. Traditionally, country
banks have maintained an excess of reserves over
Lorroings or a net free reserve position. Since the
middle of March, however, country banks have been
showing a net borrowed reserve position. Since large
correspondent banks are no longer in a position to meet
the needs of the country banks, the country banks are
relying more and more on the discount window to avoid

1/ In transmitting the agenda for this meeting the

Secretary of the Committee had indicated that "interest has been

expressed in hearing any comments the Presidents might care to

make concerning the factors underlying the recent substantial

increase in country bank borrowing at the Federal Reserve Banks,

and whether any banks borrowing at the discount window were

al-o selling Federal funds to others during the same period."

-5--



6/7/66

liquidating securities, in the face of continuing high
loan demand. As our discount window policy begins to
be applied to these borrowings, a restrictive effect
upon expansion of credit by country member banks should
follow.

As regards banks borrowing at the discount window
and selling Federal funds to others, we have taken the
position that the large correspondent banks who are
acting as dealers in Federal funds should not borrow
from the discount window during any reserve period
in which they are net sellers of Federal funds.
Recognizing the fact that in order to maintain a
market in Federal funds these banks must be sellers
of Federal funds as well as purchasers, we have not
considered borrowing inappropriate as long as the
bank was a net purchaser of Federal funds. On only

three occasions (one country bank and two city banks)

were banks borrowers at the discount window and net

sellers of Federal funds in the same reserve period.
We satisfied ourselves in each instance by direct
contact that the situation was inadvertent and not
for the purpose of obtaining a rate differential. In

none of the three cases has the practice been repeated.

We have seen no instance of a net sale of Federal
funds by a bank which has borrowed from us with the

objective of gaining the benefit of a rate differential.
There is still another matter in which I think

the Committee would be interested. It concerns the
problem of possible withdrawals from savings banks

at midyear.

Yesterday the President of the Savings Banks Trust
Company, which serves as a kind of central bank for

the mutual savings banks of New York State, and the

Presidents of three of the large New York City savings
banks called at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
to discuss a possible savings bank crisis in July.

At the end of the first quarter of 1966 the savings
banks of New York State experienced rather large
withdrawals; they fear even larger withdrawals at

midyear. The savings banks are comparatively illiquid,
with limited access to commercial bank credit and the

capital markets. Emergency sales of their holdings

of U.S. Government securities and agency securities

would not only bring them substantial losses but

could disrupt the U.S. Government securities market.

-58-



6/7/66

While they do not predict a crisis, they think
that a crisis is possible unless there are alternative
means for prompt relief, possibly through the Federal
Reserve System, in the event of the withdrawal from
the savings banks of several hundred million dollars
in a couple of days. A crisis for the savings banks
would, of course, have adverse repercussions on the
entire banking and financial system.

There was a discussion of the possibility of
setting up a mechanism whereby the Federal Reserve

System could provide relief, if needed, to avoid a
crisis. For example, to the extent that the larger
savings banks in New York City have available for
pledge direct obligations of the United States, such
banks might, after exhausting their normal borrowing

facilities, borrow from the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York on the security of those obligations, pursuant
to the thirteenth paragraph of Section 13 of the

Federal Reserve Act. If additional borrowings from

the Federal Reserve Bank become necessary on the part

of those banks or any other New York State savings

banks whose needs cannot be satisfied by the Savings

Banks Trust Company, an arrangement might be made

whereby a member bank in New York City could act as
a medium or agent for the Savings Banks Trust Company

in borrowing from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
it being contemplated that the collateral would not

qualify for use in connection with advances under

Section 13, but rather under Section 10(b), of the
Federal Reserve Act. Permission of the Board of

Governors would, of course, be necessary for such a

borrowing under the ninth paragraph of Section 19
of the Federal Reserve Act and Section 201.5 of

Regulation A.

The savings bank representatives agreed to

furnish us promptly with a memorandum outlining the

problem and possible solutions, to the end that

another meeting be held and further discussions had

within the next ten days. Stress was placed on the

desirability of setting up the machinery for handling

the problem as far in advance as possible, and also

of having the operating rules clearly understood by

all, as soon as the way is open. We indicated a
generally sympathetic attitude toward the savings

-59-



6/7/66 -60-

banks' problem, and will be working closely with them
and the Superintendent of Banks of New York. As soon
as we receive the memorandum we will be discussing
the subject further with the Board of Governors.

Last week we met with the President of the
Federal Home Loan Bank of New York. He was not
alarmed about the savings and loan situation in his
district. The Federal Home Loan Bank of New York is
prepared to provide financial assistance to associa-
tions to help them meet any unusual withdrawals that
may arise at midyear. From the supervisor's
viewpoint he saw much to be gained in the current
experience; higher standards of lending and operations
are being promoted.

Mr. Ellis reported that the basic posture of the First

District economy continued to be one of firm pressure against

available resources. With factory output rising, with capital

expenditures rising, with construction activity rising and

jobs seeking workers, more attention was being directed toward

the financial reflection of such pressures and their immediate

outlook.

In construction, Mr. Ellis said, new contracts during

the first four months of this year were 43 per cent above

year-ago levels. Nonresidential building contracts in April

registered a 45 per cent year-to-year gain. Residential

contracts posted a 47 per cent gain, mostly due to a sharp

rise in apartment buildings. In partial reflection of those

trends, real estate loans of the District's weekly reporting

member banks stood 12 per cent higher than a year ago, and in

late May were increasing at a 10 per cent annual rate. It



6/7/66 -61-

seemed fair to conclude that financing had been available in

New England.

There was some evidence, Mr. Ellis continued, that the

first quarter brought a rush of loan commitments that would

require a period of digestion. At least one insurance company

reported that during the first quarter it committed all the

funds it expected to have available during 1966. A period of

reduced loan commitments also faced the mutual savings banks--

considered as a group. While some individual banks still had

funds to invest out of State at net yields of 6 per cent or

better, others found their slight dip in deposits during April

brought their loan-deposit ratios up to or even above the

85 per cent legal loan limit in Massachusetts. If presently

scheduled deposit withdrawal notifications for July materialized

in historical patterns, several more of the mutuals would be

pushed above their loan ceilings, and would be under the same

kind of pressure as Mr. Treiber had indicated was possible in

New York. The mutuals had been "refreshing" their loan

commitments for member banks.

Mr. Ellis went on to say that the Boston Reserve Bank's

May 11 survey of time deposits at New England member banks

provided evidence of continued efforts to attract time and

savings deposits. One-quarter of the member banks now issued



6/7/66 -62-

non-negotiable CD's, and their outstanding volume had increased

15 per cent since December. A full third issued negotiable

CD's in denominations of less than $100,000 and had lifted the

outstanding level by 25 per cent since December.

Along with their 23 per cent year-to-year gain in

total savings deposits (and 2 per cent gain in demand deposits),

weekly reporting member banks in New England had found

increasing difficulty in meeting their reserve requirements. In

the three statement weeks ending last Wednesday (June 1), the

banks were borrowing on average four times more than a year

ago. The green book indicated that "the factors occasioning

the recent sharp increase in borrowing by country banks . . .

are not completely clear." In the First District's case, the

number of country banks borrowing had doubled in the past

three weeks. As the large correspondent banks drew near the

acceptable limits of their borrowing at the Federal Reserve

Bank they had curtailed their willingness to provide Federal

funds on call of their small correspondent banks, who in turn

showed up at the discount window.

The Boston Bank had reviewed the borrowing and Federal

funds activities of those banks making daily reports to it,

Mr. Ellis said. Having regard to the fact that the funds

sales and Reserve Bank borrowings occurred at different times



6/7/66 -63-

in a reserve period, no convincing evidence was found of banks

making a deliberate policy of borrowing at the discount window to

sell Federal funds. Borrowing seemed directly related to the

basic factors of peak seasonal deposit and loan pressures super-

imposed on cyclical conditions of strong loan demand and

tightening monetary policy.

About the same words came to his mind, Mr. Ellis said, in

appraising the national scene. Concern seemed greatest in the

financial reflections of a surging economy. Capital investment

was surging ahead in spite of the Presidential plea. Vietnam

impacts were showing up ever more broadly as the effects of defense

spending were imposed on top of business and consumer demands.

However slight its real effect on release of the pressures on

resources, he was inclined to regard the cutback in auto production

as a welcome relief from a prevalence of excesses.

Starting with the premise that the strong upward thrust of

the economy was continuing, as he did, Mr. Ellis continued, it

remained a critical but still unresolved issue as to whether a

tax increase might be forthcoming. Facing that uncertainty, the

major alternatives of monetary policy lay in holding the present

degree of tightness or continuing to move gradually in firming

further. While reluctant to lose momentum, he was persuaded that

it was time for a pause in the tightening process. Three factors



6/7/66 -64-

predominated in his conclusion: first, the projected tightness in

money markets in June and early July as corporations had to meet

accelerated tax payments out of reduced liquidity; second, the

exposed position of savings institutions having deposit losses and

July dividend payments while the Government enlarged its enticements

for savers' funds by issue of attractively priced participations;

and third, recent moves in policy that added another degree of

tightness in a market increasingly affected by cumulative effects

of past tightening.

Those factors persuaded him, Mr. Ellis said, to urge a pause

in which further tightening would be foregone to allow the markets

to work their way through present difficulties and to allow the

Committee another assessment of what it could accomplish by

further moves. Those views led him to select alternative A of

the second paragraph of the draft directive, with the proviso

clause included in order to forestall loss of ground. As to the

first paragraph, he would prefer to substitute the word "the" for

"our" in the references to the U.S. foreign trade surplus and the

deficit in international payments.

Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh District

continued strong. There was, perhaps, some slight moderation as

a result of developments in housing and automobiles, as was the

case nationally. On the other hand, employment, production, and



6/7/66 -65-

distribution (as reflected by department store sales) had continued

to show steady increases, with indications of further moderate

increases in the months ahead. Employment had been rising at a rate

of about one per cent a month. The advance was rather general and

the total had reached a new record. Production in the District

was up about 0.8 per cent in the past month, with increases

outnumbering declines in about a two-to-one ratio. Construction

contracts were down; cumulatively, for the year to date, they were

about 6 per cent below the same period a year ago. Department

store sales were running seven to eight per cent over a year ago

and were continuing to show strength. For the first time in a

long while, however, there had been a slight decline in new car

registrations. The agricultural situation was quite favorable.

Moisture conditions were generally good, although there were some

spotty areas, and the livestock conditions were good. Cash farm

receipts in the first quarter were 22 per cent above a year ago,

with livestock accounting for about 30 per cent of the rise and

crops the remainder.

In the financial area, Mr. Irons continued, bankers

continued to talk about the lack of liquidity and the strength

of loan demand, although loans in total and in most individual

categories declined in the period and were running below the same

period a year ago. Investments showed a slight decrease as



6/7/66 -66-

holdings of Governments were reduced and other securities were

acquired at a low rate. As in the preceding period both time and

demand deposits declined, but negotiable CD's advanced to a

record level for the District. Federal funds purchases were

down a bit but still exceeded sales.

Both the number of member banks borrowing at the discount

window and the amount of borrowings had shown increases, Mr. Irons

said. In reviewing recent discount window activity he had found

that two reserve city banks borrowing from the Reserve Bank sold

Federal funds in the same period. That was not a regular

practice, however; the banks in question happened to be caught

with surplus funds at the end of the period. He believed that some

of the District's small country banks, although not a great many

as yet, probably were coming to the discount window because their

city correspondents were suggesting that conditions were tighter.

Three or four of the banks that had come to the window in the

last few weeks had not borrowed from the Reserve Bank for several

years, and he suspected that they were giving their correspondents

a breathing spell. Still, the number of banks borrowing and the

total volume of borrowings in the District were not large; in the

week ending June 1, 17 country banks and one reserve city bank were

at the window for a total of $18 million.



In trying to trace the reasons for country bank borrowings,

Mr. Irons continued, he found that seasonal agricultural demands

were a contributing factor, and were likely to continue to be so.

There was no evidence that the small banks were dealing in Federal

funds one way or the other. He did not find the increase in

discounting activity to pose a particularly difficult problem,

and in some respects it was desirable for a few more banks that

had not borrowed in some time to come to the window. The present

level of discounting reflected a combination of seasonal, cyclical,

and money market considerations, and he saw no evidence of efforts

to arbitrage interest rate differentials.

Mr. Irons commented that the national economic situation

had already been discussed fully, and all members were aware of

the balance of payments problem. With respect to policy, his posi-

tion was quite close to that taken by Mr. Ellis. The next three

or four weeks would be a period of rather intense uncertainties

and severe pressures in the money market. The Committee had

made reserves less readily available and had contributed to the

rise in market interest rates. It was not possible to say what

lay ahead, but the Committee had achieved a considerable bite

with its recent policy actions. At this time, he thought, caution

would be prudent. He would like to see net reserve availability

6/7/66 -67-



6/7/66 -68-

not deepened further but held at about its recent level. He did

not believe that the Committee could strain the existing position

much further without giving rise to pressures for action with

respect to the discount rate and Regulation Q ceilings. He

agreed that coordination of fiscal and monetary policies would be

desirable to relieve financial pressures, but he saw no indications

that fiscal policy action would be taken.

Mr. Irons favored alternative A of the draft directives

which, he noted, called for maintaining net reserve availability

and related money market conditions in about their recent ranges.

He would interpret that language to call for net borrowed reserves

of around $350 million. While he did not feel strongly on the

matter, he would prefer to omit the parenthetical clause in the

staff's draft.

Mr. Daane left the meeting during the course of Mr. Irons'

remarks.

Mr. Swan reported that in April the unemployment rate in

the Twelfth District had declined again, to 4.3 from 4.5 per cent,

to a considerable extent as a result of another substantial increase

in aerospace employment. Retail sales continued to do less well

than in the rest of the country and, of course, residential

construction was weak. Lumber prices declined in mid-May following

a further decline in orders; Government purchases were off and it



6/7/66 -69-

had become evident that new labor contracts would be negotiated

without strikes. District agriculture seemed to be in good

shape, although the annual question of the availability of labor

for the summer and fall was again being raised. The first

authorization for Mexican labor, issued in May, called for 1,000

workers to be brought in for the strawberry harvest. In that

connection, it was interesting to note that strawberry plantings

were up sharply in Mexico this year. During the first quarter of

1966 imports of fresh strawberries from Mexico were double those

of a year ago and frozen strawberry imports were up about

one-third.

Mr. Swan said he would not take the time to review recent

developments with respect to the mortgage market and nonbank

savings institutions in the District because they had been covered

in his Bank's report on the recent special survey.1/ He would add

only that the figures the Reserve Bank had obtained for the first

ten days of May indicated a further loss in the share accounts

of California State-chartered savings and loan associations, which

accounted for about 70 per cent of total share accounts in the

1/ A report entitled "Current Mortgage Market Conditions as
I quoted in Special Surveys by the Federal Reserve Banks" had
been distributed to the Committee prior to this meeting in the
form of a special supplemental appendix to the report, "Current
Economic and Financial Conditions."



6/7/66 -70-

State. The decrease amounted to $28 million, much less than the

loss in the corresponding period in April. While the decline was

far from welcome and there still was a good deal of concern about

what might happen in early July, there was some feeling of relief

that it was not larger.

Mr. Swan went on to say that the Home Loan Bank Board's

recent ruling raised to 5 per cent the rate that California savings

and loan associations could pay on share accounts without having

their borrowing privileges at the Bank restricted. That ruling

was followed by widespread announcements by the associations not

already paying 5 per cent that they would begin doing so on

July 1. The associations that had gone to 5 per cent in April came

out much better in terms of changes in their share accounts than

others, although it was not clear whether their experience

reflected the higher rate or their greater strength. There naturally

was some hope on the part of other associations that 5 per cent

would prove to be a viable rate.

Savings deposits at weekly reporting member banks continued

to decline in May, Mr. Swan said, although the decrease in that case

also was much less than in April. Other time deposits of individuals,

partnerships, and corporations rose substantially more than savings

accounts declined. The net growth in total time and savings

deposits in May was somewhat greater than in April, although both



6/7/66 -71-

gross amounts were considerably smaller. The District's larger

banks finally appeared as net interbank purchasers of Federal funds

for two weeks in May, although the amounts involved were not large.

In the other weeks of the month they were net sellers, as they had

been previously, but in relatively small amounts.

In checking on the questions that had been raised regarding

borrowing banks, Mr. Swan continued, he had not learned of any such

banks in the District that also were net sellers of Federal funds

in the same period. Some borrowers had operated on both sides

of the funds market, but that was not a concern as long as they

were not net sellers. Borrowings by country banks were somewhat

higher in May than in April, and they also were higher in the two

weeks ending June 1 than in the first half of May; but the total

still was not large. The week ending June 1 saw a larger number

of country banks borrowing than any other recent week, but that

number was only five, and those country banks accounted for only

20 per cent of total borrowings from the Reserve Bank in the week.

It was difficult to find any common thread in their reasons for

borrowing. In the past month there had been two cases resulting

from agricultural developments, such as delays in harvesting, and

one or two cases reflecting unexpected losses of public deposits.

Two of the five country banks were large institutions whose

positions were not markedly different from those of the large

reserve city banks.



6/7/66

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Swan said that national

developments since the last meeting of the Committee seemed to

be about in line with what had been anticipated. He gathered

from Mr. Holmes' remarks that despite problems of measurement

operations had worked out rather well under a directive that

referred to aggregate reserves as well as to net reserve availa-

bility. He found it was not easy to reach a conclusion regarding

policy for the period ahead. The balance of payments situation

was serious; indeed, if that were the only consideration before

the Committee it probably would call not for gradual tightening

but rather for overt action that would affect attitudes abroad.

However, in light of the domestic situation--the uncertainties

in credit markets, the seasonal needs, the problems facing savings

institutions, and so forth--he came out about about where

Mr. Irons had, with the feeling that the Committee should avoid

any further tightening, at least until its next meeting. He

would accept alternative A of the draft directives and would

definitely include the parenthetical phrase. He thought the

Committee should continue to recognize the aggregate reserve

question even though there was some problem of measurement, and

that it should refer to the seasonally expected change despite

the problem of definition. He agreed with Mr. Treiber on the need

for caution in applying more restraint under the proviso clause,

-72-



6/7/66 -73-

and he would favor a rather liberal interpretation of seasonal

changes. It was necessary, he thought, to meet the additional

demands that were expected in the next few weeks.

Mr. Galusha said that except for developments in the Ninth

District mortgage market, on which a report had been distributed,

there were no District developments of such interest as to require

being reported at this time.

As to country bank borrowing, Mr. Galusha said there

appeared to be nothing unusual going on in the District. The volume

of such borrowing was considerably higher in May of this year than

in May of last year, and quite a bit higher than in April. But

the increase from April to May was just about what the established

seasonal pattern would have led one to expect. If anything, Ninth

District country bank borrowing was surprisingly low in May, for

the loss in total deposits was much greater than seasonal. Nor

had any evidence been found that during May District country banks,

whether in debt to the Reserve Bank or not, entered the funds

market on the selling side. The country banks had not yet become

generally active in the funds market.

Mr. Galusha mentioned that the Reserve Bank's recent effort

to dissuade a few of the city banks from using the discount window

as much as they had been was crowned with considerable success.

Those banks which were, by the Reserve Bank's standards, being a

bit too free with discount credit had stopped being so.



6/7/66

Turning to open market policy, Mr. Galusha said it appeared

to him that the Committee could do no better for the present than

to aim at maintaining the status quo in money and credit markets.

In his judgment, the objective from now until the next meeting

should be to hold short-term rates about where they had been lately,

on average, and not pay too much attention to the level of the bill

rate, to net borrowed reserves, or, for that matter, to aggregate

reserves or bank credit. Fortunately, a holding action against

pronounced changes in the complex of short-term rates should not

involve sharp deviations from recent average values for the bill

rate or the level of net borrowed reserves. Medium- and long-term

rates could well move somewhat higher, but that would not seem to

be an implication from which the Committee ought to shrink.

Mr. Galusha noted the concern about the upcoming tax date

and, more important, the implications of generally and markedly

higher interest rates for nonbank intermediaries and the residential

construction industry. In his opinion, the need for further

monetary restraint, as measured by purely economic criteria, had

not lessened. GNP, as valued in current prices, would undoubtedly

increase a good deal less this quarter than it had in the last two,

but at the moment the expectation must be for a return, whether

in the next quarter or in the fourth quarter, to unsustainably

large increases. Even if the likelihood of a rebound in auto sales

-74-



6/7/66 -75-

were to decrease and the likelihood of the worst fears about

residential construction being realized were to increase, there

would still be the twin problems of a clearly unsustainable

pattern of investment demand and sectoral inflation. He observed,

in that connection, that the upcoming Governmental sale of

financial assets could hardly be thought of as making the Committee's

task easier.

For unsustainably high investment demand, greater monetary

restraint was an obvious solution, Mr. Galusha continued. It

could not be an inviting one, however, nor even a realistic one,

until ways of lessening the effects on nonbank intermediaries and

the residential construction industry were found. The System could

therefore do worse than to lead the search for such ways. He did

not know what answers there might be, but there was a legitimacy

and urgency in the questioning.

Mr. Galusha favored alternative A of the draft directives.

But in opting for that alternative, he was assuming that the

emphasis over the period until the Committee's next meeting would

be on money market conditions. He objected to the proviso because

it presented, it seemed to him, an unreasonable restraint on the

Desk because so many things could happen that would have effects

on required reserves.



6/7/66 -76-

Mr. Scanlon reported that with the exception of passenger

cars, output of all major Seventh District industries either

increased further in May or held at the high levels of earlier

months. While fears of accelerating inflation appeared to have

been dampened somewhat in recent weeks, no significant apprehension

was detected among observers in the Seventh District concerning a

possible early end to the current boom. Automobile people were

projecting auto assemblies for the calendar year 1966 at 8.7

million, 7 per cent less than in 1965 but substantially more than

in any previous year. They pointed out that the figure was close

to projections made last fall shortly after the 1966 models were

introduced. Truck production was still pressed to capacity, and

June output was expected to reach a new high of 175,000 units.

Promised delivery times on most types of flat-rolled steel

products had been reduced sharply, Mr. Scanlon noted, mainly

because of curtailed requirements of auto firms. As yet, there

was no indication of reduced shipments of steel to other users.

For the year as a whole, local steel experts estimated total ingot

tonnage at a record 134 million tons, with output in the four

quarters as follows: 33, 35, 32, and 35 million tons. Additional

finishing capacity should ease supply schedules further by year-end,

assuming that sufficient workers were available.



6/7/66 -77-

Labor markets in the Seventh District evidently tightened

further in the second quarter, and it was apparent that heavy

demands for labor were strengthening the hands of unions in

negotiations with management. It was said that fear of a wage

freeze was often given as one reason for the higher labor demands.

In the construction trades, recent three-year contracts called

for 30 to 40 cents per hour additional each year in wages and

fringe benefits, and some contracts were for even longer terms,

with annual wage increments.

The Chicago Reserve Bank's recent survey, Mr. Scanlon said,

indicated sharp cutbacks in most areas in new commitments for

mortgages on both residential and nonresidential properties, as

was the case in other Districts. However, demand for construction

in the Seventh District was very strong. While housing permits were

off sharply in April in the north central region, that was caused,

in part at least, by strikes and unusually heavy rainfall. The

availability of labor and of materials such as copper and brass

conduits and fittings, plywood, and some aluminum products, as well

is the availability and cost of funds, would largely determine the

Level of construction activity in the Seventh District this summer.

Several of the major savings and loan associations in the Chicago

area had boosted loan rates, effective this week, with the

"standard" single family mortgage now limited to 20 years, with a

25 per cent downpayment and a contract interest rate of 6-1/4 per cent.



6/7/66 -78-

In that connection, Mr. Scanlon commented that while

savings and loan associations in the Chicago area had generally

indicated sharp cutbacks in forward commitments for mortgage funds,

the reason for the cutbacks was not illiquidity in all cases.

For example, the head of one of the largest associations in the

middle west said that while his association had funds to lend to

qualified borrowers it had cut back forward commitments more than

25 per cent because, with all the talk and press comment about

what was going to happen July 1, he wanted to build up substantial

liquidity so he could operate on his own resources under the most

severe conditions foreseeable at this time. The savings and loan

executive mentioned particularly that he could not be certain what

help would be forthcoming from the Federal Home Loan Bank, so he

wanted to play it safe.

Turning to weekly reporting banks, Mr. Scanlon reported

that loans to manufacturing firms had been rising strongly while

new loans to trade establishments and finance companies had not

kept pace with repayments. He found no evidence to date of

significant slowing in either real estate or consumer loans. The

weekly reporting banks continued to liquidate Governments during

most of May, though at a moderate pace, but they acquired a

relatively large amount of other securities, probably agencies.



6/7/66 -79-

Through mid-May, Mr. Scanlon continued, the smaller banks

in the District continued to show more rapid loan growth and

faster liquidation of Governments than the weekly reporters.

Borrowing at the discount window in recent weeks had been largely

by country banks, and the number of such banks seeking accommoda-

tion had risen to a new high. It was understood that some country

member banks were being encouraged by their city correspondents

to use the discount window in preference to their correspondent.

The Reserve Bank knew of one correspondent bank that loaned to

nonmembers at the discount rate but charged the prime rate to member

banks. It was not aware of any unusual amount of downstream

participation of loans.

The recent survey of time deposits had confirmed the long-

standing practice of many small banks in the Seventh District to

use time certificates of deposit as well as passbook savings as

vehicles for acquiring deposits. In Iowa, for example, 44 per cent

of total time deposits were in certificates, and only a negligible

amount ($3 million) were negotiable certificates of $100,000 or more.

Aggressive postures on interest rates were revealed by

relatively few banks, Mr. Scanlon said. Only 38 per cent of

District member banks paid as much as 4 per cent on savings

deposits, only 11 per cent paid in excess of 4-1/2 per cent on

time certificates of deposit and open account time deposits, only



6/7/66 -80-

4 per cent paid in excess of 4-1/2 per cent on savings certificates,

and only 2 per cent paid in excess of 4-1/2 per cent on other

nonnegotiable certificates. Excluding negotiable CD's of $100,000

or more, only 8 per cent of the District member banks paid more

than 4-1/2 per cent on any type of time deposit. Slightly more

than half the member banks--532--paid 4-1/2 per cent on some kind

of time deposit, excluding large negotiable CD's.

Reserve positions of the money market banks in the Seventh

District still were not showing strong pressure, although they

were less easy than a month ago. The amount of their CD's maturing

in June was smaller than in March. Judging by past experience, those

banks appeared in a position to meet any reasonable volume of credit

demands in the period just ahead.

As to policy, it appeared desirable to Mr. Scanlon to limit

monetary and credit expansion to not much more than normal seasonal

growth. If such expansion became inconsistent with the existing

rate of net reserve availability, he would like to see some

further reduction in the latter. He realized that the Committee

did not have a great deal of elbow room, and he certainly would not

want to move overtly, but he believed, if staff projections were

correct, that the Committee must continue gradually to exercise

more restraint. While he could accept alternative A, with the

proviso, he believed alternative B of the draft directives best

suited the objectives for which he would strive.



6/7/66 -81-

Mr. Clay commented that some sectors of the economy,

principally automobiles and housing, had slackened their pace

somewhat. At the same time, the over-all level of economic

activity was increasing at such a rate that the growth in aggregate

demand for goods and services pressed hard on the economy's

resources and capacity to produce. As a reflection of those

developments, nonagricultural prices continued their upward

movement at the more rapid rate of recent months.

The future pattern of economic activity could not be known

with certainty, Mr. Clay observed, particularly without full know-

ledge of the course of defense expenditures. What was known about

probable economic developments, however, suggested that the pressure

of demand on resources and capacity would continue and that price

inflation would also remain a problem. Under the circumstances,

monetary policy should continue to apply pressure on the commercial

banks and the financial markets.

Developments in reserve aggregates and monetary variables

during May had placed those measures in a more satisfactory

position relative to monetary policy objectives for recent months,

Mr. Clay continued. Staff projections indicated a substantial

expansion in aggregate financial measures in June. However,

forthcoming developments surrounded the period with considerable

uncertainty as to financial pressures in view of the large volume



6/7/66 -82-

of scheduled private and public financing, the tax and dividend

requirements in the period, and the problem of the pattern of

savings flows in the economy. The uncertainty probably would be

intensified if Congress should pass restrictive legislation with

respect to time deposits.

Draft directive A appeared to Mr. Clay appropriate for the

period ahead, provided a less emphatic word such as "considerably"

was substituted for the word "sharply" in the provisional clause.

Whether or not specified in the directive itself, it also seemed

to him that there should be an interest rate or money market

constraint to avoid monetary policy actions that would precipitate

a discount rate increase at this time.

Mr. Clay said the Kansas City Reserve Bank did not have

evidence that borrowers at the discount window were net sellers of

Federal funds. The factor underlying the recent substantial

increase in country bank borrowing appeared to be the high demand

for agricultural and business credit during a period of tight

money. The country banks felt the bite in that situation because

(1) they lacked equal access to the CD market, and (2) city cor-

respondent banks were limiting borrowing by their country

correspondents and were referring them to the Reserve Bank. A

total of 172 banks had borrowed from the Kansas City Bank this

year compared to 120 last year. Forty-two of those did not borrow



6/7/66 -83-

at any time during 1965, and several had never borrowed before

from the Federal Reserve. That might be proving that there was

some real advantage to System membership.

Mr. Wayne said that the latest information contained rather

definite evidence of slower growth in some sectors of Fifth District

business. Building permits, curbed by a dwindling supply of

mortgage money, dropped in April to the lowest level in nearly a

year. In the Richmond Reserve Bank's latest survey, manufacturers'

new orders showed virtually no increase for the first time since

last July, and the rise in factory shipments was considerably smaller

than earlier this year. Backlogs continued high, however, and

factory employment, hours, and wages showed further gains. Upward

pressure on prices also continued.

Mr. Wayne reported that there had been some rise in country

bank borrowings in the Fifth District, although the total thus far

remained relatively small. A number of banks had been contacted,

but regardless of the reasons they advanced for borrowing it seemed

to him that the general pattern of borrowings was one that should

be expected in a period of tight money with limited opportunities

for obtaining funds. No evidence had been found of banks selling

Federal funds during a period in which they were borrowing.

With respect to the comments that had been made regarding

savings banks, Mr. Wayne noted that there were a few large savings



6/7/66 -84-

banks in the Fifth District, in the Baltimore area. Several of

them had expressed some concern about possible developments in

the period ahead, but thus far none had raised the question of

obtaining relief through the Reserve Bank.

In the policy area, Mr. Wayne said, the Committee probably

was now in the critical phase of the difficult and delicate task

of slowing the present boom to a sustainable pace without reversing

the direction of the economy. For that difficult period, he

suggested a policy of holding about the present level of reserve

availability but with a safeguard to insure against inadvertent

increases in reserves, bank credit, and the money supply. He would

do that by again gearing the directive to required reserves.

Mr. Wayne noted that excess demand continued to show itself

in several places. Unfilled orders for durable goods continued

their steady and strong rise. Plans for business investment showed

some signs of leveling off but still were too high to be sustained.

Those and other inflationary factors should not be discounted, but

perhaps with a little more time they would yield to a continuation

of present monetary pressures.

Mr. Wayne commented that the directive adopted last time

seemed to have worked well, perhaps with the aid of favorable market

conditions and good projections. He would like to keep that format

and maintain about the same level of reserve availability unless



6/7/66 -85-

required reserves should rise appreciably. If the latter should

happen, a move should be made toward larger net borrowed reserves.

Alternative A of the draft directives, with the parenthetical

phrase included, expressed a position that seemed appropriate,

but he would like to see some reference in the first paragraph

to the situation in the mortgage market and its implications for

housing. Without some such reference, the first paragraph seemed

to support alternative B for the second paragraph rather than A.

Mr. Shepardson commented that while there were indications

of a slowdown in some sectors of the economy the general level

of activity was still advancing, with heavy pressure of demands

against resources, a tight labor market, scarcity of skilled labor

in many areas, and a continuing rise in prices. At the same time

there were pressures ahead around the tax and dividend dates,

concern about the mortgage market, and concern about the effects

of a possible excessive shifting of funds among financial

intermediaries. Those factors presented somewhat conflicting

indications. Mr. Reynolds' report on the balance of payments

situation seemed highly significant. Current price developments

would have implications for subsequent wage negotiations, and any

further deterioration in the price and wage situation could have

serious effects on the competitive position of the U.S., on the

trade balance, and on the total balance of payments.



6/7/66 -86-

Mr. Shepardson thought that those considerations, on ba

warranted pursuing a policy of further restraint while avoiding

overt action. As he understood the discussion, the Committee st

had some leeway available to move toward the $400 million level

net borrowed reserves. Mr. Treiber had mentioned moving toward

that level within the framework of alternative A of the draft

directives. However, it seemed to him (Mr. Shepardson) that such

a policy was better described in alternative B, and he preferred

that alternative.

Mr. Mitchell said he would make just one remark about

borrowings before turning to the language of the directive. It

seemed to him that the System was not using the discount rate as

a restraint; at present levels of the Federal funds rate the discount

rate would have to be raised to 5-1/2 or 6 per cent to offer

important restraint, and no one advocated such an increase. Thus,

it was up to the Reserve Banks to exercise as much restraint as

possible by persuading member banks to turn borrowers away. Denying

discounting facilities to banks that were selling Federal funds was

one means of doing so. He hoped the Reserve Banks would continue

their efforts to restrain member bank lending and perhaps

intensify them, because such efforts might be the only way to

avoid an increase in the discount rate, which could prove

catastrophic.



6/7/66 -87-

Mr. Mitchell agreed with much of what Mr. Wayne had said

about the directive. He thought it was important to guard against

a repetition of the banking developments of March and April, and

he would favor some further reduction in net reserve availability

if required reserves expanded significantly more than seasonally

expected. Unless that happened, however, he would go along with-

out much further change in net borrowed reserves. He still

favored the revision in the first sentence of the directive that he

had suggested earlier today, and he agreed that it would be

advisable to include a statement about the mortgage market.

Mr. Maisel reported that Mr. Daane, who had withdrawn from

the meeting earlier to keep another engagement, had indicated

before leaving that he favored alternative A of the draft directives.

On the savings bank matter referred to earlier by

Mr. Treiber, Mr. Maisel said he hoped there could be a System

approach to the problem, which was an important one.

As to the directive, it seemed to Mr. Maisel that banking

developments were now on the right path, and he interpreted

alternative A as calling for guarding against leaving that path.

Therefore he preferred A. Conditions now with respect to the major

monetary variables were just about what the Committee had expected.

Over the next month or two the Committee would have to face up to

the question of what goals it expected monetary policy to achieve.



6/7/66 -88-

In his opinion the goals that some people were setting up were not

properly goals of monetary policy; the country could not be run

through monetary policy alone.

Mr. Brimmer said he favored alternative A of the drafts for

the second paragraph of the directive and would leave open for the

time being the question of whether to include the proviso.

Regarding the balance of payments, Mr. Brimmer thought the

problems involved were for the most part beyond the reach of

monetary policy. Of the five problem areas noted by Mr. Reynolds,

there was only one about which the Committee could do much in the

near future--it might be able to induce commercial banks to lend

less abroad. He detected nothing in the Administration's attitude

to indicate that it regarded the previously announced balance of

payments target as serious. On the contrary, recent speeches by

officials suggested that the Administration had decided to run

the risk of further losses of gold in preference to calling for

corrective but unpopular measures. He would prefer not to see

the Committee try to make up for the lack of Administration

responsiveness to the balance of payments problem. Thus, unlike

Mr. Shepardson, he thought that the deterioration in the U.S.

balance of payments position was not a good reason for a further

tightening of policy.



6/7/66 -89-

With respect to the domestic scene, Mr. Brimmer expressed

particular interest in Mr. Brill's opening remark reporting

Mr. Noyes' advice not to let the Committee overstay a tight policy.

The present was a particularly troublesome time for forecasters.

The evidence was mixed, and while he personally believed that the

economy was in for another upswing, he was not certain of his

judgment. Given the lags in the available data, the Committee

might fail to recognize quickly a weakening in the underpinnings

of the economy. Accordingly, he would want to be a little cautious.

There were various other reasons for caution, including conditions

in the mortgage market, concerning which he had a sentence to

propose for inclusion in the directive. The financial problems

ahead might be more serious than any that had been faced by the

present generation, and the Committee should keep in mind its

responsibility for the financial system as a whole and not just

the commercial banks. In that connection, he was impressed by

the imagination shown in New York, and perhaps elsewhere, in

looking into the steps that might be taken to deal with the savings

bank problem. He agreed with Mr. Maisel that a System-wide

approach to that problem would be desirable.

Turning to the directive, Mr. Brimmer suggested retaining

the opening sentence of the first paragraph as drafted by the staff,

and following it with a new sentence reading, "There is also much



6/7/66 -90-

uncertainty about the mortgage market and the liquidity of nonbank

financial institutions." As he had indicated, he preferred

alternative A for the second paragraph and he thought the Manager

might focus on $350 million as his target for net borrowed reserve

He had not taken a position with respect to the proviso because he

was inclined to suggest that the Manager be given substantial

leeway to depart from the net borrowed reserve target if unusual

circumstances developed in financial markets, letting them fall

away from the $350 million figure if necessary. He doubted that the

seasonal factors available were adequate for dealing with the

situation that lay ahead.

Mr. MacDonald observed that the flow of business news

suggested that the economic expansion was proceeding, momentarily,

at a less frenetic pace than in the first quarter. Confirmation

could be found in the recent behavior of such series as retail

sales, new orders and shipments of durable goods, industrial

production, construction, industrial prices, and personal income.

Nevertheless, those series were erratic--one swallow did not make

a summer and one month did not make a trend. To the extent that

there had been moderation, it had been helped by the slide in auto

sales and cutbacks in car production, which were likely to have

further effects as they spread into ancillary industries such as

steel, rubber, and glass.



6/7/66 -91-

Whether it would be possible to recapture the balance in

the economy that prevailed earlier in the business expansion

remained to be seen, Mr. MacDonald noted. In any event, there

seemed to be less inflationary pressure at the moment than earlier

this year. He was glad to see that the restrained performance of

monetary measures in May largely counteracted the inflationary

April showing, and that projections for June indicated figures

reasonably close to the Committee's objective. The desired degree

of monetary restraint might thus have been reached, at least for

the time being.

Mr. MacDonald reported that most economic developments in

the Fourth District had been consistent with the national pattern,

although the regional measures had by no means behaved uniformly.

On the side of moderation, gains in manufacturing activity appeared

to have slackened recently in several major District centers.

District steel production had remained high, but new orders

received by the reporting steel producers declined slightly in May,

on a seasonally adjusted basis. Auto sales and department store

sales in the District had slipped thus far in the second quarter,

and construction contracts, after climbing through February,

turned down in succeeding months.

On a stronger note, Mr. MacDonald added, insured unemploy-

ment in major labor markets of the Fourth District had continued



6/7/66 -92-

to edge down, reaching the low figure of 1.1 per cent; in 5 of the

14 major labor markets the rate was less than 1 per cent. The

Reserve Bank's spring survey of capital spending plans in Cleveland

and Cincinnati found that business firms had upgraded their

estimates of spending for 1966 since the fall survey. The change in

part reflected a carryover of capital outlays from 1965 into this

year.

Mr. MacDonald reported that banking statistics for January

through April showed that credit expansion in the District had

been considerably larger at banks outside major cities than at

weekly reporting banks, which suggested that, as of April, the full

effects of tighter monetary policy were still to be felt by

country banks.

With reference to the borrowing of country banks at the

discount window, Mr. MacDonald said that during the first five months

of 1966 such borrowing was up 40 per cent from the year-earlier

period--about the same as in the nation. Daily average borrowings

of the District's country banks had more than doubled since March,

but still accounted for only about 1 per cent of total country bank

borrowing. Ten of the banks that borrowed this year had not

borrowed from the Reserve Bank in the past three years. In

several cases the borrowing reportedly was caused by increased

loan demand stemming from use of credit lines by branches of



6/7/66 -93-

national corporations that had been unable to obtain sufficient

funds in money market centers.

Recent data provided no evidence of a significant shift in

the pattern of banks' use of the discount window and transactions

in Federal funds. Occasionally, large banks found themselves over-

sold on Federal funds and turned to the discount window. No

country banks had been found that simultaneously borrowed from the

Reserve Bank and sold Federal funds.

As for monetary policy during the next three weeks,

Mr. MacDonald expressed a preference for alternative A, as drafted

by the staff, for reasons already given by others.

Mr. Hilkert reported that several indicators pointed to

some slackening of pressures on economic resources in the Third

District. Although the labor force in the District was more fully

employed than at any time since the Korean War, gains in manufac-

turing employment had lessened and demand for labor (reflected in

help-wanted indexes) had ceased to expand. Also, nonresidential

construction in the District had lagged so far this year, and

auto registrations for the year to date were under 1965 totals.

Superimposed upon those factors in the real economy,

pressures in the mortgage market had been building rapidly in

intensity. Inasmuch as the Philadelphia Reserve Bank made a survey

of mortgage conditions four weeks ago and just recently updated it,



6/7/66 -94-

it had been able to observe that build-up. The surveys indicated

the same kind of cuts in new mortgage commitments that had already

been reported for most other Districts. One difference observed

in the Bank's two surveys, however, was in the reasons given for

the abrupt change in policy with respect to mortgages. Around

May 1, savings and loan officials blamed CD's, nearly exclusively,

for the net savings outflow. But since then few had found

convincing evidence that the money did go to the commercial

banks. Almost all interviewed admitted frankly they did not know

where the money was going. Another difference was in connection

with mortgage rates. FHA average mortgage discounts were 2 points

in March, 3 in April, and 4-1/2 near the end of May. When

mortgage lenders were surveyed around May 1, FHA did not expect

an average 4-1/2 point discount until midsummer.

During the past week the Philadelphia Reserve Bank also had

been in touch with several banks and finance companies to inquire

about automobile financing, Mr. Hilkert added. The banks and larger

finance companies reported a volume of business roughly similar to

last year's, or perhaps a bit higher, though borrowers were being

screened more carefully. The medium and smaller-sized finance

companies, on the other hand, reported business off considerably,

partly because of slipping demand but more importantly because

money was harder to get. If those findings accurately reflected



6/7/66 -95-

developments throughout the nation, further complaints might soon

be expressed--this time in the area of consumer financing--about

intense competition from the commercial banks.

On the banking front in the Third District, country banks

had experienced slower growth in loans and investments so far this

year than in 1965, with little pressure on the deposit side of

the ledger. That was one reason, together with heavy participation

in the Federal funds market, why there had not been the bulge in

borrowing at the discount window that had characterized some other

Reserve Banks. The number of country banks borrowing in recent

weeks had not been out of line with comparable periods of the past

two years, and though there had been some pickup in amounts borrowed

the increase had not been substantial.

The banks that had been borrowing at the window appeared to

have done so for a variety of reasons, Mr. Hilkert said. For

example, a few larger country banks had experienced a rising loan

demand from large firms that formerly borrowed in the money centers

but now were finding conditions there relatively tight. Also, the

substantial increase in the Federal funds rate (and at times reduced

availability of such funds) had encouraged several banks to seek

discount accommodation.

It had been possible, Mr. Hilkert said, to keep close track

of borrowing at the discount window in relation to activity in



6/7/66 -96-

Federal funds and other borrowing because the Reserve Bank had

been getting daily figures since February from all country banks

on Federal funds transactions and other borrowing.

Among country banks during the last four bi-weekly reserve

periods, some sold Federal funds during the same reserve period

in which they were borrowing at the discount window, and a few

sold small amounts on days when they were borrowing. However,

there was no evidence of that being a regular practice by any

country bank. Two of the six city banks that made a market in

Federal funds for correspondents had borrowed during the past

eight weekly reserve periods. Each bank sold Federal funds during

those periods, and on days during which they were borrowing.

Typically, city banks reduced their sales of Federal funds when

they borrowed at the window.

Although no pattern had emerged, Mr. Hilkert added, the

Reserve Bank had noticed some factors responsible on occasion

for simultaneous Federal funds sales and borrowing from the

Federal Reserve by country banks. There had been a case in which

the country bank had an agreement with its correspondent to sell

Federal funds daily; then, when a need arose, it borrowed from

the Reserve Bank instead of cutting back Federal funds sales.

A second case was one in which the country bank used an inflow of

funds to sell Federal funds instead of paying off an existing

note at the Reserve Bank.



6/7/66

Mr. Hilkert observed that the Reserve Bank would be in a

position to see whether or not those practices increased as it

obtained more experience with the Federal funds and other

borrowing figures on a daily reporting basis. No doubt questions

would arise as to proper administration of the discount window.

It seemed obvious, however, that uniformity in policing those

practices would be desirable.

Mr. Patterson submitted the following statement for the

record:

In the Sixth District we note the same moderating
influences evident in the rest of the country. These
have extended to a variety of economic and financial
series. Declines have shown up not only in retail
sales and construction contracts, but also in employ-
ment. It may be that some of the employment gains in
the early part of the year borrowed from the most
recent period. Of course, we still find a considerable
shortage of labor, especially skilled help. Nevertheless,
it seems to us that the pressures, even for labor, have
abated somewhat.

Having said this, I don't want to attach undue
importance to the declines that have occurred. The
dip in auto sales has not been large. And even in
the case of construction the drop has been small,
although our survey would indicate that the worst is
yet to come.

That there has been a decided change in underlying
District developments is quite clear, however. It shows
up, for instance, in a reduction in the willingness of
consumers to borrow, not only for autos but for other
purposes as well. In our large cities there has been
a slowing down in the over-all loan expansion. It is

hard to tell to what degree that is traceable to a
softening in credit demands. It may well be partly
self-imposed, and it may also reflect the impact of

our own policy actions.

-97-



6/7/66

It is always difficult to see the effects of credit
restraint when first applied. But as we all know, those
become cumulative and eventually show sizable results.
We are now seeing some evidence of this in the national
housing sector, although the root of the problem there
seems to be also partly a matter of bank competition
and a decline in the demand for housing per se.

Rather than feeling uncomfortable that there has
been a slowing up in theeconomy, I would think that this
is what we hoped would happen, especially since no tax
increase seems to be in the offing. If the economy had
not responded, I would have been very much disappointed.
Therefore, I think it would be a distinct mistake if we
were to ease our policy now.

On the other hand, I wonder if housing is not feeling
more of an impact than we anticipated and bargained for.
This consideration, plus the fact that theeconomy seems
less overheated than it has been, suggests that this is
not the time for additional credit restraint. I am
further persuaded in this conclusion by the agencies'
marketing problems, the mid-June money market pressures,
and the Treasury's prospective borrowing requirements.

My feeling is that while caution is the watchword
today, some difficult decisions on the discount rate and
Regulation Q lie ahead. The number of banks paying
5 per cent on savings certificates seems to have increased
sharply, in our District at least, and in some cases
banks have gone to 5-1/2 per cent. We, too, have found
an increasing number of country banks using the discount
window. This increase--only partly seasonal--seems to
reflect a certain amount of unwillingness to take capital
losses on securities in the face of still relatively
strong loan demands and moderating deposit increases.
There is little evidence that banks are trying to borrow
at the discount window and are also selling Federal
funds, but policing may become a problem. For this
reason, discount rate action may well become a necessity.

On the matter of open market policy, Mr. Patterson said

that in general he favored the approach taken in the directive at

the last meeting. Today, however, he would not resist the increase

in required reserves for June projected by the staff, unless that

-98-



6/7/66 -99-

increase turned out much greater than presently anticipated. He

would go along with alternative A of the draft directives.

Mr. Lewis reported that economic activity in the Eighth

District continued to show great strength. Personal income had

risen at about a 10 per cent annual rate since last fall, and

spending, as measured by the flow of check payments, had increased

at a 7-1/2 per cent rate. The greater demand for goods and

services was straining production and credit facilities and placing

upward pressure on prices. Real output, as estimated from indus-

trial use of electric power, had increased at about a 5 per cent

annual rate since late last year, and total employment had risen

at a very sharp 7 per cent rate. Particularly rapid gains

occurred in manufacturing employment at St. Louis and Memphis.

Unemployment, which averaged about 3.4 per cent of the District

labor force in late 1965, had been down to about 3.1 per cent

since March.

Total credit at Eighth District weekly reporting banks

had expanded at an 11 per cent annual rate since December, compared

with an 8 per cent rate in the nation. Loans had risen at a

15 per cent rate and bank investments had increased slightly.

Business loans in the District had advanced at an unusually large

25 per cent annual rate since December, with an especially strong growth

in St. Louis. Firms in most industrial categories were large net



6/7/66 -100-

borrowers. Bank deposits had expanded at a 6 per cent rate since

December, with much of the growth in demand deposits. An exception

to the strong growth in bank deposits and loans had occurred in

the Memphis area. Deposits in Memphis had shown only a slight

rise over the past two years, evidently because those banks had

been less competitive in rates paid on time deposits due to a

4 per cent Tennessee limitation. With a lack of growth in funds

available, outstanding business loans at Memphis banks had changed

little on balance in nearly two years.

Mr. Lewis reported that 25 country banks had borrowed in

the first five months of 1966. That was three and one-half times

the number that borrowed in the first five months of 1965. The

amount borrowed in the past three months had averaged about double

the average of last winter. Reasons given for the greater borrowing

included strong loan demands and increased difficulty of getting

accommodation from correspondent banks. One bank reported that

it had lost some deposits because competitors were offering higher

rates on time accounts. Only one country bank had sold Federal

funds in the same period in which it borrowed; that bank sold on

the last two days of the reserve period but then paid out. Several

reserve city banks had sold Federal funds during periods in which

they borrowed, but were heavy net buyers rather than net sellers.



6/7/66 -101-

Upward pressure continued on prices, Mr. Lewis noted. For

example, in the St. Louis area there had been marked increases in

wages of construction workers, the cost of building materials had

risen sharply, and the delivery period on certain key items had

lengthened considerably. As a result, builders reported that the

cost of constructing a residence was 5 to 10 per cent higher than

just a few months ago. Over-all consumer prices in the St. Louis

area had risen at a 4 per cent annual rate since last September.

In summary, Mr. Lewis said, demands for goods and services

had been unusually strong, probably excessive, in the Eighth

District, as in the rest of the nation.

Mr. Robertson submitted the following statement for the

record after presenting a brief oral summary:

It seems to me we are in a continuing strong basic
economic situation, but one in which monetary restraint
can finally be said to be having some real bite on
demands for resources. This is obviously true in the
construction field; it may also turn out to be one of
the contributing factors to the lower level of automobile
sales; and in numerous other areas of spending we hear
at least an occasional story of some spending decision
altered by the money situation.

As a matter of fact, there is an increased outcry
from some of these areas that tight money is biting too
much. A good part of this is special pleading, of
course, but some of the results of restraint--particularly
in housing--may be drastic enough to deserve some attention.
I, myself, would prefer any remedial action on this front
to come through appropriate amendment of Regulation Q,
rather than any easing of our general policy of restraint.
But I think such developments do suggest that we might



6/7/66

have carried our progressive tightening about far enough
at this juncture, and that a policy of holding firm

about where we are might be the best decision for us to
reach today.

I am reinforced in this view by the behavior of

the banking aggregates during May, when we finally

managed to achieve some wiping out of the big March-

April bulge. I hope our present degree of tightness

will suffice to keep any June bulge smaller in size and

more temporary in duration. To guard against any new

wave of outsize expansion in bank credit, however, I
would again like to tell the Manager to be guided in
part by the strength of over-all bank expansion. To be
more explicit, thinking of his general operating target

as net borrowed reserves in the neighborhood of

$350 million, I would have him run net borrowed reserves

up to $100 million deeper than that if required reserves
should expand substantially more than seasonally
expected; and, by the same token, I would be ready to
see him work net borrowed reserves down to as little
as $250 million if required reserves should be so much
weaker than expectations as to produce a seasonally
adjusted decline.

I should add that I recognize the month of June
may also bring some special money market pressures--
from such things as tax date borrowing needs and
Federal agency financings--that will complicate the
Manager's job. As I said last time, I am sure no one
here wants to be recommending actions that would
disrupt the markets, and the Manager may have to
occasionally take this possibility into account in
shaping his operations. But I think this kind of
instruction is and always has been implicit in the
Committee's directive, and needs no spelling out.
Indeed, it would be a very complex job even to try to
express its scope and limitations in black and white,
and it would be misleading if we tried to subsume all
such complexities in the shorthand of a pet phrase
like "taking account of money market conditions."
Therefore, I would not favor inserting an explicit
reference to "money market conditions" in the directive.
I think we are better advised in this area to rely upon
the Manager's discretion, meanwhile keeping our formal
directive aimed consistently at the target of reserve
availability.

-102-



6/7/66 -103-

All things considered, I would favor alternative A
of the directive drafts presented to us by the staff,
but I would want to see the phrases referring to money
market conditions stricken on the grounds that they
either imply too much or are not necessary, depending
on which of their two possible meanings one might want
to stress. I would, of course, want to see included
the parenthetical reference to adjusting operations in
the light of the movement of required reserves.

Mr. Robertson added that he shared the view that some

reference be made in the first sentence of the directive to

factors that would argue for holding the present degree of firmness

at this juncture rather than tightening further. He would suggest

language such as "the mortgage market is tight, automobile sales

have fallen off, and concern exists about the liquidity of nonbank

financial institutions."

Chairman Martin noted that a majority of the Committee had

expressed a preference for alternative A for the second paragraph

of the directive and that, on the whole, the members did not

appear to be far apart in their views on policy. He proposed that

the Committee proceed by considering the various suggestions that

had been made for revising the draft directive. A discussion of

wording of the directive ensued.

Thereupon, upon motion duly made

and seconded, and by unanimous vote,

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

was authorized and directed, until

otherwise directed by the Committee,

to execute transactions in the System

Account in accordance with the follow-

ing current economic policy directive:



6/7/66 -104-

The economic and financial developments reviewed at

this meeting indicate that, while the mortgage market is

tight, automobile sales have fallen off, and some concern

exists about the liquidity of nonbank financial institu-
tions, the domestic economy is continuing to expand,
with industrial prices rising further and credit demands
remaining strong. The foreign trade surplus has declined

and the international payments deficit has increased.
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's

policy to resist inflationary pressures and to strengthen
efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's
balance of payments, by restricting the growth in the
reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.

To implement this policy, System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to maintaing net reserve avail-
ability and related money market conditions in about
their recent ranges; provided, however, that if required
reserves expand considerably more than seasonally expected,
operations shall be conducted with a view to attaining
some further gradual reduction in net reserve availability
and firming of money market conditions.

Chairman Martin then observed that the members of the Board

of Governors were to appear before the Committee on Banking and

Currency of the House of Representatives tomorrow (June 8) regarding

legislative proposals affecting financial institutions. A letter

dated June 6 had been received from Chairman Wright Patman of the

Committee asking for an expression of views on a four-part proposal,

one part of which had to do with permitting open market purchases

by the Federal Reserve System of any obligation which was a direct

obligation of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest

by, any Federal Home Loan Bank. The Chairman thought that matter

should be discussed today since it related to the Committee's

responsibilities.



6/7/66 -105-

Mr. Treiber inquired about the present eligibility for

purchase by the System of Federal Home Loan Bank obilgations.

Mr. Hackley replied that under section 14(b) of the Federal

Reserve Act the Reserve Banks could operate only in direct or

fully guaranteed obligations of the U.S. Since there was a specific

statutory provision that Federal Home Loan Bank obligations were

not obligations of, and were not guaranteed by, the U.S. they were

not eligible.

Mr. Maisel remarked that if the Board was to comment

favorably on any legislation in the area he would hope that it

would urge including a broader list of agency issues than simply

FHLB obligations.

Chairman Martin said he thought everyone would agree on

that point, and Mr. Treiber indicated that his initial reaction

also was against a piece-meal approach to the question.

Mr. Cardon noted that in testimony before the House

Committee today Under Secretary of the Treasury Barr had submitted

a list of agency obligations that were not eligible for purchase

by the Federal Reserve Banks. Mr. Barr had expressed the view

that it would be consistent to make FHLB obligations eligible and

had indicated that the Administration would have no objection to

such legislation.

In reply to a question by Chairman Martin, Mr. Hackley



6/7/66 -106-

categorically how many agency issues were now eligible. Mr. Forrestal

of the Board's Legal Division had prepared a memorandum for the

Board on April 13, 1966, listing a number of obligations believed

to be eligible either because of specific statutory provisions for

full guarantee by the U.S. or because they fell within a 1961

opinion by the Attorney General concerning obligations guaranteed

by Government agencies. (Note: Subsequent to the meeting copies

of Mr. Forrestal's memorandum were distributed to the Committee

and a copy was placed in the Committee's files.)

Mr. Maisel commented that while the list of eligible issues

was long, it consisted mainly of obligations of minor agencies

accounting for a relatively small percentage of all agency issues.

Mr. Swan agreed that the question should be approached in

terms of all agency issues rather than FHLB obligations alone.

However, in view of the importance of the subject and the like-

lihood that heavy reliance on agency issues in lieu of direct

Treasury obligations would not prove to be a temporary procedure,

he thought the Committee should give very careful consideration

to the desirability of making all agency issues eligible, and of

conducting open market operations in them along with operations

in direct obligations of the Treasury.

Mr. Treiber remarked that the Federal Home Loan Banks had

authority to borrow directly from the Treasury, and presumably



6/7/66 -107-

would do so if they were unable to raise needed funds in the market.

The System probably would be less subject to pressures if it

confined its operations to Treasury securities. Of course, if

purchases of FHLB obligations were begun the Committee could still

maintain its desired credit policy by not acquiring an equivalent

amount of Treasury securities.

Mr. Swan noted that there was a statutory limit of $1 billion

on Home Loan Bank borrowing from the Treasury.

Mr. Robertson said that it was difficult to oppose making

all agency issues eligible for System purchase on grounds of

principle. He agreed, however, that if they were made eligible

the System was likely to be subject to a good deal of continuing

pressure to buy them.

Mr. Mitchell referred to Mr. Holmes' earlier comment

regarding problems in operating in small issues, and asked whether

it would not be desirable to have some lower limit on the size of

issues that would be made eligible.

Mr. Holmes said that, as he had indicated, there would be

many problems in operating in agency issues, including that which

he had referred to as the problem of "even keel." He questioned

whether the System should be used to enable agencies to avoid

paying the rates necessary to float their issues in the market.



6/7/66 -108-

Mr. Maisel noted that even if the law was changed the

Committee would still have to revise its Regulation and its

continuing authority directive before the Account Management would

be authorized to operate in agency issues. In the process of

formulating those revisions the Committee would have an opportu-

nity to carefully consider the various kinds of operating problems.

Mr. Brimmer commented that the matter of agency issues had

been under discussion for some time and he asked if Mr. Holmes had

given thought to possible procedures.

Mr. Holmes replied that it probably would be desirable for

the System to have standing authority to buy agency issues, and

that it was hard to justify having some issues eligible and some

not. If the agency market continued to develop it was quite

possible that transactions in agency issues would prove workable

as long as it was understood that they would be kept moderate in

size and that they would be supplemental to operations in Treasury

securities. A study might show that it would be easier to arrange

repurchase agreements against such securities than to deal in them

on an outright basis. The use of RP's would give some support to

underwriters carrying enlarged positions, and from a technical

standpoint it would be much easier to relate RP's to reserve

objectives than would be the case with outright transactions.



6/7/66 -109-

Mr. Wayne said he understood that the System could not

engage in repurchase agreements involving particular types of

securities unless it had the authority to buy such securities out-

right. The alternatives would appear to be engaging in RP's against

agency issues or operating through the discount window, and of the

two he would prefer the former. Accordingly, he did not think the

System should oppose the legislation in question.

Chairman Martin remarked that he had considerable trepidation

about the proposal because the System dealt in high-powered money.

He would expect pressures for the System to operate in a wide range

of agency issues regardless of possible consequences for the money

markets. He doubted that that would be a wise course to follow

if it could be avoided. In any case, the question had to be thought

through carefully.

Mr. Swan commented that the suggestion that the legislative

authority should cover all agency issues rather than the specific

issues of Federal Home Loan Banks left open the major question of

the moment, as to what might be done if those Banks exhausted their

$1 billion authority to borrow directly from the Treasury.

Mr. Maisel noted in response that another alternative was

available; the Treasury had legal authority to deposit funds in

the Home Loan Banks.



6/7/66 -110-

Mr. Brimmer suggested that it would be helpful if the

Manager prepared a memorandum on the general subject of operations

in agency issues for the Committee's use. It was agreed that such

a memorandum would be desirable.

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be

held on Tuesday, June 28, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 6, 1966

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on June 7, 1966.

First paragraph

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this
meeting indicate that the domestic economy is continuing to expand,
with industrial prices rising further and credit demands remaining
strong. Our foreign trade surplus has declined and the deficit in
our international payments has increased. In this situation, it is
the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist inflationary
pressures and to strengthen efforts to restore reasonable equilibrium
in the country's balance of payments, by restricting the growth in
the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.

Second paragraph

Alternative A (preserving current firmness, with possible qualifica-
tion

To implement this policy, System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with
a view to maintaining net reserve availability and related money
market conditions in about their recent ranges (; provided,
however, that if required reserves expand sharply more than
seasonally expected, operations shall be conducted with a view
to attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve
availability and firming of money market conditions).

Alternative B (continued firming, with degree conditioned by
movement in required reserves)

To implement this policy, System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a
view to attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve
availability and attendant firming of money market conditions, and
to attaining somewhat greater restraint if required reserves expand
sharply more than seasonally expected.


