









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 22, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Mr. Bopp 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Hickman 

Mr. Irons 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Shepardson 

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, and Swan, Alternate Members 

of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Partee, 

Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel, Legal 

Division, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors



11/22/66

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. MacDonald and Lewis, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Cleveland and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Parthemos, Taylor, Baughman, and 
Jones, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Arena, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on November 1, 1966, 
were approved.  

At the invitation of Chairman Martin, Mr. Hackley reviewed 

some possible implications for Committee procedures of the "Freedom 

of Information Act" (Public Law 89-487, enacted July 4, 1966, with 

an effective date of July 4, 1967), noting that the terms of the 

Act were still under study. Following his remarks, Mr. Hackley 

responded to questions.  

After this discussion, Chairman Martin suggested that the 

members might continue to give consideration to the subject and that 

the Committee might plan on pursuing it further at coming meetings.



11/22/66 -3

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of 

the System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions 

and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign 

currencies for the period November 1 through 16, 1966, and a 

supplemental report for November 17 through 21, 1966. Copies of 

these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged again 

this week for the thirteenth consecutive week, but the uncommitted 

holdings of the Stabilization Fund were now down to about $32 million.  

No French purchases were expected this month; the Bank of France 

lost $37 million in October, and their holdings seemed to be down 

about another $30 million so far this month. Unfortunately, however, 

there was a new customer in the form of the Bank of Italy, which was 

beginning to feel domestic political pressure as a result of a 

decline not only in its gold ratio, but also in the absolute amount 

of its gold holdings. Governor Carli estimated that the decline in 

Italian gold reserves this year might come to roughly $60 million.  

He had approached the U.S. regarding gold purchases of $30 million 

this month and $30 million in December to rebuild Italian gold 

reserves to their end-of-1965 level. Unless Governor Carli changed 

his mind, or unless the Russians made some massive gold sales during



11/22/66 -4-

December, the Treasury would have to show another major reduction

in the gold stock fairly soon. More generally, the prospective

Italian purchase would represent in part a compensation for gold

losses resulting from Italian participation in the London gold pool.

If other central banks should decide to follow the Italian example,

the usefulness of the pool to the United States would, of course,

be correspondingly reduced.

On the London gold market, Mr. Coombs continued, conditions

had been fairly quiet in recent weeks, with the pool picking up

about $20 million during October as a result of Egyptian sales plus

a heavier flow of newly-mined gold from South Africa. As of the

moment, the pool had available $32 million of the $270 million origi-

nally committed, plus a supplementary commitment of $50 million

agreed to last September, for a total of $82 million. Yesterday and

today there were heavy demands in the gold market with the price

moving up to $35.18. As he had indicated at other recent meetings,

in his view the gold market was likely to prove to be the single most

troublesome source of problems for the dollar in the period ahead.

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs said, sterling remained

a problem. So far this month, the Bank of England had made further

progress in paying off forward contracts, which had been reduced

since the middle of September by nearly $1 billion. On the other

hand, there had been no sustained inflow into the reserves; in fact,



11/22/66 -5

as of Friday, November 18, the Bank of England was down about $40 

million so far this month. The market reception of the excellent 

trade figures reported for October was disappointing. Yesterday 

and today the Bank began to execute market swaps of sterling against 

dollars, and through this technique should be able to show a net 

surplus at the end of the month, but probably not enough to permit 

any substantial repayment of debt now outstanding. In fact, he saw 

very little alternative to Britain's rolling over again most of the 

overnight credits of $425 million which they received at the end of 

October. Those overnight credits were supplied in the amount of 

$200 million by the U.S. Treasury, $175 million by various foreign 

central banks, and $50 million by the System.  

Looking a bit further ahead, Mr. Coombs remarked, some 

troublesome problems could arise in December as a result of possibly 

severe pressures on the Euro-dollar market, which might react 

against sterling. As the Committee knew, U.S. banks had attracted 

a great deal of money from the Euro-dollar market and, if they tried 

to maintain those holdings through the year-end, the result might be 

something of a tug-of-war between the U.S. banks and foreign banks 

seeking to repatriate funds from the market for year-end window-dressing 

purposes. Such a tug-of-war could produce a very sharp rise in the 

Euro-dollar rates, which would in turn exert a strong pull on liquid 

funds now held in sterling.



11/22/66 -6

At the last meeting of the Bank for International Settlements, 

Mr. Coombs continued, ways and means had been considered of avoiding 

such a sudden vacuum in the Euro-dollar market which could pull in 

money from London, and most of the European central banks seemed 

agreeable to the U.S. suggestion of a joint effort to cushion the 

year-end strains. The Swiss National Bank and the Netherlands Bank, 

for example, would be prepared to funnel back into the Euro-dollar 

market via the BIS most of the money that they took in as a result 

of year-end window-dressing by their banks. The Bundesbank had 

already announced a reduction in reserve requirements during December 

and the Bank of Italy would try to restrain run-offs of Euro-dollar 

market placements by the Italian commercial banks.  

If those measures did not suffice, Mr. Coombs said, there 

were two additional steps that might be worth taking. As the Committee 

knew, the System had a reciprocal line of credit with the BIS of 

dollars against European currencies other than Swiss francs in the 

amount of $200 million equivalent. A short-term drawing of dollars 

by the BIS of perhaps no more than a week's duration for placement 

in the Euro-dollar market might help considerably to relieve any 

sudden strains that might develop, at no risk to the System. Secondly, 

if a sharp rise in the Euro-dollar rates should tend to pull liquid 

funds out of London, that would probably be reflected in a weakening 

of spot sterling and a strengthening of the forward rate, with the



11/22/66 -7

result that the New York-London arbitrage differential on Treasury 

bills might move sharply in favor of London. In such circumstances, 

it might be worthwhile for the System to execute in the market 

covered purchases of sterling with the dual objective of preventing 

any outflows from New York while simultaneously protecting sterling 

against year-end pressures.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
November 1 through 21, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the longer-standing portions of the 

swap arrangements with the National Bank of Belgium and the Nether

lands Bank--setting aside for the moment the increases that had 

been negotiated in September 1966--would both mature soon. Specif

ically, the $100 million line with the National Bank of Belgium, 

with a 12-month term, would mature on December 22; and the $100 

million line with the Netherlands Bank, having a three-month term, 

would mature on December 15. He recommended renewal of the two 

standby swap lines for another twelve and three months, respectively.  

Renewal of the $100 million standby 
swap arrangements with the National Bank 
of Belgium and the Netherlands Bank was 
approved.  

Under the twelve-month line of credit with the National 

Bank of Belgium, Mr. Coombs said, it had been the established



11/22/66 -8

practice for both parties to make a $50 million drawing with a 

maturity of six months. That $50 million drawing, on which 

neither party had any disbursements outstanding at the moment, 

also reached the end of its term on December 22, 1966, and he 

recommended its renewal for another six months.  

Renewal of the six-month drawing on 
the standby swap arrangement with the 
National Bank of Belgium was noted without 
objection.  

As the Committee knew, Mr. Coombs said, the standby credit 

lines with both the National Bank of Belgium and the Netherlands 

Bank were increased by $50 million last September, with the proviso 

by both the Dutch and the Belgians that they regarded the increases 

as temporary, and that a prolongation should be discussed in advance 

on a multilateral basis at a meeting of WP-3. That question had in 

fact been on the agenda at a recent WP-3 meeting, but apparently 

time did not permit a discussion then; and no further WP-3 meeting 

was scheduled before the swap line increases reached their maturities 

around the middle of December. He had been in touch informally with 

the Netherlands Bank on the matter, and understood that their present 

thinking was to relate the question of prolongation of the September 

increase in the swap line to the question of whether the $400 million 

of short-term facilities placed at the disposal of the Bank of 

England by European countries in September would be renewed when



11/22/66 -9

they matured after the turn of the year. In effect, the Dutch 

position, as he understood it, was that if the September credits 

to the U.K. were renewed they would be prepared to renew the 

additional $50 million on their swap line with the System. An 

extension of the September credits to the U.K. would probably be 

discussed at the December meeting in Basle, and as far as he could 

see the general attitude in Europe now might be reasonably sympa

thetic. He was not sure of the reasoning underlying the position 

of the Netherlands Bank; perhaps their effort to avoid hardening 

the $50 million enlargement of the line into a permanent arrangement 

reflected a desire to bring it under multilateral surveillance by 

representatives of Governments rather than of central banks. He 

suspected, however, that the continental lines to the U.K. would 

themselves eventually take on a semi-permanent character, so the 

Dutch might well end up having made no more than an empty debating 

point. Second, and more important, he thought they were worried 

about the objectives of U.S. policy at the moment--specifically, 

about the goals with respect to reforms in the international monetary 

system--and were not sure how the U.S. thought the swap network 

would fit in.  

In any case, Mr. Coombs said, it had already been indicated 

to the Dutch on several occasions that the System would prefer not 

to have any reluctant partners in the network; and that, if the



11/22/66 -10-

Netherlands Bank should find it inconvenient to prolong the increase

in the swap line, the point certainly would not be pressed. He

suspected that they realized that they would attract to themselves

a fair amount of unwanted publicity if it became generally known

that they had withdrawn part of their credit lines to the U.S.

Accordingly, he felt reasonably sure that the September increase in

the credit lines with the Netherlands Bank would ultimately harden

into a permanent increase. In his judgment, much the same consid-

erations applied to the increase of $50 million in the swap line

with the National Bank of Belgium. Against that background, he would

like to recommend Committee approval for renewal for another three

months of the $50 million increases in the two swap lines in question,

if the other parties were agreeable.

In reply to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said it

had already been made clear to the two central banks that the System

would not concur in a renewal if they wanted to incorporate conditions

in the documents exchanged.

Mr. Daane said he thought Mr. Coombs' approach was probably

the right one and he would support it. As a sidelight, he would

note that despite all the discussion at the previous WP-3 meeting of

the desirability of initiating multilateral surveillance of the swap

network in that forum, at the most recent meeting--presided over by

the Netherlands delegate--no time had been allowed for the planned

discussion and that fact did not seem to disturb anyone. Since the



11/22/66 -11

next meeting was scheduled for January, it was obvious then that 

no discussion could be held before the September 1966 enlargements 

of the network came up for renewal.  

Renewal of the $50 million enlarge
ments of the standby swap arrangements 
with National Bank of Belgium and the 
Netherlands Bank was approved.  

Mr. Coombs said his next recommendation related to the 

Committee's authorization of November 1965 to assume commitments 

for forward sales of lire up to $500 million equivalent. When the 

Committee authorized such operations there were several suggestions 

by Committee members that the subject should be re-examined if 

those commitments were still on the books after a year had passed.  

During the last few months, he had given a fair amount of thought 

to the matter and had discussed it with the Treasury, which also 

had outstanding commitments in forward lire, totaling $1 billion.  

If the Committee so desired, it could pull out of those operations 

right now without disturbance to the international financial markets 

or to the Bank of Italy; the U.S. Treasury would be prepared to take 

over the System's $500 million. As he had thought about the question, 

however, it had seemed increasingly desirable to him to make a 

distinction between the time element involved in such forward 

operations on the one hand and in the swap operations on the other.  

In the case of swap operations, it seemed to him absolutely essential 

to keep such credits short-term, preferably no more than six months.



11/22/66 -12

Very fundamental questions of discipline in the entire international 

payments mechanism were involved; swap drawings were made by a deficit 

country in the expectation, or at least the hope, that it was dealing 

with a short-term situation which might be reversed either through 

natural forces or by corrective policy moves. Such swap drawings 

constituted the short end of the credit spectrum, with drawings upon 

the IMF and inter-governmental loans constituting the medium- and 

long-term segments of the spectrum. No central bank in the swap net

work, he was sure, wanted to see the maturities of the swaps lengthened 

out, regardless of whether the central bank concerned was doing the 

borrowing or the lending.  

However, Mr. Coombs continued, forward operations did not 

represent debt of one central bank to another; rather, they were 

contracts with the market which had been executed in order to relieve 

market tensions. Large-scale forward operations such as the Bank of 

Italy had undertaken were essentially a means of lubricating the 

international financial machinery and, in particular, insuring that 

no serious disruptions occurred in the Euro-dollar market--which, 

as the Committee knew, had become a major source of financing for 

a wide variety of international trade and investment. No central 

bank had any direct responsibility for the Euro-dollar market, but 

he thought it would be highly dangerous for the central banks to 

treat that market as something of a free planet whose movements



11/22/66 -13

could be disregarded. By shunting Italian commercial bank money 

into the Euro-dollar market through those forward lire contracts, 

the Bank of Italy had acted to relieve a stringency in that market 

in the same sense that the Federal Reserve or any other central 

bank would buy Treasury bills to relieve pressures in its domestic 

market.  

If that analogy had any validity, Mr. Coombs said, he was 

inclined to think that the Committee should not be rigid insofar 

as the time element in such forward operations were concerned. To 

him, the essential issue rather seemed to be whether the operation 

in question was performing a useful function; if so, it should not 

be abruptly terminated because it reached some arbitrary maturity 

date. In that connection, he might also note that none of the 

European central banks which had engaged in such forward operations-

and that included the Germans, Swiss, Dutch, and British as well as 

the Italians--had applied to such forward operations the same time 

limits they would attach to central bank swap operations. He would, 

therefore, like to recommend to the Committee that the System's 

present commitments in forward lire be continued on the books, subject 

to further review in three or six months. He would hope that the 

progressive reduction of the Italian balance of payments surplus 

which had been going on this year would continue and that in the new 

year opportunities would arise for liquidation of a substantial



11/22/66 -14

portion, if not all, of those commitments. In that connection, 

he might mention that he had secured the agreement of the U.S.  

Treasury to allow the System priority over the Treasury in liqui

dating its commitments insofar as market opportunities permitted.  

There was, of course, no risk to the System in the forward lire 

operations.  

Mr. Daane expressed the view that the Committee should 

continue the present authorization for forward lire commitments 

and plan on reviewing those operations in three months.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that Mr, Coombs had suggested the 

possibility of some reduction in the outstanding commitments, and 

asked whether the latter would spell out his expectations in that 

regard.  

Mr. Coombs replied that growth in the commitments had slowed 

almost to zero. The real key to the outlook for them lay in the 

Italian balance of payments situation. They had a heavy surplus in 

1965. This year, however, their surplus had been at hardly more 

than half last year's rate, and their recent disastrous floods 

might accentuate the trend toward balance. Secondly, the Italian 

payments position tended in general to be highly volatile. Accord

ingly, he would not be surprised to find them in heavy deficit in 

1967 or 1968.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Hickman, Mr. Coombs said that 

the swing in the Italian balance of payments could easily be large



11/22/66 -15

enough to permit liquidating all of the forward lire commitments 

of the Treasury and the System.  

Mr. Maisel said he had no specific objections to the course 

Mr. Coombs recommended. However, he still felt as he had when the 

subject was originally discussed in November 1965; the Committee was 

making a major decision on an ad hoc basis. Along with the Treasury, 

the System was underwriting $1-1/2 billion of the $9 billion Euro

dollar market. Why that particular part of the market? What should 

the reaction be if it were proposed to underwrite the whole market? 

It seemed to him that a basic study of the System's role with respect 

to the Euro-dollar market was needed.  

Mr. Coombs agreed that a staff study of the type Mr. Maisel 

mentioned was desirable. On the substantive question, he would 

repeat that no central bank had specific responsibility for coping 

with the problems that arose in the Euro-dollar market, and one 

could only hope that central banks would attempt to cooperate infor

mally to minimize the dangers. As he had indicated, he was inclined 

to think that to a large extent such forward operations should be 

viewed as the international equivalent to central bank operations 

in domestic markets. The record seemed to suggest that this was 

a painless way for the System to join with other central banks in 

dealing with the problem of restoring liquidity to the Euro-dollar 

market. In addition, the operations of the Bank of Italy were a



11/22/66 -16

good object lesson to other central banks on desirable international 

behavior under conditions of payments surpluses.  

Mr. Daane said that similar questions had arisen in the 

meetings in Paris last week. He thought a review of the System's 

role in the Euro-dollar market was justified.  

Chairman Martin noted that no objections had been raised 

to continuing the System's forward commitments in Italian lire at 

present. He suggested that the Committee plan on reviewing the 

matter again in three months, and that the staff proceed with a 

study along the lines of that Mr. Maisel had suggested.  

Mr. Coombs then said he would like to mention that during 

the past few months there had been suggestions from the National 

Bank of Denmark and the Bank of Norway that they would welcome 

an opportunity to join the Federal Reserve swap network. One 

reason those countries had not been included earlier was the fact 

that neither had so far qualified for Article VIII status under 

the IMF regulations. He was informed, however, that it was probable 

that both countries would meet the Article VIII requirements early 

next year. In that connection, he thought it was also worth pointing 

out that in September both central banks joined for the first time 

in the credits to the Bank of England. It would be useful, in his 

opinion, to have staff studies of the possible desirability of 

including both central banks in the network, probably with relatively



11/22/66 -17

small lines of credit in each case--possibly $50 million. It would 

be desirable, he thought, for the Committee to reach a decision in 

the matter fairly soon.  

Chairman Martin suggested the staff prepare such studies.  

He added that it would be worthwhile to have corresponding studies 

with respect to Mexico and Venezuela, since both of those countries 

also were interested in joining the System swap network.  

Mr. Brimmer referred to the two steps that Mr. Coombs had 

said might be taken if further measures were needed to deal with 

year-end problems in the Euro-dollar market, and asked which approach 

Mr. Coombs thought would be most likely. The choice might have 

important implications for the Committee's domestic operations, since 

the Euro-dollar market had been an important source of funds to U.S.  

banks recently.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the decision between the two courses-

as well as the timing of the operations and their scale--would depend 

largely on the market situation. If, however, the strains were 

serious it might be useful to follow both courses; the two types of 

operations together might well be more effective than either alone.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period November 1 through 16, 1966,



11/22/66

and a supplemental report for November 17 through 21, 1966. Copies 

of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

The money market was subjected to some moderate 
pressure during the period since the Committee last met.  
As the written reports have indicated, this was mainly a 
reflection of increased pressure on money center banks 
which, for reasons we do not fully understand, appears to 
have been somewhat greater than has been typical in early 
November in other recent years. On the day following the 
last meeting of the Committee the effective Federal funds 
rate reached 6-1/4 per cent despite the injection of 
nearly $1/2 billion of reserves on the day and a net 
borrowed reserve position for the week of about $300 million.  
With the credit proxy showing no signs of strength, net 
borrowed reserves were permitted to fall still lower in 
the subsequent two weeks. Nonetheless, with excess reserves 
at a high level at country banks, the Federal funds rate 
remained within a 5-1/2 to 6 per cent range. Three- and 
six-month Treasury bill rates moved up about 20 basis points 
from the relatively low 5-1/4 and 5-1/2 per cent rates 
prevailing at the time of the last meeting, but declined 
sharply last Friday and yesterday as strong demand for 
bills developed and the temporary stresses receded from 
the money market. By the close of business yesterday the 
key three- and six-month rates were back where they were 
at the time of the last meeting. In yesterday's regular 
weekly auction the three-month rate was set at 5.25 per cent 
and the six-month rate at 5.50 per cent.  

Dealer financing rates at New York City banks touched 
a new high of 6-7/8 per cent for new money before receding 
again prior to last weekend. Dealers were able to find 
financing out of town at lower rates, however, and were not 
under pressure to liquidate inventories which had been built 
up as dealers took on issues involved in the Treasury's 
November cash refunding and increased their holdings of 
longer bills. Despite the fact that prices of the new notes 
offered by the Treasury had fallen below par before the 
November 15 payment date, dealers tended to view their 
still substantial holdings as a good investment for the

-18-



11/22/66

longer pull. They were not anxious, however, to build up 
their holdings further and backed away from modest selling 
by some speculative holders. Both new issues moved above 
par bid in yesterday's strong bond market. As far as bill 
holdings are concerned, the dealers are expecting heavy 
seasonal buying by the System over the next few weeks.  
While dealers had no major financing problems over the 
period, the high cost of money remains a serious concern 
to them and has, of course, made them unwilling to hold 
short-term bills, thus aggravating market shortages.  

Perhaps the most significant development since the 
Committee last met has been the resurgence of demand in 
the capital markets. As you will recall, a considerable 
feeling of confidence had built up in the bond markets at 
the time of the last Committee meeting. There was no 
rush of borrowers into the market and corporate and 
municipal dealers had willingly increased their portfolios.  
Since then a steady stream of announcements of additions 
to the new financing calendar--headed by the A.T.&T. issue 
set for early January--has introduced a new note of caution 
and long-term interest rates have moved higher. The long 
markets were also affected by rumors that the Federal 
National Mortgage Association might come to the market 
with participation certificates before year-end, and by 
the continuing uncertainty about the likelihood of fiscal 
policy action. At the moment the market is rather delicately 
poised and much will depend on the stream of economic news 
and on Administration tax and spending decisions that could 
be forthcoming before the next meeting of the Committee.  

The Treasury has about completed its 1966 financing 
program. The November refunding is now just about out of 
the way, although final distribution of the new issues is 
by no means complete, and $1.2 billion of new money was 
raised in a highly successful bill strip auction last week.  
All that remains is an auction of $1 billion or so tax 
anticipation bills set for early December.  

Looking ahead to the rest of the year there are a 
number of problem areas--the buildup of demand in the capital 
market, the Treasury's tenuous cash position which seems 
likely to result in direct borrowing from the System, un
certainties regarding the international flow of funds as 
the year-end window dressing period for European banks 
approaches, and the continued pressure that CD attrition has 
been putting on money center banks. The movement of short
term interest rates is of course of crucial importance in

-19-



11/22/66

determining the likely CD runoff between now and the end 
of the year. At the current level of Treasury bill rates 
the banks might well be able to handle their very large CD 
maturities without undue problems. Given the large banks' 
heavy dependence on the Euro-dollar market, and the possibil
ities they have of switching from that market to the Federal 
funds market, it could be difficult to bring the Federal 
funds rate much lower on a consistent basis than it has been 
lately without a massive injection of reserves. While a 
loss of Euro-dollar deposits does not necessarily mean a 
loss of deposits in our banking system as a whole there is 
apt to be considerable churning if banks with large basic 
deficits have to make up Euro-dollar deposit losses.  
Mr. Coombs has already noted the international complications 
of this situation.  

The uncertainties about the Treasury cash position 
and the international flow of funds make the forecasting 
of likely interest rate movements in the weeks ahead a 
highly risky proposition. The blue book 1/ notes that 
current estimates of a need to supply about $1 billion 
reserves by early December could be substantially reduced-
or the position could even be reversed--if direct Treasury 
borrowing from the System reaches substantial proportions.  
Open market operations will, of course, have to be adapted 
to meet the situation as it develops day by day, but it 
may be difficult to achieve pinpoint control of the reserve 
situation. In addition, a frustration of dealer expectations 
of heavy System bill purchases could lead to upward pressure 
on bill rates. Some offsetting demand may result from 
sustained private buying and foreign central bank purchases, 
but such demand might well be concentrated on shorter bill 
maturities where there are already acute market shortages.  
If such a situation should develop, it might be useful for 
the System to engage in Treasury bill swaps--selling short 
bills that are in demand and taking longer bills from dealer 
positions. I would be prepared, if the Committee agrees, 
to undertake such swaps over the coming weeks if unsettled 
market conditions in the longer bill maturities appear to 
warrant them and provided that the market wants shorter bills 
at about current rates.  

Returning to the likelihood that the Treasury will borrow 
from the System, there are some technical problems that 
require the Committee's attention. As you know, direct 
borrowing by the Treasury from the System is limited by 
law to $5 billion. The continuing authority directive 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-20-



11/22/66 -21

authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
to purchase for its account directly from the Treasury, 
with discretion to issue participations to other Reserve 
Banks, special short-term certificates of indebtedness only 
up to $500 million. We have been working with the Treasury 
to try to determine what their needs might be; current 
guestimates--which are far from precise--range from about 
$100 million to around $600 million--with the maximum need 
beginning in early December. While these estimates may be 
too high, I believe--to be on the safe side--that the 
Committee should increase the maximum amount of short-term 
certificates that may be held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks from $500 million to $1.0 billion.  

Mr. Daane said it was his impression that some of the recent 

pressures in money markets were due to maldistribution of reserves 

toward country banks. He asked whether that situation was in process 

of being corrected.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the maldistribution already had been 

largely corrected. A flow of reserves from city to country banks 

seemed to be a phenomenon characteristic of early November, although 

it was larger this year than in past years.  

Mr. Daane then asked whether the Manager expected Treasury 

bill rates in coming weeks to reflect the upward pressures that were 

usually experienced near the end of the year.  

Mr. Holmes replied it was particularly difficult now to say 

what would happen to bill rates because there were forces working in 

both directions. As he had indicated, there would be upward pressures 

if reserves were supplied by means other than the System purchases of 

bills the market expected. On the other hand, rates had declined 

sharply in the past few days as a result of strong demands.



11/22/66 -22

Mr. Daane asked whether Mr. Holmes would characterize present 

money market conditions as somewhat easier than they had been recently, 

and Mr. Holmes replied affirmatively. He would anticipate that the 

money market would turn very easy today unless pressures developed 

from some unexpected source. While it was too early to say what the 

level of net borrowed reserves would be for the current statement 

week the Desk was now looking at a figure well below $200 million.  

Mr. Mitchell asked what level of bill rates would be required 

to permit banks to expand their outstanding CD's to offset a reflow 

of funds to the Euro-dollar market in a volume of, say, $400 million.  

Mr. Holmes replied that while such judgments were difficult 

to make he thought the bill rate probably would have to be somewhat 

lower than it was now.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether the bill rate might have to drop 

as low as 5 per cent, and Mr. Holmes replied that he could not be 

sure.  

Mr. Ellis asked Mr. Holmes if there would be any rate objec

tives in the proposed market swaps of short bills for long.  

Mr. Holmes said that pressures had begun to build up in longer

term bills recently. The expected demands from foreign central banks, 

and perhaps other sources, probably would be concentrated in the 

shorter-term area where supplies were limited. If that occurred he 

thought it would be useful for the Desk to feed short bills into the



11/22/66 -23

market and take out longer bills. There would be no particular rate 

objectives to the operation; the purpose would be to relieve pressures.  

Chairman Martin asked whether the Manager was proposing a 

balanced operation.  

Mr. Holmes replied in the affirmative. He added that if 

Treasury actions and perhaps also the System's foreign currency 

operations supplied reserves over the rest of the year there would 

be much less to be done through domestic open market operations than 

the projections implied. That might well affect expectations and 

produce a turnaround in bill rate movements. That would not be 

particularly desirable at a time of seasonal churning in the market.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that one aspect of the proposal he found 

puzzling was that dealers did not have many longer-term bills avail

able for sale at present.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that that was the case at the moment, but 

noted that such bills would be coming back to dealers as outstanding 

long-term repurchase agreements matured. Such RP's would be running 

off all through December, but particularly around the middle of the 

month. They had been scheduled in that way precisely because dealers 

had expected seasonal buying by the System in December.  

Mr. Hickman then commented that the one-month bill was closely 

competitive with negotiable CD's of banks, and he did not think the 

System would want to operate in a manner that would put rates on those



11/22/66

bills under upward pressure. It would be desirable, he thought, to 

give the banks ample room to retain their outstanding CD's, and he 

would be dubious about selling too many bills in the short-term area.  

Mr. Holmes agreed, and indicated that he would propose to 

engage in the operation only if it could be carried out without too 

much effect on short bill rates.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period November 1 through 21, 
1966, were approved, ratified, and 
confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

In my view, domestic nonfinancial developments now 

confirm more clearly developments discernible earlier in 

the financial area in suggesting an appreciable slowing 

down in the rate of expansion in total economic activity.  

The average annual rate of real growth in the GNP for the 

past two quarters combined, for example, is now estimated 

at less than 3 per cent. Moreover, the pattern of GNP 

revisions seems now to be becoming one of downward adjust

ments in contrast to the upward revisions typical when 

the economy is in a vigorously expanding phase. Right 

now, for example, recent weakening in housing starts and 

auto output suggest our current fourth-quarter GNP 

estimate, made before these developments were reported, 

may prove too high.

-24-



11/22/66

Growth in industrial production has also slackened 
markedly since August, with the 0.3 per cent rise in 
October being due largely to a sharp spurt in auto 
production to a level from which it has already been 
cut back. Employment growth continues to be sizable, 
but the rise since mid-year has been less than earlier.  

Turning to the recent spending proclivities of the 
major sectors of the economy, consumer outlays have been 
sluggish for some months now. When one makes allowance 
for larger tax payments and higher prices, real consumer 
disposable income and spending have both only increased 
at around a 2 per cent annual rate thus far this year.  
Although earnings of factory workers are rising by more 
than 4 per cent, and recent wage settlements are averaging 
around 5 per cent a year and have resulted in higher labor 
costs, from the wage earners' point of view the lion's 
share of these wage increases has been absorbed by higher 
consumer prices and has not been available for purchases 
of additional real goods and services.  

One of the sharpest and earliest drops in consumer 
spending, of course, was that for new housing. As a 
result, housing starts fell to a 1.1 million annual rate 
level in the third quarter and then plummeted to around 
the 850,000 level last month. New permits for future 
starts declined only slightly further in October, but 
they were already very low.  

Consumer outlays on furniture and major appliances 
have also weakened, reflecting in part the decline in 
housing expenditures. Moreover, public reception of the 
1967 model autos to date has not been overly enthusiastic.  
Only consumer spending on nondurable goods and services is 
continuing apace, and for both categories higher prices 
have been accounting for a significant part of the increase 
in dollar purchases.  

The course of future consumer spending will depend in 
large part on the spending decisions of business 
enterprises and governments which help generate additional 
consumer income. Turning to business spending first, it, 
too, now has undoubtedly passed the point of maximum rate 
of increase. The rate of inventory accumulation dropped 
substantially in September at manufacturers and outstanding 
stocks actually declined at wholesalers. Total retail 
inventories were up in September, but the rise was due 
entirely to an increase in auto stocks. Auto stocks rose 
again in October to a point sparking the production cut-back

-25-



11/22/66

I noted earlier. Surveys of business firms and purchasing 
agents suggest over-all inventory accumulation is likely 
to taper off further in the coming months.  

New orders for durable goods declined rather sharply 
in October following the brisk run-up the month before.  
New orders have shown no increase on balance since spring.  
Several private surveys now also suggest a sharp retardation 
in business spending on new plant and equipment some time 
in 1967. If one takes into account the level such spending 
is already reaching in the current quarter, real business 
spending on plant and equipment may already be near its 
peak for the current investment boom.  

Unfortunately, I can add little today to your know
ledge about the likely course of defense spending. All I 
can say is that it seems to me unlikely that the increase 
in such spending in coming quarters will exceed on average 
the large $4.2 billion rise of the third quarter, partly 
because $0.5 billion of the third-quarter rise was due to 
the one-time effect of the military pay increase. Our 
staff guess of the increase in defense spending in the 
current quarter is $3.5 billion. When one assesses the 
likely effects of future defense spending on total economic 
activity, he should note that effects start when orders 
are placed and that the large third-quarter rise in defense 
spending was at a time when the increase in total activity 
in the economy was moderate and when inflationary pressures 
were becoming less obvious. It is likely to take a goodly 
increase in aggregate Government spending next year just 
to offset the smaller likely rise in spending by the 
private sectors of the economy.  

As for the significance of these demand developments 
for resource use and prices, the rate of utilization of 
manufacturing capacity no doubt dropped off a little in 
September and October as new capacity continued to be put 
in place at the earlier pace and as growth in output 
slowed markedly. You will have noted from the green 
book 1/ that revised data on capacity utilization have been 

developed. These data show that a high rate of utilization 

has prevailed in recent quarters but the level of 
utilization has been revised down a little for many years 
back.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-26-



11/22/66

The unemployment rate has remained just under 4 per 
cent in recent months due to the fact that a reduced 
labor force growth has approximately matched the reduced 
rise in employment. Average weekly hours of work have 
dropped off a little, too, but remain high.  

Over-all industrial prices have been little changed 
now for several months. A drop in sensitive prices has 
concealed a rise in prices of other industrial goods in 
the total index since May whereas earlier a sharp rise in 
sensitive prices had hidden the relative stability of 
prices of other commodities in the total. In any case, 
over the past year as a whole, industrial prices have 
risen about 2 per cent, an accomplishment that most other 
industrial countries would no doubt have been happy to 
have emulated.  

There will be some further upward pressure on over-all 
industrial prices in the months to come if wage increases 
continue in the 5 per cent annual-rate area, and if the 
decline in sensitive material prices ceases. Incidentally, 
the Census Bureau has recently revised its data on labor 
costs in manufacturing to show a sharper recent increase 
than had been indicated by the earlier data. But some 
further wage, labor cost, and price inflation may be an 
unavoidable result of past excesses. They probably 
cannot be averted without a degree of over-all restraint 
on the economy that would produce a recession.  

Three weeks ago I said that domestic financial develop
ments suggested to me that the time had come for a further 
relaxation of monetary restraint. Today, I feel that 
nonfinancial developments suggest the same course of action.  
Monetary policy has achieved the moderation in the upward 
thrust of aggregate demand it has been seeking. Policy 
should now be adjusted in a timely manner lest we be 
saddled with the blame for overstaying the boom.  

Mr. Hickman commented that he thought Mr. Koch's presentation 

was an excellent one. He then asked about the specific statistical 

calculation Mr. Koch had used in arriving at the conclusion that both 

real disposable income and spending of consumers had risen at an

annual rate of 2 per cent thus far this year.

-27-



11/22/66

Mr. Koch replied that his statement was based on the calculated 

percentage increases in the variables in question from the fourth 

quarter of 1965 to the third quarter of 1966, expressed at annual rates.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

In assessing the economic situation for the Committee 
three weeks ago, I expressed some skepticism about the 
validity of the softening signals financial statistics had 
been giving us in October. While some of the preliminary 
nonfinancial figures available on November 1 suggested a 
change occurring in the underlying economic situation, I 
was reluctant then to accept all of the figures at full 
value, or to recommend more than a shading of policy in an 
easing direction.  

But as better and later figures have come in, I've had 
to swallow some of my skepticism and, to use a phrase 
hallowed in FOMC deliberation, "resolve doubts on the side 
of ease." The financial figures were right in signaling a 
major shift in activity this fall, albeit they seem to 
have overstated the extent of the change. While neither 
industrial output nor total GNP has actually contracted, as 
have financial flows, the production, price, and spending 
developments reviewed by Mr. Koch this morning all confirm 
that expansion of economic activity has slowed markedly.  

Under the circumstances, one might have expected 
financial indicators in November to continue to signal 
slackening trends in activity. Some of the financial 
measures have. Bank credit has continued to contract (at 
least on the proxy basis), and business loan growth has 
proceeded at only a sluggish pace. But other financial 
indicators have hinted at renewed pressures. After 
declining in late October, member bank borrowing increased 
through mid-November; the Federal funds rate also bounced 
back, reaching, at one point, a new high; and there was 
a surge in bank borrowing from abroad through foreign 
branches. These indicators of intensified pressure on 
the banking system were reflected throughout most money and 
capital markets, with both short- and long-term rates 
advancing by up to a quarter of a per cent. Could this be 
taken as a signal of resurgence in economic activity in

-28-



11/22/66

November? Was the late summer-early fall lull in economic 
activity over? 

I doubt it. Nothing in the fragments we have on a 
current weekly basis suggests a revival in business or 
consumer spending such as to lead to a sharp expansion 
in private credit demands. Indeed, the fragments suggest 
further economic dampening, at best, and the behavior of 
financial markets in the past few days suggests that 
investors are coming around to this view.  

Frankly, I'm not satisfied with any of the explana
tions as to why there was a turnaround from an easing to 
a tightening trend in financial figures and expectations 
between late October and mid-November. Analysts have 
attributed it variously to the build-up in the corporate 
calendar, the aftermath of the Treasury's November 
refunding, rumors of a revival of participation certificate 
issues, and the Administration's backing and filling on 
tax policy. Undoubtedly, all of these factors have 
contributed to uncertainty in financial markets; market 
participants have reacted in a predictable manner, with 
investors holding back a bit and borrowers pressing 
harder.  

But let's not put all of the blame--and I use the 
word "blame" deliberately--on recent and prospective 
Treasury financings, or Administration indecision, or the 
usual vagaries of investor sentiment. Let's recognize 
that the Fed has contributed importantly to market 
uncertainties, in failing to give the banking system and 
financial markets a clearer signal of the current objectives 
of monetary policy. Not that we're free of uncertainty 
ourselves; we know precious little more than any banker 
or bond buyer as to what defense spending or tax policies 
will be. But we have observed that expansion in economic 
activity was slowing, and even earlier that bank credit 
was not expanding at a rate appropriate to the needs of 
the economy. We've wanted to correct this, as the 
continued inclusion of the proviso clause in the directive 
would indicate. Why haven't we succeeded? 

I would argue that the failure stems in part from 
misplaced devotion by this Committee to the marginal 
reserve measure, under conditions that were bound to make 
it an inadequate indicator of tightness or ease in either 
money market conditions or bank reserve availability.  
Today, more than ever, the key to banking developments is 
the spread in interest rates between those on CD's and 

those on alternative investments. With rate pressures this 
fall forcing a shortening in CD maturities such that about

-29-



11/22/66

half the volume of large CD's outstanding at the end of 
October mature before year-end, with the rollback in 
ceiling rates on consumer CD's forcing a slowing in these 
inflows to banks, with use of the discount window made 
uncomfortable, and with bank liquidity already reduced, 
how could we expect bank management to loosen the leash 
on lending officers, or even refrain from security sales 
to finance loan commitments? Why should we be surprised 
at a build-up in the capital market calendar, when 
monetary restraint has already forced a wring-out of 
corporate liquidity, and tax payments are expected to 
accelerate significantly in the first half of 1967, and 
bank loans are difficult to obtain or renew? At least 
one large borrower is tapping the capital market soon 
to repay bank loans, and some of the other issues scheduled 
for coming months undoubtedly are to rebuild liquidity 
drawn down as a result of the unavailability of bank loans, 
rather than as precursors to a burst of capital spending.  

Results such as these were legitimate objectives of 
policy earlier. But there's no need to carry a good 
thing as far or as long as we seem to be doing. By 
permitting a variety of forces to press bill rates back 
closer to CD ceilings, by limiting the possibility of 
banks tapping the consumer saving stream, by keeping the 
borrowing of reserves unattractive through retention 
of the September 1 letter philosophy, and--at least 
until recently--by providing nonborrowed reserves 
niggardly, we have closed off almost all of the domestic 
sources of bank credit expansion. There is not much 
logic, then, in bemoaning the failure of credit to 
expand. So long as there's a price at which the public 
will demand credit, we can achieve bank credit expansion 
by moderating one or more of the constraints we ourselves 
have imposed.  

Undoubtedly, it would be advisable to wait for 
clarification of the fiscal situation before undertaking 
a major loosening of constraints. And there are balance
of-payments consequences to consider, as Mr. Solomon will 
be discussing in a moment. But if it is the appraisal 
of this Committee that the current domestic situation 

affords the possibility of some moderate easing in bank 

credit availability, I would suggest that policy and its 
implementation be directed toward sufficient provision 
of reserves so as to permit market rates to sink well 

below CD ceilings, overriding even the seasonal rate 

pressures customary in the weeks ahead. The objective

-30-



11/22/66

would be a pattern of rate relationships such as to 
eliminate the drain of funds from financial intermediaries-
savings and loan associations as well as banks--without 
permitting the whole rate structure to fall so far as to 
induce massive resurgence in credit extensions.  

Our knowledge of money market and bank credit 
interrelationships is not as well developed as yet to 
permit much confidence in quantifying the level of 
marginal reserves that would be associated with desired 
developments in interest rates and in the reserve and 

credit aggregates. The estimates advanced in the blue 

book--with justifiable diffidence--suggest that one 

consistent complex of variables might be: net reserves 
fluctuating around zero, 5 per cent rates on 3-month 
bills, and bank credit expansion in the 2-4 per cent 

annual rate range. This is probably as good a guess as 
any, although with the very recent change in financial 
market sentiment, these rate and aggregate objectives 

might possibly be reached with a milder change in net 

borrowed reserves than going all the way to zero. Never

theless, there are seasonal and other pressure points 

ahead, as Mr. Holmes has indicated, and it would seem 

to me important to insure that the six-month bill rate 

moved down along with shorter-bill rates. Given our 

recent frustrations in using marginal reserve targets 

to achieve bank credit expansion and interest rate 

moderation, I would suggest putting greater emphasis on 
the latter variables directly as guides to the System's 

intervention in money markets in coming weeks.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that in times past suggestions had been 

made at Committee meetings regarding appropriate fiscal policy in 

relation to monetary policy. He asked what prescription for fiscal 

policy Mr. Brill would have in view of his projection of a slower 

economic growth rate.  

Mr. Brill said he could not be certain that economic growth 

would continue to slow until he knew more than at present about the 

probable course of defense spending next year. If defense spending

-31-



11/22/66

continued to rise at the rate the staff had guessed for the fourth 

quarter--and he would not be surprised if the fourth-quarter guess 

turned out to be on the high side--he would still favor an increase 

in taxes given what was known about other trends. He would add, 

however, that he now was less certain than he had been three weeks 

ago about the desirability of a tax increase, 

Mr. Solomon then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments: 

I propose to concentrate this morning on the links 
between monetary policy and the balance of payments, 
focusing on the possible repercussions on capital flows 
of an easing of monetary conditions in the United States.  
The impact of an easing here would depend importantly 
on what happens to monetary conditions in Europe, a 
subject that was discussed intensively at last week's 
meetings of Working Party 3 and the Economic Policy 
Committee of the OECD.  

The Committee is well aware that over the past year 
the deterioration of the trade balance has been more 
than offset by inflows of capital in response to tight 
credit conditions in the United States. Both the 
increase in imports and the inflows of capital are 
extraordinary and temporary--reflecting the surge of 
domestic spending and policy responses to it. The major 
forms of capital inflow have been the net repayment of 
U.S. bank loans by foreigners--amounting to $500 million 
in the first nine months of this year (partly seasonal)-
and Euro-dollar borrowings by U.S. banks through their 
foreign branches--amounting to more than $2-1/2 billion 
thus far this year (part of which is also seasonal).  

Although these Euro-dollar borrowings are often 
disparaged as being "hot money" and as not affecting the 
balance of payments on the liquidity basis, there is no 
question that in a real sense these flows have relieved 
the U.S. balance of payments this year. Surely our 
balance of payments problem is mainly a problem involving 
official acquisition of additional dollars by Europe.

-32-



11/22/66

What the Euro-dollar borrowings have done is to sweep 
up dollars that would otherwise have gone to European 
central banks; to some extent these borrowings may 
also have diverted dollars from the U.K. Without 
these Euro-dollar borrowings, larger reserve gains by 
continental Europe would have required the United 
States either to draw on the IMF or sell gold, after 
possibly first using the swaps more actively.  

If indeed the reduction in the trade balance is 
temporary--reflecting an income surge at home rather 
than a deterioration in our competitive position in 
world markets--it is difficult to find fault with a 
temporary capital inflow offsetting it.  

The question to be faced now is: what will happen 
to these capital inflows if monetary policy eases in 
the United States? In this connection, one can 
visualize either a move toward monetary ease by itself 
or such a move as part of a shift in the policy mix, 
in which tax rates are increased. A shift in the mix 
that led to more housing expenditures and less business 
and consumer spending would provide a modest benefit 
to imports, in view of the smaller import content of 
housing. But, whether the mix is shifted or not, the 
major questions have to do with the response of capital 
flows to a change in monetary policy. What can be said 
on this matter? 

(1) It should be noted that if banks 
merely stop adding to their debt to the 
foreign branches--without any repayments-
the balance on official settlements next 
year will tend to worsen--from this factor 
taken by itself--by over $2 billion.  
Ideally, this cessation of capital inflow 
would be offset by a slackening of imports, 
while exports continue to increase at the 
recent rate. The green book suggests that 
we should be seeing some slowdown in import 
growth beginning this quarter. A reduction 
in import growth from close to 20 per cent 
annual rate to 10 per cent would help the 
trade balance by more than $2 billion per 
year, other things including export expansion 
remaining the same. Even this ideal outcome 
might involve lags such that the capital 
account deteriorated before the trade

-33-



11/22/66

balance improved. Much more serious would 
be a failure of exports to increase at a 
healthy rate. But that is a problem about 
which monetary policy can do little aside 
from its efforts to maintain domestic price 
stability.  

(2) It is also reasonable to assume 
that U.S. banks, having developed this 
source of funds in Europe and being 
anxious to rebuild their liquidity, will 
not rush to reduce their Euro-dollar indebt
edness. What goes up does not automatically 
come down. We may find that this source of 
funds to banks remains more important than 
in the past.  

(3) The level of interest rates in the 
Euro-dollar market will have an important 
bearing on the attitude of U.S. banks toward 
Euro-dollar indebtedness. It is the 
differential between rates here and in the 
Euro-dollar market that counts rather than 
the absolute level of rates here. From the 
viewpoint of our balance of payments, it is 
desirable that Euro-dollar rates come down 
with short-term rates in the United States.  
But it matters greatly how the Euro-dollar 
rates are pushed down. If they fall only 
because U.S. banks are pouring dollars back 
into the Euro-dollar market, our balance of 
payments will suffer. On the other hand, if 
Euro-dollar rates decline because Europeans 
are demanding fewer, or supplying more, 
dollars to that market, U.S. banks will feel 
less of an incentive to reduce their Euro
dollar indebtedness.  

(4) There is now some reason to think 
that European interest rates may decline, 
as the green book indicates. Two major 
countries, Germany and the U.K., are experi
encing a distinct slowdown in economic 
activity. The U.K. is ready to relax its 

monetary policy as soon as it can do so 
without losing funds through interest
induced capital outflows. Much of the WP-3 

and EPC meetings last week were devoted to

-34-



11/22/66

persuading the German authorities that, on 
the basis of their own reports regarding 
the outlook for the German economy--slowdown 
and possibly recession ahead--and the German 
balance of payments--rapidly increasing surplus-
German monetary policy should be eased 

significantly. Such an easing of monetary 
policy in Germany, combined with declining 
credit demands there, should put downward 
pressure on Euro-dollar rates.  

(5) As for bank credits to foreigners, 
it seems likely that these would respond to 
an easing of credit conditions in the United 

States with a lag and by small amounts. The 
desire of banks to rebuild liquidity and to 
meet the needs of domestic borrowers should 
make for a gradual resumption of new loan 

extensions and therefore for a gradual 

reversal of the present tendency toward net 

repayments.  
(6) Thus there are reasons to expect 

that an easing of monetary policy here will 

not lead to a symmetrical reversal of this 

year's capital inflows. But suppose this 

turns out to be wrong and that next year U.S.  

banks do not increase their Euro-dollar 

indebtedness at all. This is an extreme 

assumption--even in 1964 and 1965, U.S. banks 

borrowed net from their branches, though 

in much smaller amounts than this year. Such 

a cessation of Euro-dollar borrowing would 

by itself bring a deterioration of some 

$2-1/2 billion in the official settlements 

balance. Following this year's surplus of 

about $500 million, we would have an 

official settlements deficit next year of 

$2 billion. While this year's balance of 

payments has looked better than we had any 

reason to expect, next year's balance would 

look worse than we have reason to expect.  

But taking the two years together, the 

average deficit on official settlements 

would be $750 million--better than in 1965 

or any previous year of this decade. We 

would still have a balance of payments

-35-



11/22/66 -36

problem, but that is not surprising. We 
had no reason to think that the long-run 
balance of payments problem would solve 
itself. It must still be faced as a long
run problem. But meanwhile, it need not 
freeze the present posture of monetary 
policy if it appears appropriate to change 
that policy for domestic reasons.  

Mr. Maisel asked whether the Euro-dollar transactions of 

U.S. banks were really of great significance to the U.S. balance 

of payments if a large part of the flows was to and from Britain.  

Mr. Solomon replied that the impact on the British balance 

of payments of the Euro-dollar funds drawn in by U.S. banks this 

year was a point of contention between some officials of the U.S.  

and the U.K. There was no question but that a large volume of 

funds left the U.K. this summer. He suspected, however, that that 

outflow reflected factors of confidence, and that the funds would 

have gone elsewhere if they had not come to the U.S. Thus, the 

dollars were absorbed by U.S. banks rather than flowing to foreign 

central banks. More recently British reserves had been rising-

although, as Mr. Coombs had indicated, not at a rapid rate--and 

U.S. banks might have been attracting some dollars that might 

otherwise have gone to Britain. But some dollars also were being 

drawn from the continent, and there was no way of assessing the 

relative importance of the two sources. Accordingly, he did not 

think it was safe to say that most of the funds were coming from 

Britain.



11/22/66 -37

Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Solomon to report to the 

Committee on the recent meetings of the Economic Policy Committee 

and Working Party 3 which he had attended.  

Mr. Solomon said that in general, the attitude toward the 

U.S. at those meetings was gentle. There was a strong awareness of 

both domestic and balance of payments effects of tight monetary 

policy. The most conspicuous cases were Germany and the United 

States. Mr. Ackley reported to EPC that monetary policy had restrained 

demand expansion by $8-$10 billion, before multiplier effects, in 1966.  

A general desire was expressed to end and reverse the escalation of 

interest rates in major countries, but in a manner that contributed to 

better balance in international payments. Hence the stress on monetary 

policy in Germany, where both domestic and balance of payments 

considerations pointed to the desirability of a relaxation of credit 

restraint. The German central bank representative resisted the 

suggestion that one country could swing world interest rates, but did 

indicate that a relaxation of policy was likely.  

As for the prospects for economic activity and payments 

balances in 1967, Mr. Solomon continued, it was expected that both 

Germany and the U.K. would experience slower expansion. For both 

countries recession was possible next year. On the other hand, 

Italy, France, and Japan were likely to experience faster expansion.  

The French representative stated that the recent fall-off in the



11/22/66 -38

French balance of payments surplus was more than a transitory 

development. What seemed to be happening was that French imports 

were accelerating with domestic expansion, while exports had fallen 

off as a result of the slowdown in Germany and the U.K. Thus, part 

of the French surplus had been absorbed by domestic expansion and 

part was being shifted to other countries. Also, there had apparently 

been some capital outflow in response to short-term rates abroad.  

Mr. Solomon said that WP-3 had held a frank discussion in a 

restricted session in which the Europeans let their hair down 

regarding the future of the international payments system. They 

reiterated a well-known continental view that European official dollar 

holdings should not increase in total, although the dollar holdings of 

individual countries could swing up and down with shifting payments 

balances. In fact, European dollar holdings had declined by $1-1/2 

billion in the past two years. Thus, the Europeans recognized that 

the U.S. had been financing its deficit not as a reserve currency 

country but no differently from non-reserve currency countries--by 

using its reserve assets.  

The second major point in that discussion, Mr. Solomon 

observed, was a recognition of what was called the "collective 

responsibility' of the gold-holding countries to avoid destabilizing 

the system by converting existing dollar holdings into gold.  

Although the means of implementing that responsibility were not



11/22/66 -39

clearly at hand, it was recognized in a constructive way. The entire 

discussion was clearly a condemnation of French policy and of 

"Rueffism." 

Finally, Mr. Solomon said, the discussion of swap arrange

ments that had been initiated at the September meeting of WP-3 was put 

off until January of 1967, as Mr. Coombs had indicated.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to comment on the 

developments at the recent meeting of the Group of Ten Deputies.  

Mr. Daane said he would first add one or two observations to 

Mr. Solomon's report. Some of those around the table at the EPC 

meeting--including Mr. Ackley of the U.S. delegation--urged that the 

Germans consider fiscal as well as monetary policy actions in moving 

to relax economic constraints. Secondly, the Italians thought their 

balance of payments surplus this year might be on the order of $450 

million, but that estimate did not allow for the impact of the recent 

floods.  

Turning to the Group of Ten Deputies' meeting, held in Paris 

on November 16, 1966, Mr. Daane said that it was concerned largely, if 

not entirely, with procedural questions, including the physical and 

other arrangements for the first joint meeting with the Directors of 

the IMF. That meeting would be held at the Fund in Washington on 

November 28 and 29, 1966. Formally, the meetings would be chaired 

jointly by the Managing Director of the Fund and the Chairman of the



11/22/66 -40

Deputies, but in practice it was expected that Mr. Schweitzer would 

preside over the meetings held in the U.S. and Mr. Emminger would 

preside over the alternate meetings held elsewhere. Those attending 

would be the Executive Directors of the Fund and their alternates; the 

Deputies of the Ministers and Governors of countries participating in 

the General Arrangements to Borrow (two persons per country) and their 

alternates; the Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director of the 

Fund and members of the IMF staff designated by the Managing Director; 

and, finally, observers from Switzerland, the BIS, and the OECD.  

As to the agenda for the first joint meeting, Mr. Daane 

continued, the Deputies developed a draft which was later amended in 

discussions between Messrs. Schweitzer and Emminger. It was now 

generally agreed that the agenda should include five items, as follows: 

the aims and objectives of reserve creation, including the need for 

reserves and its relationship to adjustment policies and the supply of 

conditional liquidity; the nature and form of deliberately created 

reserves, including their financing; distribution of deliberately 

created reserves; utilization of new reserve assets, including condi

tions for the transfer of new reserve assets and for assuring the 

acceptance of these assets; and conditions and circumstances of 

activation of a contingency plan. With respect to each topic, one or 

more Deputies would take the lead in setting forth the views of the 

Deputies within the framework of the report they issued in August 1966.



11/22/66 -41

Mr. Perouse of France offered to take the lead on the first item, 

but it was agreed that he would be joined by Mr. Deming of the U.S.  

Mr. Daane went on to say that the Deputies agreed to hold 

a meeting of their own immediately following the joint meeting in 

Washington to consider their work program. One possibility discussed 

was that of appointing small task forces from among the Deputies, 

alternates, and members of the secretariat to do advance work on 

those problems the Deputies regarded as being within their orbit, 

including the problems of lessening possible strains on the 

international monetary system and the question of the future role 

of gold.  

Mr. Daane concluded by noting that the second joint meeting 

with the IMF probably would be held in London in the latter part 

of January 1967.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

There is no doubt that in recent weeks the state of 
the economy has become more complex and subject to more 
uncertainties than was true a few months ago. After many 
months of almost uninterrupted exuberance, we now find 
clear signs that the pace of the expansion has become 
less rapid. Perhaps it is only natural that this change 
should give rise to doubts whether the uptrend can be 
sustained at all, or whether we are close to an actual 

business recession; but on careful analysis, I find 
no basis at all for such a pessimistic conclusion, at 
least short of a major turn-around in Vietnam developments,



11/22/66

of which we have no convincing evidence whatever. And, 
after all, a basic objective of our policy in the past 
year or more has been precisely to slow an excessively 
rapid growth in aggregate demand.  

Economic activity continues to expand. Given the 
probability that defense spending will be moving up 
strongly through next year, inflation--both demand-pull 
and cost-push--remains a serious threat. It is 
interesting to observe that even the more pessimistic 
forecasters of 1967 GNP seem to assume without question 
a continuing price rise on the order of 3 to 3-1/2 per 
cent per annum. Certainly there is no reason to accept 
such a rise with complacence.  

A good deal of stress is being placed by the 
pessimists on the likelihood that plant and equipment 
spending will rise only very moderately in 1967, after 
a 17 per cent increase in 1966. In our Bank we believe 
that, as in many recent years, the McGraw-Hill figure of 
5 per cent will probably turn out to be too low. We 
would expect an actual increase closer to 10 per cent, 
even after taking full account of the dampening effects 
of the suspension of the tax credit and accelerated 
depreciation, and of the significant impact of tight 
money on capital spending plans. As for consumer 
spending, this does seem to be losing some of the extra 
buoyancy it had shown earlier in the year. For one 
thing, the rate of private saving has been lower than 
the long-term average in the first three quarters of 
this year, and it appears that a rise may now be taking 
place. Nevertheless, as long as personal income is 
increasing at a substantial pace, as it is, I believe 
that reasonably well-sustained consumer spending will 
no doubt provide a strong underpinning for the economy.  

According to our estimates of fiscal impact of the 
Federal budget, the latter is providing a sizable 
stimulus to the economy in the current half-year, and 
the stimulus will still be large in the first half of 
calendar 1967. With the prospect of a Federal budget 
deficit in the current fiscal year of about $8 billion 
or more, whether figured on a cash or on an adminis
trative basis, I find it hard to understand, on any 
economic grounds, the Administration's reluctance to 
request a general tax increase in the very near future.  
Such an increase could easily be rescinded if economic 
developments should take a serious turn for the worse 
some time in the coming year.

-42-



11/22/66

While the wholesale price indices have been 

behaving quite well in the last few months, the outlook 
for labor costs is anything but encouraging. The 5 per 
cent pattern set in several recent major settlements 

now seems to be regarded as a probable minimum for next 
year's important negotiations, and much more ambitious 
demands seem to be in the making in many industries. I 

was shocked, in a recent talk with Governor Rasminsky, 
to learn of the extreme magnitude of recent labor demands 

beyond our northern border.  
Turning to the balance of payments, we find a 

disturbingly large underlying deficit temporarily ob

scured by special transactions, including large 
placements of foreign short-term funds in longer-term 

time deposits and U.S. agency obligations--many of 

these being in the nature of "window-dressing" trans

actions. And the reduced liquidity deficit that remains 

has been more than adequately financed by the massive 

inflow of Euro-dollars through the foreign branches of 

American banks--a flow which is bound to slacken and 

may well be reversed in the coming months. Meanwhile 

the trade surplus, which is the major hope for ultimate 

payments equilibrium, has been deteriorating substantially.  

Under such conditions, even though the rate of import 

expansion may decline with the slowdown in domestic 

business growth, the prospect of considerable cost 

inflation is ominous indeed.  

In the credit area, we do see further evidence that 

the System's restrictive policies have significantly 

slowed the expansion of bank credit. Indeed, the actual 

decline in bank credit, as measured by the credit proxy, 
in the past 3-1/2 months might even suggest that we 

have gone too far in this direction. But in view of 

the fallibility of all of our seasonal adjustments, 

especially in the light of the altered tax payment 

schedules in effect this year, I think it would be unwise 

to lay too much stress on the statistical showing of 

three or four months. In somewhat longer perspective, 

the reduction in the annual rate of bank credit growth 

to 5.6 per cent in the first ten months of 1966 from 

somewhere around 10 per cent in 1965 seems to me a 

gratifying achievement. And it is well to bear in mind 

that total credit flows through the economy have not 

been reduced nearly as sharply as the bank figures might 

suggest. Furthermore, the heavy calendar of corporate

-43-



11/22/66

bond offerings suggests that credit demands remain 
very high.  

Under all these circumstances, both domestic and 
international, I can see no basis for making an explicit 
change at this time in our basic policy of credit 
restraint. While there is always a risk of overstaying 
a policy of tightness, I believe we would face an even 
greater risk if we were to relax policy too much too 
soon, There is still no assurance that fiscal policy 
will be moving soon to support our efforts to contain 
inflationary pressures, and it would seem to me unwise 
to consider easing monetary policy significantly before 
vital fiscal decisions have been made by the Adminis
tration. Since none of us has wanted to achieve an 
absolute cessation of bank credit expansion, I would 
be willing to see doubts continue to be resolved on the 
side of ease, if staff expectations of further declines 
in bank credit and related aggregate measures over the 
rest of the year actually materialize.  

Given the stresses and strains that can come to 
bear on financial markets between now and the year-end 
I believe that a great deal of flexibility will be 
needed in the conduct of System open market operations.  
The Manager will have to work in terms of the feel of 

the market, with due attention to the Federal funds 
rate, the bill rate, and dealer lending rates. Our 

experience of the last two weeks demonstrates pretty 
clearly that net borrowed reserves are a rather 

unreliable indicator of credit conditions, especially 

under present circumstances. Nevertheless, the net 

borrowed reserve statistics receive so much public 

attention that we run some danger of a misinterpretation 

of our policy, i.e., an impression that we have moved 

to a significantly easier policy. Thus, I would hope 

that net borrowed reserves would tend to be closer to 

$300 or $400 million than to $200 million, provided 

that those net borrowed reserve figures turned out to 

be consistent with a comfortable money market. I think 

the Manager should continue to pay close attention to 

the various measures of bank credit and liquidity. And 

I would be quite happy to see some weakening of interest 

rates attributable to further cooling of demand pressures.  

But I am fearful that we are not likely to see a 

sufficient slackening of demand pressures if a tax 

increase is not forthcoming. Hopefully we will know 

more about this by the time we next meet.

-44-



11/22/66 -45

As far as the directive is concerned I would prefer 
alternative A as presented by the staff.1/ If aggregate 
measures prove to be as weak as the staff now projects, 
this would, as I interpret it, mean some modification of 
operations to permit somewhat more confortable conditions 
in the money market. The net results would probably not 
be far different from the thrust of alternative B, but 
I think it unwise to commit ourselves to an overt policy 
of less restraint until some decisions have been made 
on fiscal policy.  

Mr. Lewis reported that the boom had apparently lost some 

of its strength in the Eighth District. Spending might be slowing; 

the volume of check payments changed little from July to October 

after going up 12 per cent in the previous year; business loans at 

large banks had also been about unchanged since July. Real output 

might be expanding less rapidly in the District as many sectors 

had reached capacity. Payroll employment had risen at a 2 per cent 

rate since June after growing 4 per cent in the previous twelve 

months. There had been little change in nonmanufacturing employment 

since mid-year.  

Nationally, Mr. Lewis said, it could now be seen from the 

recent revisions of the national accounts figures that total spending 

on goods and services rose about 7 per cent from the first to the 

third quarter. By comparison, outlays had gone up at a 9.5 per 

cent rate from late 1964 to early 1966. He thought that that 

1/ Alternative draft directives proposed by the staff for 
consideration by the Committee are appended to these minutes 
as Attachment A.



11/22/66 -46

apparent slowing in the growth rate of total spending had been 

desirable, with the economy operating at capacity and inflationary 

pressures building up. The abrupt change from rapid expansion 

in bank reserves and money to contraction beginning last spring 

had probably contributed to the slower growth in total demand 

in recent months in spite of a stimulative budget situation.  

Despite that apparent slackening in the rate of growth of 

total demand, Mr. Lewis remarked, price increases this year had 

accelerated. The general price index went up at a 3.8 per cent 

rate from the first to the third quarter as against a 2.1 per cent 

rate from late 1964 to early 1966. He was fearful that the basic 

price trends were still strongly upward.  

Real output, which had risen at a clearly unsustainable 

7 per cent rate from late 1964 to early 1966, had since increased 

at a 3 per cent rate, Mr. Lewis continued. The 3 per cent rate of 

gain in real output was probably less than the long-run potential 

of the economy; yet, during the period of acceleration of production 

for defense at the expense of civilian goods that might be the 

necessary growth rate. Furthermore, acceptance of a 3 per cent 

growth rate might be desirable in the short-run in order to bring 

under control the strong inflationary pressures.  

As to policy, Mr. Lewis believed the marked change from 

rapid monetary expansion to some monetary contraction beginning



11/22/66 -47

last spring had been desirable and had probably been a significant 

factor in moderating total demand. Total member bank reserves 

and the money supply had both declined at a 2 per cent rate since 

last April. He thought it would be a mistake to permit such 

declines in bank reserves and money to continue at this time. In 

the past two or three months it appeared that the monetary contraction 

had not been the Committee's intent. Initial projections had 

repeatedly been that the stock of reserves and money would rise; 

yet, after the fact, declines had occurred. As a result of some 

recent weakness in loan demand, net sales of Governments were 

required to prevent greater declines in interest rates. Monetary 

contraction acted as a drag on both spending and credit demand, 

and lessening of credit demand in turn tended to cause further 

unplanned monetary contraction.  

For the near future, Mr. Lewis suggested that the System 

take the action needed to avoid a further decline in bank reserves 

and money. On the other hand, since inflationary pressures were 

present, he thought that any rapid expansion of those magnitudes 

should also be avoided. Interest rates and net borrowed reserves 

might properly be allowed a relatively wide range of movement in 

response to changing credit demand. As to the directive, Mr. Lewis 

preferred alternative B.



11/22/66 -48

Mr. Patterson reported that the economic data that had 

become available for the Sixth District since the last meeting of 

the Committee confirmed the previous appraisal that the economy 

of the area was proceeding at a slower pace than earlier in the 

year. In some sectors of the District the behavior was better 

than nationally, but even in such cases the performance exhibited 

no great exuberance. Contrary to national developments, total 

construction contract volume continued to run slightly ahead of 

last year, but the volume of residential construction was now 

feeling the pinch of the money shortage and rates to a much greater 

extent, and construction employment continued to trend downward.  

Early November reports on automobile sales suggested that sales 

continued below last year's, and the behavior of consumer credit 

statistics reflected that development.  

Continuing, Mr. Patterson commented that the latest loan 

statistics for the Sixth District gave additional evidence of a 

changing pattern of lending. Loans at large weekly reporting 

banks declined sharply during the final week of October and had 

shown only slight increases during the first two weeks of November.  

In most years the loan increase was fairly large in November. No 

major type of loan showed any expansionary strength at those banks.  

At all Sixth District member banks seasonally adjusted loans in 

October changed little from September, and total loans and invest

ments declined slightly. He found no clear-cut answer from bankers



11/22/66 -49

as to whether or not current loan trends resulted from a deliberate 

tightening of lending by the banks or changes in the demand for 

loans stemming from changed economic conditions. Apparently some 

of both were occurring, from what bankers told him. Bankers 

reported not only more restrictive practices but also a less 

frantic demand for bank loans. Certainly, he concluded that, so 

far as his own District was concerned, the demand for bank loans 

was no longer accelerating, as it had been earlier this year, even 

though credit demands might still be high.  

Turning to the national scene, it seemed clear to 

Mr. Patterson that total credit demands were still high. It also 

seemed clear that there was considerable difference between condi

tions now and those prevailing only a short time ago. Then credit 

demands were accelerating, and the nonbanking economic data helped 

explain the cause of that acceleration. Now credit demands were 

apparently not accelerating, and the economic data such as statis

tics on industrial production, retail sales, employment, and prices 

did not provide evidence that credit demands were growing faster 

than productive capacity. On the other hand, the behavior of the 

aggregate reserve and the money supply figures suggested that 

System policy had had a major influence on maintaining the high 

level of rates, for rates were still extremely high although they 

might be lower than two months ago.



11/22/66 -50

Under those conditions, Mr. Patterson said, a policy posture 

that was appropriate during the period of accelerating demands for 

bank credit was no longer appropriate. On the contrary, a less 

restrictive policy seemed to be in order. If policy were to be 

measured solely by net borrowed reserve figures of the past two 

weeks, it could be concluded that policy had indeed eased. Never

theless, banks continued under extremely strong pressures, as 

evidenced by the continued high level of borrowing and the con

straints imposed by recent trends in time deposits. He believed 

that the Committee should try to prevent a further drift downward 

in the seasonally adjusted reserve figures and the money supply.  

He would also like to have the Committee place itself in a position 

that might be quickly reversed if the same sort of conditions that 

prevailed a few months ago reappeared. A move toward greater ease 

at the present time should be in the nature of a probing operation 

and might be accomplished by aiming toward a net borrowed reserve 

figure below $200 million.  

Mr. Bopp said evidence was growing that inflationary 

pressures might be subsiding somewhat. One could not fail to be 

impressed by these facts: the decline in total construction 

expenditures, in physical volume to the extent of about 5 per cent 

below a year ago; the slowdown in accumulation of inventories and 

a rise in the inventory-sales ratio; the slower increase in 

industrial production; the small increase in capital expenditures



11/22/66 -51

now planned for 1967; and the stability of wholesale prices in 

October. It appeared that the upward pull of demand on prices 

was weakening.  

But even though business expansion might be losing some 

of its steam, Mr. Bopp continued, upward pressures remained. The 

backlog of manufacturers' new orders for durables continued to 

grow. Both defense spending and capital expenditures were expected 

to rise at about current rates for the remainder of this year.  

Growth in personal after-tax income should provide strong support 

for consumer demand. Wage settlements continued to show increases 

well above the guideline. Thus, the cost-push effect on prices 

could offset any weakening in demand-pull.  

Financial markets also reflected mixed trends, Mr. Bopp said.  

One that should be watched carefully was the slow downward movement 

of total bank credit and the money supply. Liquidation of invest

ments had exceeded loan expansion; however, total loans and business 

loans had been rising at a slower rate. He had been unable to 

determine to what extent slower loan expansion reflected more restric

tive bank lending policies or weaker demand resulting from earlier 

anticipatory borrowing and a slower rate of inventory accumulation.  

Looking ahead, however, the demand for funds in the capital 

market seemed to Mr. Bopp likely to be strong during the remainder 

of the year. Perhaps some of the larger volume of offerings for 

December reflected a spill-over from restrictive bank lending



11/22/66

policies; but regardless of the reasons, the likelihood was good 

that private demand, possibly augmented by some agency offerings 

and participations, would tend to force yields higher.  

As he summarized those various developments, Mr. Bopp 

observed, the situation appeared more encouraging than alarming.  

The economy seemed to be moving toward a more sustainable rate of 

growth instead of either runaway inflation or recession. As for 

policy, he would favor supplying sufficient funds to meet the large 

anticipated demands in the capital market and CD runoffs and would 

put more emphasis on preventing a rise in rates and arresting the 

decline in nonborrowed reserves and bank credit than he would on 

net reserve positions. Alternative B of the draft directives, as 

interpreted in the notes attached, would be appropriate.1/ 

1/ The note to which Mr. Bopp referred read as follows: "The 
reference to 'somewhat easier conditions in the money market' 
might be interpreted to call for the money market conditions 
described in the second full paragraph on page 5 of the blue 
book. As indicated in the following paragraph on that page, 
these money market conditions cannot be counted on to result in 
an appreciable expansion of bank credit before year-end. The 
proviso clause is worded, however, to guard against unforeseen 
expansion at a 'rapid' rate. Recent Committee commentary might 
suggest about a 10 per cent growth rate as an upper limit." 

The blue book paragraph (second full paragraph on page 5) 
mentioned in the note read as follows: "It might well be 
necessary, however, to move net borrowed reserves to a shallower 
level than has prevailed in the past two weeks in order to keep 
bill rates from rising much above current levels. Under such 
conditions, the Federal funds rate would be likely to drop to a 
level averaging closer to 5 per cent, dealer financing costs should 
decline further, and dealers would find it more comfortable to 
finance their inventories--not only of bills but also of coupon 
issues. These developments would also tend to moderate rate pressures 
in long-term markets, as expectations of monetary easing took hold."

-52-



11/22/66 -53

Mr. Hickman commented that there was now little doubt that 

the pace of economic expansion moderated in the third quarter and 

through October. Confirming evidence included the downward revision 

in GNP, the slight decline in corporate profits, the further drop in 

construction outlays, the reduced rate of increase of business 

inventories and employment, some leveling tendencies in retail sales, 

and four months of stability in the index of wholesale industrial 

prices. The theme of moderation had permeated the discussion at 

the November meeting of the Cleveland Reserve Bank's Board of 

Directors. It was then pointed out that machine tool buying seemed 

to have passed its peak, and that delivery schedules in that key 

industry were shortening. Less optimism in the auto industry was 

reported, and steel companies were lowering their estimates of 

fourth-quarter shipments.  

The evidence did not suggest to Mr. Hickman that a recession 

was approaching but, coinciding with the widely-discussed surveys 

of plans for new plant and equipment spending in 1967, signs of 

moderation could not be ignored. Moreover, the Committee should 

recognize that a large part of the gain in real product that had 

taken place in recent months had been due to defense spending, and 

that the behavior of the private sector had been weak. Analysis of 

the industrial production index, for example, suggested that the 

weights of those components that had been posting successive new



11/22/66 -54

highs during recent months accounted for only about one-third of 

the total. Most of the steady risers were defense-connected.  

Financial developments bore out the change in the business 

climate, Mr. Hickman said. An informal survey last week of important 

Fourth District banks revealed a recent general softening in the 

demand for business loans. Applications for new loans were fewer, 

and some earlier commitments were not being taken down. Opinion 

was divided as to whether those commitments would be activated 

later this year.  

Before turning to policy, Mr. Hickman said, he would like 

to remind the Committee once again of the lack of adequate informa

tion for the design of appropriate policy. Inventories were an 

obvious gap in the Committee's knowledge, as indicated by the fact 

that two-thirds of the revision in third-quarter GNP was in the 

inventory component. Such information as was available on defense 

spending was almost useless until well after the fact; a significant 

part of the $1.7 billion difference between the estimated and actual 

national income budget for the third quarter was due to larger

than-anticipated defense expenditures.  

Against the background of past moderation and future 

uncertainty, Mr. Hickman remarked, the Committee should continue 

to shade monetary policy on the side of ease. He was increasingly 

disturbed by the recent behavior of the bank credit proxy, which



11/22/66 -55

was expected to decline in November and December, with the latter 

being the fifth month in a row. A stiff price could be paid in 

the real sector next year if the reduced flow of funds through the 

financial intermediaries continued much longer. In the period 

immediately ahead he would again let the behavior of the credit 

proxy and the money supply determine policy, but would seek to 

obtain an annual rate of growth in the credit proxy on the order 

of 3 or 4 per cent, even if that meant substantially shallower net 

borrowed reserves. The mounting calendar of corporate and tax

free bonds reduced the risk that such a tactic would touch off a 

speculative wave in the bond market. Hopefully, by the time of 

the Committee's next meeting, fiscal policy for 1967 would be 

revealed, and the Committee would be able to determine the future 

course of monetary policy more easily. Mr. Hickman favored 

alternative B of the staff's current economic policy directive 

drafts.  

Mr. Brimmer said there was no need for him to review again 

the evidence on domestic economic conditions presented by the staff 

and also discussed in the preceding comments of members. He shared 

the doubts and uncertainties about the underlying strength of the 

private economy. He would even go further to say that in the 

absence of defense and related expenditures the Committee probably 

would be on the verge of describing the outlook for the U.S. economy



11/22/66 -56

in the manner Mr. Solomon reported the German economic outlook 

had been described at the recent Paris meetings: slowdown and 

possibly recession ahead. The Committee had gone quite far in 

restraining domestic activity in recent months and it should be 

concerned about the desirability of continuing that restraint in 

the months ahead.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that some of the discussion today related 

to the question of the appropriate means for formulating national 

economic policy. He had not been a member of the Board last fall 

when the discount rate was raised, but after reviewing the record 

he felt that that step toward restraint was a proper one. Although 

the problem of the appropriate mix of monetary and fiscal policy 

had not been resolved at that time, the System had not failed to 

move ahead. Now, as then, it was highly desirable to have a proper 

fiscal-monetary policy mix. Specifically, if it was necessary to 

maintain the existing degree of over-all restraint, it would be 

dangerous to rely on monetary policy to provide it; a tax increase 

would be required. But he did not think the Committee should wait 

for assurance of fiscal action before easing monetary policy at 

present, just as the System had not waited for fiscal action last 

December before moving toward restraint. It was necessary, of 

course, to remain sensitive to the issue and to continue to urge 

a tax increase--hopefully one large enough to do the job but not 

so large as to damage the economy.



11/22/66

Secondly, Mr. Brimmer said, he thought the Committee should 

remain alert to the possibility that capital market flotations were 

now substituting for bank credit. He was impressed by the recent 

cessation of growth--and decline--in bank credit. The Committee 

obviously had wanted to provide sufficient reserves in recent months 

to permit some expansion in bank credit; and, on the assumption that 

much of the impending increase in capital market flotations reflected 

substitutions for bank credit, he thought the reserve supply should 

be increased. Also, the attrition in CD's had gone far enough, and 

the Committee should be especially careful to prevent further run

offs. It was not easy to say how far the Desk should go in that 

connection--it would be undesirable to overdo the action--but hope

fully a proper course could be found.  

Mr. Brimmer then referred to the Manager's comment that the 

volume of his operations in the coming period would depend on the 

actions of the Treasury and the operations of the Special Manager, 

and that domestic open market operations might not have to supply 

as much in reserves as was usual at this time of the year. While 

he (Mr. Brimmer) was not sure of the precise mechanism that should 

be employed, he hoped that care would be taken to insure that the 

System's operations in foreign currencies did not interfere with 

the goals of its domestic operations.

-57-



11/22/66 -58

As far as the balance of payments was concerned, Mr. Brimmer 

was particularly pleased to hear Mr. Solomon's conclusion that there 

was no necessary incompatibility in the short run between the policy 

requirements in that area and in the domestic economy. He hoped 

that it would continue to be possible to take that position, and to 

rely primarily on the voluntary restraint program to deal with the 

problem of capital outflows.  

In concluding, Mr. Brimmer said he would lay stress on his 

view that it would be inappropriate for the Committee to postpone 

the kind of policy change indicated as necessary by the evidence 

on the domestic economy until there was assurance that fiscal 

action would be taken. Of the two draft directives, he favored 

alternative B; indeed, he leaned toward a "B minus" directive--one 

that called for going somewhat further toward easing than did 

alternative B.  

Mr. Maisel said that in preparing for today's meeting he 

had reviewed his statements at previous meetings of this year, 

and had to admit that he was beginning to feel like a broken record.  

At most meetings he had called attention to the fact that the 

Committee seemed to be following an erratic path. The failure to 

move directly to where it wanted to be was not due to uncertainty 

as to its goals. Rather, it was because the Committee had not been



11/22/66 -59

willing to specify its true goals, and the method by which it 

hoped to achieve them, in its directive.  

The Committee had failed to develop clear-cut policies 

and procedures to alter the factors actually under its control-

total reserves or bank credit, Mr. Maiselcontinued. It had paid 

too much attention to changes in money market conditions and net 

borrowed reserves. As a result it had introduced a major lag in 

policy. All during the winter and spring the Committee was moving 

in the wrong direction, in one opposite to that necessary to reach 

its agreed-upon goals of restraint. That had again been true since 

August but in the opposite direction.  

Mr. Maisel commented that the proviso clause in the direc

tive was a major step forward in attempting to reduce that lag 

and to get the Committee on its desired path more rapidly.  

Unfortunately, the Committee had not really been willing to live 

with the proviso. Those general comments were illustrated 

particularly by the actions of the past six weeks. In that period 

there seemed to be agreement that bank credit ought to stop 

declining and probably should expand. Action, however, had not 

been consistent with that goal. Other constraints to policy had 

been followed in the Desk's operations. Initially they were those 

of the Federal funds rate and more recently that of net borrowed 

reserves. As a result, policy had followed paths set by the market



11/22/66 -60

instead of letting the market react against a policy the Committee 

adopted in order to reach its goals. Mr. Brill's discussion this 

morning was very pertinent.  

It was true, Mr. Maisel remarked, that for the past three 

months there had been great uncertainties in the production and 

output situation. A rapid resolution of those uncertainties was 

not likely. On the other hand, it had also been clear that it was 

not necessary to arrive at a basic decision as to the future course 

of the real economy in order to stake out a logical path for monetary 

policy. No matter what happened to output and production, the 

economy would be harmed if the Committee continued a policy creating 

great distortions in the field of money and credit.  

In the present situation it seemed quite clear to Mr. Maisel 

that further harm to the productive sphere, through a failure to 

allow credit to expand at a normal rate, could only defeat the 

Committee's basic goals. Depending upon which index was used, the 

monetary variables had failed to expand for from three to six months.  

The distortions in the economy and related supply imbalances grew 

greater day by day. That meant inflationary pushes on the cost side.  

Those supply imbalances might well be at a point where they were 

exceeding any unfavorable price effects threatened through increasing 

demand. In any case, an actual weighing of possible relative courses 

was not necessary because in the current situation putting the monetary



11/22/66 -61

house in balance was unlikely to raise aggregate demand above 

supply. As a result of the past three months' experience, when 

bank credit declined instead of increasing, the total was probably 

$6 billion or so below a desirable level. There had been a short

fall in the furnishing of total reserves of somewhere between $300 

and $500 million.  

What the Committee had to do now was avoid further delay, 

Mr. Maisel said. It should recognize that its lags in implementing 

its goals were extremely dangerous. It had to be concerned with 

the future costs of failing now to expand the reserve base at a 

normal rate. The Committee also had heard that it could get into 

a major Euro-dollar market problem.  

The Committee's directives should pick a desirable level 

of expansion in required reserves and then instruct the Desk to 

attempt to insure that such a level of reserves was furnished the 

market, Mr. Maisel continued. The Committee should be concerned 

with the amount of credit being furnished and allow the market to 

determine the interest rate that went along with it. It seemed 

clear to him that for the past three months the Committee had 

been far too concerned with attempting to control interest rates 

rather than the amount of money and credit. The estimates of 

reserves had been good in terms of rates of expansion or decline.



11/22/66 -62

However, even though the Committee's goal was an expansion of 

reserves it absorbed reserves on a day-by-day basis in order to 

meet the market constraints.  

Mr. Maisel said he would support alternative B of the 

draft directives, but he would like to see it changed to make 

clear that the amount of ease called for was simply that required 

to achieve a normal reserve expansion of approximately 1 per cent 

a quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis. Sufficient reserves 

should be furnished for the credit proxy to grow at a rate of 

approximately 6 per cent. Actually, the rate could be slightly 

higher if deposits in other institutions continued to expand at 

a slower rate than the credit proxy. It should be clear that 

any given concept of a net borrowed figure was rejected. Although 

he did not feel strongly, if the Committee agreed, he would like 

to attempt again a more direct statement of the goal. Specifically, 

he would revise the second paragraph of alternative B to call for 

operations "with a view to attaining moderate expansion in bank 

reserves, money, and credit," and would delete the final clause 

of the staff's draft.  

Mr. Daane remarked that in talking about the question of a 

possible tax increase last week Walter Heller had described himself 

as a "cautious hawk." As far as monetary policy was concerned 

today, Mr. Daane said, he personally was no hawk at all; but he



11/22/66 -63

would describe himself as a "reluctant dove," at least with respect 

to an overt move. The balance of payments continued to pose a 

major problem, and the trade balance was a crucial element in that 

situation. Thus, while Mr. Solomon had said today that monetary 

policy could do little to encourage exports except for its efforts 

to maintain price stability, he (Mr. Daane) regarded such efforts 

as an extremely important contribution which the Committee should 

continue to make. Nor was he confident that one could look for 

other than adverse effects on capital flows of an overt move toward 

ease. For those reasons, and with the additional uncertainty in 

the fiscal policy area, he concluded that the position of a reluc

tant dove was the better position.  

Mr. Daane felt that there was a significant difference 

between a policy action taken by the Committee as part of a change 

in the mix of over-all national economic policies and a Committee 

action taken independently. He agreed with Mr. Brimmer that timing 

was of the essence, but he reached a somewhat different conclusion 

on what timing was appropriate. He would much prefer a monetary 

policy posture of initial non-resistance to an easing in interest 

rates, and subsequent validation as desired, if and when fiscal 

policy action came into view. He was impressed by Mr. Koch's 

review of the indications of weakness in the economy, but he was 

also impressed by Mr. Brill's unwillingness to predict slower



11/22/66 -64

economic growth until he knew more about the Federal budget. While 

the projections of defense spending seemed reasonable, the Committee 

did not in fact know what was likely to happen in that area. He 

thought too much emphasis was being placed on developments in the 

private sector in the discussion today and too little on public 

sector developments.  

Unlike Mr. Brimmer, Mr. Daane thought there was not a close 

analogy between the present situation with respect to the economic 

policy mix and that of last December. A year ago the question was 

whether monetary and fiscal policies should be coordinated in a 

general move toward restraint. The question now was whether mon

etary policy should be eased in advance of a fiscal policy move 

toward restraint--and against a background of existing fiscal 

stimulus.  

Operationally, Mr. Daane said, for a long time he had 

lectured against the use of free reserves as a guide to monetary 

policy, and he had been unhappy with both the Committee's and the 

market's emphasis on that variable. Nevertheless, he felt that 

there would be risks in deciding simply to ignore it and to try 

to break away from that emphasis in the current uncertain market.  

Despite this, he would give the Manager full flexibility and would 

suggest that there be a much greater emphasis in operations on 

interest rates. From this viewpoint the Manager should be directed



11/22/66 -65

to maintain the current comfortable tone in the market, resolving 

doubts on the side of ease.  

As to the directive, Mr. Daane said the wording of the 

first-paragraph statement of the Committee's general policy con

tained in alternative B was more felicitous than that in alternative 

A; it appropriately reflected the realities of the situation in the 

private economy. For the second paragraph he would also favor 

alternative B, but with a significant amendment. He would say 

"To implement this policy, System open market operations until the 

next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 

maintaining the somewhat easier conditions presently prevailing 

in the money market, unless bank credit appears to be resuming a 

rapid rate of expansion." As the Manager had indicated, market 

conditions at the moment were easier than they had been earlier 

in the recent period. If those conditions were maintained in the 

face of the expected seasonal pressures, the Committee would have 

achieved the desired shading of policy without making an overt 

move toward easing, which in his judgment would be undesirable.  

Mr. Mitchell said he agreed with Mr. Brill's analysis today.  

As far as the general posture of policy was concerned, he did not 

think the kind of signal reflected in a change in the discount rate 

would be appropriate at this time--even if the discount rate was at 

a level at which it could be used for such a purpose--but he would



11/22/66 -66

be willing to take a step just short of that. He felt that the 

Committee should be pushing hard now, up to a certain point. That 

view presumably aligned him with Mr. Brimmer's "B minus" and perhaps 

with Mr. Maisel's position.  

One thing that appeared to be disturbing to the Committee, 

Mr. Mitchell remarked, was that the banking system was not respond

ing to the System's moderate blandishments toward easing. Perhaps 

the System had not blandished banks enough. In his judgment the 

banks were so concerned about their liquidity positions that a 

successful effort to attain renewed growth in bank credit probably 

would require much more drastic open market operations than most 

of the speakers around the table had implied. He was convinced 

that net borrowed reserves in the $300-$400 million range suggested 

by Mr. Hayes would not do the job, and he was not sure that a zero 

level would do it; net reserves might well have to be positive.  

Having gotten banks to do what it wanted them to do, the System 

might find it hard to get them to change, but it was important 

that they should do so.  

With respect to the question of the relation between mon

etary and fiscal policy, Mr. Mitchell said he was inclined to agree 

with Mr. Daane rather than with Mr. Brimmer. But he would not like 

to see the System led struggling and resisting toward ease. He 

would prefer making a policy change that would be recognized as



11/22/66 -67

such--not necessarily widely, but by market technicians--and that 

would be the probable result if net reserves became positive. The 

Committee itself had something to gain from recognizing the recent 

developments in the economy; developments which, he would remind 

the members, were occurring despite escalating defense expenditures.  

He also would remind the Committee of another fact that should not 

be overlooked--that net funds raised in the nonfinancial sectors 

dropped in the third quarter to an annual rate of $63 billion, 

from $84 billion in the second quarter.  

It was quite important, Mr. Mitchell thought, for the 

Committee to make a change in policy significant enough for the 

banks to recognize. Hopefully, they would then start rebuilding 

their liquidity positions even though they were experiencing an 

outflow of funds resulting from European window-dressing operations; 

and at least some small growth in bank credit and the money supply 

would be achieved.  

Mr. Shepardson said he would not undertake to present another 

review of economic conditions, since they had already been extensively 

discussed. On the matter of timing, he would note that his view was 

similar to those of Messrs. Daane and Mitchell, rather than to that 

of Mr. Brimmer.  

It was clear, Mr. Shepardson continued, that bank credit had 

not been expanding recently. Whether or not that was inadvertent,



11/22/66 -68

he did not think it was the Committee's intention now to press 

further in the direction of restraint. But he would not consider 

an overt change toward ease to be appropriate at this time, in 

view of the large existing uncertainties--and also of the near

certainty of cost-push pressures on prices, which would have both 

domestic and balance of payments consequences. In his view it 

would be better to adopt alternative A, which provided for 

maintaining money market conditions in their recent ranges, for 

the directive. By adopting A, the Committee would be accepting 

the slight easing that had occurred in money markets and the 

shallower level of net borrowed reserves that had come about. He 

was not disturbed by the fact that the net borrowed reserve figure 

had not been as deep recently as some members had suggested at 

previous meetings. Finally, he thought that the situation that 

might develop around the year-end in connection with international 

flows of funds should be dealt with, and in his judgment it would 

be possible to do so under the proviso clause of alternative A.  

Mr. Wayne reported that over-all activity in the Fifth 

District continued at a high level, although it now seemed rather 

definite that the pace of advance had slowed considerably in the 

past month or two. Reports of manufacturers in the latest survey 

indicated some further slowdown in new orders, backlogs, and ship

ments, with most of the easing in durable goods lines. Respondents



11/22/66 -69

also reported further weakness in residential construction, a 

reduced pace of automobile sales, and smaller gains in retail 

trade. Confidence among both bankers and businessmen continued 

considerably less buoyant than earlier in the year, although perhaps 

a little stronger than three weeks ago. While textilemen remained 

concerned over growing imports and rising labor costs, they now 

seemed to view the future with cautious optimism. He continued 

to receive reports of large cutbacks in construction spending, but 

the building permits series showed only a relatively small over-all 

decline from last year.  

Mr. Wayne commented that no purpose would be served in 

repeating analyses of the national economy that had already been 

heard. In the country as a whole, signs of easing continued to 

appear. On balance, it would seem that for the present the growth 

of aggregate demand had been reduced to a rate which was not con

tributing significantly to inflation.  

In the matter of policy, Mr. Wayne concurred in both the 

analysis and conclusion expressed by Mr. Koch. The developments 

in the capital markets noted by Mr. Brill were not surprising; 

they were more or less following an anticipated course. They did 

serve to reinforce his support of the policy posture indicated by 

Mr. Koch. Mr. Solomon's concluding comment encouraged the Committee 

to give priority to the domestic situation.



11/22/66

There was considerable lag between cause and effect, 

Mr. Wayne continued. The Committee's restraint continued to be 

quite firm and its effects would be felt for several weeks or 

months into the future; and the Committee should consider whether 

it wanted to see the current easing trends in economic activity 

intensified over such a period. The reduction in bank credit had 

brought a substantial reduction in required reserves which, in 

turn, had brought into play the proviso clause of the directive.  

Measured by marginal reserve levels, the Committee had moved into 

a somewhat easier policy by that back door. Historically, October 

and November 1966 might mark that point in time when restrictive 

monetary policy once again proved its painful but salutory effec

tiveness. To overstay that posture would be regrettable. Certainly 

the proviso clause should be retained, but he believed the time had 

come when the Committee should recognize positively the desirability 

of some easing. He would favor a policy of increasing slowly the 

availability of reserves, the amount of easing to depend on the 

behavior of required reserves. Alternative B, along with the 

explanatory notes, represented what he believed to be a proper 

course of action for the Committee to adopt today.  

Mr. Clay observed that recent measures of economic activity 

gave further evidence of slackening in the pace of activity in some 

sectors of the national economy. It was becoming increasingly a

-70-



11/22/66 -71

mixed picture, with a widening disparity from one sector to another.  

The situation was further complicated by the fact that the most 

important source of expanding activity was military spending and 

that the magnitude and course of that spending remained very 

unclear. Some of the most striking behavior continued to be found 

in the financial variables, notably the decreases in bank reserves, 

bank credit, and the money supply.  

The recent record of economic activity indicated to Mr. Clay 

that some relaxation of monetary policy would be appropriate. The 

monetary data particularly underscored the need for some shift in 

monetary policy. Decreases such as had been taking place in bank 

reserves, bank credit, and the money supply were not suitable for 

the current economic situation and, despite the increase in net 

reserve availability, were not in keeping with what the Committee 

presumably had desired to accomplish in recent weeks. Some 

positive growth in bank reserves that would provide the basis for 

moderate growth in bank credit was rather what was desired. In 

consideration of recent developments in interest rates in the 

money and capital markets, some relaxation in monetary policy prob

ably would have a salutary effect on the money and capital markets 

too.  

In view of the prevailing military program and the accom

panying tight resource utilization situation in many sectors of



11/22/66 -72

the economy, Mr. Clay continued, any shift in monetary policy should 

be less aggressive than it might be under other circumstances. That 

view was further underscored by the uncertainty as to the volume of 

military spending and as to the Government's fiscal program.  

As he had already indicated, Mr. Clay said, the objective 

was to provide reserves so that both bank reserves and bank credit 

could show moderate growth. What targets might be consistent with 

that goal was difficult to know, but tentative targets might include 

a Treasury bill rate ranging down toward 5 per cent, and net borrowed 

reserves ranging substantially below recent levels, if necessary.  

It should be indicated, however, that a dramatic move on the part 

of the Federal Reserve, with accompanying sharp movements in credit 

markets, was not the goal sought; rather, a more gradual approach 

was desired. Allowance would need to be made in conducting opera

tions for any direct Treasury borrowing from the Federal Reserve.  

Moreover, the program would need to adjust for any tendency toward 

money market tightness as the December tax date approached.  

Alternative B of the economic policy directive drafts was 

satisfactory to Mr. Clay.  

Mr. Scanlon said that in the interest of time he would 

summarize the remarks he had prepared and ask that his complete 

statement be included in the record. He then briefly summarized 

the following statement:



11/22/66

Although there is widespread agreement in the 
Seventh District that the economy has entered a period 
of slower growth, there is an equally widespread view 
that general price inflation will continue into 1967.  

Opinion varies as to the impact of the suspension 
of the investment tax credit. Some marginal expenditures 
are being sliced from 1967 capital expenditure budgets 
now being formulated. But it does not appear that the 
effect of the suspension of the credit, in itself, will 
be a major factor depressing capital outlays. The chief 
executive of a large petroleum firm finds profitable 
investment opportunities outrunning availability of 
funds, in contrast to experience of earlier years. A 
steel firm's management recently reviewed all capital 
expenditure programs to pinpoint possible deferments.  
Although little was accomplished, it was noted that clear 
signs of the development of a business recession in 1967 
would slow capital projects through the abolition of 
overtime, extra crews, and other costly methods dictated 
by urgent need.  

A sharp decline in orders for construction equipment 
has occurred in recent weeks. This is not simply a 
reflection of the drop in home building because heavy 
excavating equipment has been affected. Demand for other 
types of machinery and equipment remains strong and back
logs continue to rise.  

Steel orders have slowed as steel users have been 
cutting inventories as delivery times have been reduced.  

Shipments of finished steel have not kept pace with 
ingot production, indicating a further reduction in the 
ingot production rate. Ingot production for all of 1966 
is expected to be 135 million tons, compared with last 

year's record 131 million tons. Shipments, however, are 
expected to total slightly less this year than last.  
Production and shipments in 1967 are expected to equal 

this year's, despite an estimated drop in auto assemblies 

of about 300,000 units.  

There are continued complaints of the poorer quality 

of available labor, high turnover, and wildcat strikes.  

Profit margins are likely to shrink.  

Some manufacturers who have announced price increases 

recently have waited anxiously for the reaction from 

Washington. A farm machinery producer has encountered 

strong pressures from Governments in other countries, 

e.g., Canada, against increasing prices on its products.

-73-



11/22/66

In the past three weeks, our major banks have shown 
a contra-seasonal reduction in business loans although 
some bankers have indicated that they are expecting 
demands for business credit to increase substantially in 
the weeks ahead.  

Meanwhile, bank acquisition of mortgages has slowed 
markedly, outstanding loans to finance companies have 
been reduced, and sizable holdings of municipal and U.S.  
agency securities have been liquidated.  

Despite over-all credit contraction, the large 
Chicago banks continued to show a substantial basic 
deficit position as both demand and time deposits declined 
somewhat further. However, pressures appear to be less 
than a month ago, and a much smaller portion of funds to 
cover the position was acquired at the discount window.  
Country bank borrowings are also significantly below the 
August experience both in amount and number of banks.  

Current financial data do not indicate a substantial 
reversal in the slow downward drift of aggregate monetary 
and credit measures, although slight increases in total 
reserves, money supply, and time deposits may still occur 
for November as a whole. It is not clear whether the 
recent firming of interest rates reflects monetary 
restraint or stronger credit demands. The same amount 
of non-bank credit growth may entail higher interest rates.  
On the other hand, the recent tendency toward stabilization 
of CD's may indicate a slowing or halting in the process 
of disintermediation.  

Given the increasing signs of hesitancy in the private 
sector, some portion of which I trust we can attribute to 
our own actions, I think it unwise to continue to permit 
reserves, money supply and bank credit to decline. I 
would favor a policy posture designed to achieve moderate 
growth in total bank credit and related aggregate measures.  

I support alternative B for the directive, although 
the 10 per cent growth rate suggested as the upper limit 
for the proviso clause in the staff notes seems too high 
to me. I do not foresee a problem in this regard but I 
would hope that if bank credit resumes a rapid rate of 
expansion we don't wait until we reach a 10 per cent rate 
to reverse our position.  

Mr. Galusha said that, by all appearances, the rate of economic 

growth had declined so the Committee had, in a way, succeeded in its

-74-



11/22/66 -75

stabilization objective. The Committee might find, come mid-1967, 

that the rate of growth had declined still more--too much, in fact.  

His impression--based admittedly on a relatively brief experience 

as a member of the Committee--was that monetary policy actions had 

an effect not immediately but after a rather appreciable length 

of time.  

No immediate vanishing of inflation was in prospect, 

Mr. Galusha continued. The outlook was, however, for less infla

tion than there had been. If history was any guide, price increases 

would continue for some time, possibly through much of 1967. But 

historians would have to trace the price increases of 1967 to already 

past changes in the unemployment rate and the level of corporate 

profits, not to a present and continuing excess demand. There was, 

then, little chance at the moment that price increases were going 

to accelerate, or that an inflationary psychology of major dimensions 

was going to be created. Even if the present unemployment rate held, 

price increases from here on in would get smaller and smaller.  

Undeniably, Mr. Galusha remarked, the more pressure the 

Committee put on the economy, the smaller future price increases 

would be. Even cost-push inflation, so-called, could be checked by 

monetary policy--but, as compared with demand-pull inflation, only 

at the cost of a relatively great amount of unemployment. Thus, to 

persist in trying to check further price increases--which in prospect



11/22/66 -76

seemed quite modest--would be to recreate the very economic situation 

that was barely escaped a few years ago. And in getting back again 

to something like full employment, the Committee would almost 

inevitably produce the kind of changes, particularly in corporate 

profits, that were conducive of relatively large increases in money 

wages.  

What the Committee had to avoid, therefore, was a stop-go 

type of monetary policy, Mr. Galusha said. It was necessary to 

avoid moving away again from near-full employment. And in the 

interest, he would stress, of the country's long-run international 

competitive position. It was better to hold steadily to a satisfac

tory unemployment rate than to attain the same rate only on average.  

What all that suggested to Mr. Galusha was that the Committee 

even now should be giving its attention to increasing the supply of 

bank loans. Perhaps it was not too soon to begin thinking about 

ironing out the wrinkle that had been put in discount policy a few 

months ago, which would probably require some form of concerted 

action to avoid inter-District unevenness. Or about money market 

conditions which would facilitate, not hinder, the rolling-over of 

maturing CD's. Even an increase in the average maturity of CD's 

might be desirable. The Committee perhaps would be well-advised to 

go to some lengths to convince banks, particularly the large ones, 

that they were not badly over-extended, and that they could get back



11/22/66 -77

to where they wanted to be without having to persist in the stringent 

rationing of loans.  

Having said all of that, Mr. Galusha continued, he would be 

uneasy with any obvious move of major dimensions. Rather, he would 

prefer to encourage the Desk to continue a cautious groping along 

the cliff to easier footing--plus joint efforts to correct the 

aberrations in discount window administration.  

Mr. Swan remarked that he could summarize economic develop

ments in the Twelfth District with the statement that there had 

been no major changes in the last few weeks. He also would favor 

some moderate move toward easing. In light of the general economic 

situation he thought the Committee certainly should be looking 

toward some expansion in bank credit and the money supply. In the 

immediate short-run, the Manager was confronted with a need to try 

to smooth out the special stresses in the money market that were 

anticipated between now and mid-December, and to prevent the current 

pressures in capital markets from having some backlash effects in 

the money markets. To him that implied a comfortable money market.  

While he again hesitated to quantify objectives, it did seem that 

the bill rate should be 5-1/4 per cent or somewhat less, and the 

Federal funds rate certainly should be below 6 per cent. He did 

not think that that could be accomplished with net borrowed reserves 

of $300 million, but he hoped it would not be necessary to go to



11/22/66 -78

zero. In any case, he thought the net reserve figure was somewhat 

less important at this juncture.  

The policy change should be moderate, Mr. Swan continued.  

At the same time, he would strongly urge the adoption of alternative 

B; the action, even though modest, should be a positive one, and it 

should be explicit in the directive. As to the interpretation of 

the proviso clause in that alternative, he shared Mr. Scanlon's 

question about the appropriateness of a 10 per cent upper limit on 

bank credit expansion. And he questioned, as he had three weeks 

ago, the use of the word "sharply" in the first paragraph to describe 

rising defense expenditures. The description probably was correct, 

but definitive evidence was not available to the Committee.  

Mr. Swan's concluding observation related to Mr. Mitchell's 

comments about the difficulty of getting banks to develop a more 

positive attitude toward credit expansion. That difficulty might 

be due, in part, to strong feelings at banks about their liquidity 

positions. In his judgment, however, the attitudes of banks were 

still conditioned by the System's September 1 letter to member 

banks. While the letter had been appropriate at the time it was 

issued, he thought the System should now give serious consideration 

to the possibility of taking steps soon to dispel its effects, at 

least if the present attitudes of banks persisted.



11/22/66

Mr. Irons said there had been no significant new develop

ments in economic conditions in the Eleventh District over the past 

three weeks. The District economy had been following the national 

pattern, with evidences of moderation in some sectors and of strength 

or expansion in others. On balance, the District economy was expand

ing a bit, in a manner not greatly different from the national economy.  

About the same statement would hold in the financial area, 

Mr. Irons observed. Total bank loans and investments had declined 

in the recent period, although loans changed relatively little.  

Deposits were down, and the CD situation was posing difficulties for 

some banks. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had not been large 

except for borrowings under the special program.  

With regard to credit policy, Mr. Irons remarked that it 

might be well for the Committee to avoid any overt action at this 

time, or any action that might appear to represent a change in 

policy. He did not question the signs of a slower growth rate or 

of lessened inflationary pressures in the economy, but he was 

skeptical about the desirability of moving in an abrupt or overt 

manner on the basis of the evidence available at this time. It had 

been suggested that the Committee should avoid overstaying a posture 

of restraint; but the Committee should also avoid over-eagerness to 

change its position on the basis of the information it now had.

-79-



11/22/66 -80

For the directive, Mr. Irons favored either alternative A 

or the version of alternative B Mr. Daane had suggested, which was 

fairly close to A. He was not overly concerned about the specific 

level of net borrowed reserves, but he did not think the Committee 

could completely ignore net borrowed reserves at this time; market 

participants still gave them attention, and there was little the 

Committee could do about that. He favored a Treasury bill rate 

in the 5 - 5-1/4 per cent range, and a Federal funds rate in the 

area of 5-1/2 per cent. He would not be disturbed if net borrowed 

reserves were at $200 million or less. He thought the Manager had 

to be given a great deal of leeway to be guided by market develop

ments, but that he should not operate in a manner that would make 

the market conclude the Committee had moved to a different policy 

posture.  

Mr. Irons agreed with Mr. Swan's comments about the 

September 1 letter, and thought the System was running the risk 

of inconsistency in policy by leaving the letter outstanding.  

Regardless of the System's intentions, many banks--in the Eleventh 

District at least--were interpreting the letter to mean that they 

should not come to the discount window except under conditions of 

a degree of restraint which they associated with the September 1 

letter. A number of the larger District banks now had large built

in deficits and found it necessary to borrow from some source every



11/22/66 -81

day. That situation probably was not limited to the Eleventh 

District. The System probably would not make the same statements 

today that were considered appropriate on September 1; there 

appeared to be no desire now, for example, to call for a slower 

rate of growth in business loans. The problem now was not one 

of strong demands for credit and a strong desire by banks to 

make loans, but rather one of illiquid positions and built-in 

deficits at banks. But the letter remained outstanding and con

tinued to affect the attitudes of banks. The conflict was not 

one that could be brushed aside, and a re-examination of the 

September 1 letter was clearly needed.  

Mr. Ellis said that in the interest of time he would omit 

the remarks he had prepared on recent developments in the New 

England economy. The Boston Reserve Bank had now had visits by 

officers from four of the District's largest insurance companies 

and from the farm credit banks of the District, each wishing to 

review any special avenues of borrowing should their liquidity 

needs worsen further. The Reserve Bank had initiated an informal 

tally of New England insurance company policy loan trends on a 

monthly basis. So far it revealed that (1) prepayments of out

standing loans had virtually ceased, lessening their cash inflows; 

(2) policy lending spurted abruptly in the summer and early fall 

to rates 10 times or more above year-ago rates; (3) 1967 cash



11/22/66 -82

flows were virtually committed so that in general they were not 

making new commitments for 1967 funds; and (4) October and early 

November had seen some slackening in the squeeze and the better 

condition in municipal markets had allowed them to sell off enough 

assets to rebuild liquidity somewhat. They now felt they might 

get through this year without calling on their bank lines.  

Of course, Mr. Ellis said, the System's most direct concern 

was with commercial banks. In appraising their activities since 

September 1--a date he thought was meaningful for the purpose--he 

found no substantial evidence of change in pattern in New England.  

As of November 9, their total loans were 10.5 per cent above a year 

earlier. The comparable figure on August 31 was 10.3 per cent.  

Business loans on November 9 showed a 17.5 per cent year-to-year 

gain, compared with 17.2 per cent on August 31.  

Of the four Boston reserve city banks, only one had a 

business loan volume below its August 31 level. The other three 

had expanded their business loans as much as--and in one case, 

substantially more than--in the same periods of the past two years.  

Just about the same observation might be applied to the patterns 

of their total loans. Each of those four banks had been relying 

heavily on borrowed funds in the forms of negotiable CD's, Federal 

funds, or discounts at the Reserve Bank. But each had also been 

able to reduce quite substantially the ratio of borrowed funds to



11/22/66 -83

required reserves. It seemed that the strengthening in the 

municipal securities market had enabled them to use their sec

ondary reserves as originally intended.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis agreed with the 

staff's analysis but disagreed with their prescription, and he 

suspected that a question of timing was involved. He would focus 

briefly on two points. First, there was an important difference 

between an inflection point--the point of maximum rate of increase 

in a growth trend--and a recession downturn in such series as 

GNP, employment, and so forth. He emphasized the difference 

because he thought there might well be a tendency to over-react 

to an inflection point. Last spring and winter the Committee was 

seeking to slow down an unsustainable rate of economic upsurge.  

The first paragraph of the green book stated that that had tran

spired. An inflection point in the rate of growth, not a 

recession downturn in real terms, had been achieved. Current 

projections of acceptable growth rates were being made in the 

context of existing policy, not of an eased policy; the latter 

would require upward revisions in the projections. The evidences 

of pause in the financial area, such as the recent pattern of 

change in business loans at banks, might be interpreted in the 

same manner as price developments were being interpreted--namely, 

as reactions to earlier excesses. In that connection he would



11/22/66 -84

endorse the comments that had been made today regarding the contin

uing impact of the System's September 1 letter. It would be 

desirable to seek some graceful way of withdrawing that letter.  

Secondly, Mr. Ellis said, the proper policy mix to maintain 

growth at the desired slowed rate probably should be a somewhat 

tighter fiscal policy and a somewhat easier monetary policy. But 

his own judgment was that the political process was such that the 

proper policy mix could not be achieved if the Committee moved first 

to ease monetary policy. The Committee had been alerted via the 

press to the possibility, perhaps by early December, of a decision 

and an announcement by the President concerning the outlook for 

the budget, including tax considerations. Certainly the prospects 

for Presidential support and legislative approval of any tax increase 

could be severely worsened if monetary policy were to be substan

tially eased in advance. That act would be taken as evidence that 

the economy had weakened to a point that obviously ruled out tighter 

fiscal policy. Thus, an overt move toward ease in the next three 

weeks would substantially reduce the chances of a tax increase.  

That suggested to Mr. Ellis the essentiality for the next 

three weeks of avoiding an overt move and the appearance of numbers 

that would allow the interpretation that such a move had been made.  

To be quite specific, while the Committee might decry as antedeluvian 

continuing analyst attention to net borrowed reserves as an indicator 

of policy, there seemed little chance that re-education could be



11/22/66 -85

accomplished this year. To him, that meant the Committee should 

continue as a target of operations a net borrowed reserve figure 

within the $300-$400 million range and not move overtly lower to 

a zero-$ 2 0 0 million range. He would agree with Mr. Hayes' descrip

tion of desirable operations under that objective.  

Concerning the directive, Mr. Ellis said that alternative B 

was seriously defective in providing no directions for operations if 

bank credit were to resume a rapid rate of expansion. As a minimum 

an additional clause was necessary; following the words, "unless 

bank credit appears to be resuming a rapid rate of expansion," 

should be added--to borrow language from alternative A--a clause 

reading, "in which case, operations shall be conducted with a view 

to maintaining about the same range of money market conditions as 

have prevailed since the previous meeting of the Committee." To 

be consistent, he should observe that the alternative A proviso 

clause was silent as to what modification might be undertaken in 

the light of bank credit developments. His own view was that the 

clause should provide for modification toward both tightening and 

easing, as expressed in the relevant staff note of those attached 

to the draft directives.1/ He would prefer a proviso clause that 

1/ The staff note to which Mr, Ellis referred read as follows: 
"One possible interpretation (of the proviso clause in alternative 
A) is that operations shall be modified toward ease if the bank 
credit proxy appears to be weaker than the fractional declines 
projected by the staff for November and December...; and modified 
toward firmness if the proxy resumes expansion at an annual rate 
in excess of that for the year to date (4.6 per cent)."



11/22/66

read, "provided, however, that operations shall be modified to 

counter sharp and sustained movements in total bank credit." 

Obviously, of the two draft directives he favored alternative A.  

Mr. Robertson asked that the statement he had prepared for 

today's meeting, reading as follows, be included in the record: 

I think it is quite clear that both the facts and 
the analysis before us this morning argue for some 
easing of monetary policy, with the chief question for 
debate being how much.  

Without doubt, a number of key measures of business 
activity are softening. Much of this slackening is 
probably the direct or indirect consequence of restrictive 
public policies, rather than the independent sprouting 
of the seeds of recession; but nontheless we need to be 
very careful not to let money become any tighter than 
necessary to do its job.  

Insofar as the financial side is concerned, all avail
able indicators are consistent with a real and pervasive 
slowdown in credit expansion. Thus, as has. already been 
indicated, we have had no net growth in bank credit or 
money supply for three and six months, respectively.  
Interest rates, particularly in the long-term area, have 
moved back up near their historic peaks. This, I submit, 
is too tight a financial restraint to hold for very long 
on a growing economy, once inflationary pressures seem to 
have passed their peak.  

Yet, while some monetary easing may be called for, 
my preference continues to be, as I said last time, for a 
"tentative but gradual and progressive kind of let-up of 
monetary pressures." In particular, with a new Administra
tion position on taxes promised to be close at hand--perhaps 
even before our next meeting--I think we should make our 
move gradually at this time so that it will not importantly 
reduce our options, depending upon the outcome of the 
supposed December tax decision.  

To accomplish this, I would favor gradually working 
net borrowed reserves lower, perhaps down into a range 
around $100 million, over the next three weeks, thereby 
countering some of the build-up of seasonal pressures that 
ordinarily takes place during this interval. I refer

-86-



11/22/66

primarily to net borrowed reserves for the reasons that 
I gave at some length at our last meeting. I would expect 
the most closely associated money market interest rates to 
show no increase, and perhaps even some decline in this 
new reserve climate; and also I would expect CD attrition 
to slow down--outcomes that I would regard as desirable.  

I know some observers feel that the degree of restraint 
exercised by net borrowed reserves is quite variable, and 
hence is a poor policy guide. But such a view mistakes the 
best policy role for net borrowed reserves, in my judgment.  
Certainly the influence of a given net borrowed reserve 
figure does not stay the same over time, with differences 
stemming from differences in loan demands, banker attitudes, 
liquidity positions, et cetera. Proper policy prescription 
calls for taking all such considerations into account in 

judging what level or range of net borrowed reserves might 
best tide us over the days ahead. It is with such an 

arrangement of thoughts in mind that I advocate dropping 
net borrowed reserves back to a range around $100 million.  

Some consideration for such a target might, I suppose, 

be squeezed in as part of attention to a general "money 

market conditions" target in the directive. I, myself, 

however, would prefer to recognize our concern with 

reserves more directly by calling for open market opera

tions that would, in directive language, "attain somewhat 

easier net reserve availability and related money market 

conditions." 

For the proviso clause, this time I have no objection 

to the kind of one-way proviso drafted by the staff in its 

alternative B, although as a general matter I prefer the 

two-way kind that we have recently used. Having called 

for a moderate easing in the first part of the second 

paragraph, I would not want a proviso that might lead the 

Manager to ease still further, because I think too marked 

an easing could be bad policy at this time. On the other 

hand, I would be willing to see any easing action stopped 

in the unlikely event that bank credit started to expand 

rapidly once again.  

With these exceptions and interpretive remarks, I 

favor alternative B of the draft directives supplied by 

the staff.  

Mr. Robertson then said that, as indicated in his statement, 

he also was in favor of some easing. The only question was how much;

-87-



11/22/66 -88

no one would want to ease so far as to damage the chances of fiscal 

policy action. After hearing the discussion today, he would now 

propose a new version of the second paragraph of alternative B, 

reading as follows: "To implement this policy, System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 

with a view to encouraging moderate expansion in aggregate reserves 

and bank credit, provided that money market conditions do not ease 

sharply." Such language, in his judgment, would avoid the risks 

of an overt move toward ease that had been noted by some members.  

Mr. Hayes commented that the phrase Mr. Robertson had 

suggested embodied aggregate variables similar to the language 

the Committee had recently dropped from the first paragraph of the 

directive. He felt that such language was not feasible as an 

operating instruction.  

Mr. Daane said he felt that the instruction Mr. Robertson 

proposed would be difficult to implement, since it placed main 

emphasis on variables that the Manager could not control precisely.  

Mr. Hayes noted that Mr. Daane's suggested revision to 

alternative B had received some support, and indicated that he also 

would be prepared to vote for it.  

Chairman Martin said that before turning to policy he wanted 

to note that he thought the System had performed well during 1966, 

all things considered. The performance had not been perfect--the



11/22/66 -89

timing of actions had not necessarily been right in all respects-

but the record as a whole held up quite well.  

It was important to keep in mind, the Chairman continued, 

that monetary policy could not achieve results as precise as some 

people apparently desired. In retrospect, he thought that by May 

or June of this year monetary policy probably had done about all 

that could have been expected of it toward slowing down excessive 

expansion of demand in the economy, short of risking disastrous 

developments in the money market of a kind that no member of the 

Committee would want to see. In his judgment the thrift industry 

was not set up well. Since the beginning of the year the savings 

of individuals and businesses had been totally inadequate to meet 

demands for credit but, with full employment and high plant 

utilization rates, any further monetary expansion earlier in the 

year would only have added to inflationary pressures. Later, 

cost-push pressures on prices began to be added to the demand-pull 

variety, and he doubted whether monetary policy could cope 

effectively with cost-push pressures. He was hopeful that the 

Administration would come forward with a fiscal policy program 

that would supplement monetary policy, but it was necessary to 

recognize that such fiscal action would be at least six to nine 

months late, just as the step toward monetary restraint taken a 

year ago appeared, by hindsight, to have been late.



11/22/66 -90

Many recent developments in the economy were encouraging, 

the Chairman said. Automobile manufacturers had been prudent in 

reducing output rather than relying on credit and other forces to 

propel their industry forward. The shift of borrowers from banks 

to capital markets noted in the discussion today should have 

occurred some time ago. That such developments were occurring 

now was highly encouraging for the longer-run outlook.  

The Committee faced a fine judgment now on whether to make 

an overt change in policy, Chairman Martin observed. Before the 

meeting he had considered the draft directives suggested by the 

staff and had concluded that the difference between the policies 

called for by alternatives A and B was not great. After the go

around today he was inclined toward alternative B--not because a 

majority seemed to favor it but because it indicated that the 

Committee was abreast of economic developments. Whether or not 

any fiscal policy action was likely to be taken should be known 

in the next three or six weeks, and in the meantime the Committee 

would be indicating that it was aware of a change in basic elements 

of the economy. He would consider the policy change as a probing 

movement, to be reversed if events went the other way. Monetary 

policy had to be flexible.  

The Chairman repeated his view that by early summer the 

Committee probably had done about all that it could do. Devel

opments had gotten ahead of the Committee, and some adjustments



11/22/66 -91

in the economy were inevitable; if expansion were not slowing now 

the situation would be serious. He thought the Committee should 

try to make a moderate change in its policy in line with the 

statistical analyses that had been presented although, he would 

add, he had grave reservations about the scientific aspects of 

analyses in this area. He intended no criticism of the staff; 

his point was that he doubted whether the Committee could reach 

firm conclusions solely on the basis of statistical analyses of 

periods as short as two or three months. Monetary policy remained 

as much an art as a science.  

The Chairman then said he did not think the Committee should 

attempt to attain the kind of precision implied by some comments 

today, including the references to a "B minus" directive. The 

staff's alternative B roughly reflected the policy course a majority 

appeared to favor. He would suggest adopting that alternative for 

the directive and leaving to the Manager the task of operating 

within its framework. He did not believe the appropriate level of 

net borrowed reserves could be spelled out precisely, but to him 

that was not of great importance. Several suggestions for amending 

the staff's draft had been offered but, while they might be workable, 

in his opinion the staff's alternative B implied everything necessary 

at this juncture. He would interpret it to call for a modest overt 

change. Mr. Hayes had made a good case against any overt change at



11/22/66 -92

this time, but an equally good case could be made for a modest 

change. The Committee should not be overly reluctant to change 

policy in either direction. The objective now, he thought, should 

be to move in a gradual way without trying to be too precise about 

it.  

Mr. Brimmer observed that in light of the Chairman's remarks 

he would withdraw his suggestion that the Committee adopt a "B minus" 

alternative for the directive. He had used that expression to 

indicate the strength of his preference for the general type of 

policy called for in alternative B, and was prepared to vote for 

the staff's draft without amendment.  

Chairman Martin remarked that there obviously were some 

differences of degree in the views of members. He then suggested 

that the Committee vote on the staff's alternative B.  

Mr. Shepardson said that he would like to hear the language 

Mr. Daane had proposed again before the vote was taken. Mr. Daane 

then repeated the version of the second paragraph he had suggested 

earlier, calling for the maintenance "of the somewhat easier condi

tions presently prevailing in the money market, unless bank credit 

appears to be resuming a rapid rate of expansion." 

Chairman Martin remarked that one objection to Mr. Daane's 

proposal was that it implied that the Manager had brought about 

conditions that the Committee was forced to accept. Such an



11/22/66 -93

implication would be wrong, he thought; the Manager had been 

trying to carry out the Committee's instructions all along.  

Mr. Daane replied the market often moved independently 

to some degree, and it did not necessarily respond precisely to 

the Committee's actions. Market conditions had eased recently 

as a result of the ebb and flow of funds and that change was not 

inconsistent with the Committee's previous directive. In his 

judgment the language he had proposed spelled out the objective 

a majority of the Committee sought. He would be willing to accept 

alternative B if it was interpreted in a manner consistent with 

his own proposal. But he would have to vote against it if it was 

interpreted to call for a degree of ease he considered excessive, 

such as zero net borrowed reserves and a bill rate down to 5 per 

cent.  

Chairman Martin observed that Mr. Daane's comment reflected 

the divergence of views he had mentioned. In his opinion a majority 

favored moving further toward ease rather than accepting existing 

market conditions.  

Mr. Hayes agreed with Mr. Daane that natural factors were 

capable of influencing money market conditions apart from the 

Committee's operations, and that that, in fact, had happened 

recently. Moreover, it was quite conceivable that there would be 

some deliberate moderate easing of conditions under directives



11/22/66 -94

of the type the Committee had issued recently, given the proviso 

clause they contained; otherwise there would have been no point 

in including the proviso. In the recent period there had been a 

tendency for the Desk to lean toward ease, in view of the behavior 

of the bank credit proxy. Under those circumstances he saw no 

reason against Committee acceptance of prevailing market condi

tions.  

Chairman Martin commented that there also was another view 

on the appropriate policy course at present--that the Committee 

should move a little further toward ease.  

A number of members concurred in the Chairman's statement.  

Mr. Mitchell said he would be prepared to vote for either 

Mr. Robertson's proposed language or the staff's alternative B, 

although with respect to the latter he shared the view that the 

10 per cent rate mentioned in the staff notes as an upper limit 

on bank credit expansion was too high.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that a 10 per cent limit would not 

strike him as excessive because it applied to a short period and 

followed several months of decline in the bank credit proxy.  

Chairman Martin said he had no objection to Mr. Robertson's 

proposed language if a majority preferred it, but he still leaned 

toward alternative B as drafted by the staff.



11/22/66

Mr. Wayne said he favored alternative B because he thought 

it was important for the record to indicate that the Committee had 

recognized at this meeting that the time had arrived for some 

change in policy.  

Mr. Daane asked whether the Committee would consider adop

tion of alternative B to be an overt change in System policy.  

Chairman Martin replied that the answer, in his judgment, 

was yes, although the change would be a modest one--about as modest 

as an overt move could be.  

Mr. Shepardson said it was his understanding that adoption 

of alternative B would not imply that the Committee found a 10 per 

cent growth in bank credit acceptable, and the Chairman agreed.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Messrs. Hayes 
and Daane dissenting, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed 
by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 

at this meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic 
activity is continuing to expand, with sharply rising 

defense expenditures but with evidences of moderating 
tendencies in various sectors of the private economy.  

While there has been some slowing in the pace of advance 

of broad price measures, upward price pressures persist 
for many finished goods and services. Bank credit and 

money have shown no expansion in recent months. Long

term interest rates have again risen somewhat after 

declining from their late summer peaks. The balance

-95-



11/22/66 -96

of payments remains a serious problem. In this situa
tion, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy 
to maintain money and credit conditions conducive to 
noninflationary economic expansion and progress toward 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to attaining somewhat easier 
conditions in the money market, unless bank credit 
appears to be resuming a rapid rate of expansion.  

Mr. Hayes said that he had cast a negative vote with reluc

tance; he found it necessary to dissent because of the interpretation 

of the action as an overt change in policy. Mr. Daane concurred in 

Mr. Hayes' statement. Mr. Shepardson indicated that his affirmative 

vote was cast with reluctance.  

Chairman Martin then noted that the Manager had recommended 

an amendment to the Committee's continuing authority directive to 

increase from $500 million to $1 billion the limit on holdings of 

short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased directly from the 

Treasury. In his judgment such action would be appropriate.  

There was general agreement with the Chairman's statement.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
paragraph 2 of the continuing authority 
directive was amended to read as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 

directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase 

directly from the Treasury for the account of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in cases where



11/22/66 -97

it seems desirable, to issue participations to one 
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special 
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be 
necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the rate charged 
on such certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent 
below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York at the time of such purchases, and provided 
further that the total amount of such certificates held 
at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not 
exceed $1 billion.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Daane, Mr. Holmes said that 

no formal action by the Committee to amend its directives was 

required to authorize the offsetting purchases of longer-term bills 

and sales of short-term bills that he had indicated earlier might 

be desirable under certain circumstances. He had brought the 

matter to the Committee's attention because the Desk had not 

customarily engaged in operations of that type.  

Mr. Daane then observed that he would favor such operations 

if the circumstances Mr. Holmes had described eventuated. Other 

members concurred.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, December 13, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



CONFIDENTIAL (FR) ATTACHMENT A 

November 21, 1966.  

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on November 22, 1966 

Alternative A 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is con
tinuing to expand, with sharply rising defense expenditures but with 
evidences of moderating tendencies in various sectors of the private 
economy. While there has been some slowing in the pace of advance 
of broad price measures, upward price pressures persist for many 
finished goods and services. Bank credit and money have shown no 
expansion in recent months. Long-term interest rates have again 
risen somewhat after declining from their late summer peaks. The 
balance of payments remains a serious problem. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to maintain money 
and credit conditions conducive to the restraint of inflationary 
pressures and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations until 
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 
maintaining about the same range of money market conditions as have 
prevailed since the previous meeting of the Committee; provided, 
however, that operations shall be modified in the light of bank credit 
developments.  

Alternative B 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that over-all domestic economic activity is con
tinuing to expand, with sharply rising defense expenditures but 
with evidences of moderating tendencies in various sectors of the 
private economy. While there has been some slowing in the pace of 
advance of broad price measures, upward price pressures persist for 
many finished goods and services. Bank credit and money have shown 
no expansion in recent months. Long-term interest rates have again 
risen somewhat after declining from their late summer peaks. The 
balance of payments remains a serious problem. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to maintain money 
and credit conditions conducive to noninflationary economic 
expansion and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.



-2

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 
a view to attaining somewhat easier conditions in the money market, 
unless bank credit appears to be resuming a rapid rate of expansion.


