









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

on Monday, July 11, 1966, at 10:30 a.m. This was a telephone 

conference meeting, and each participant was in Washington except 

as otherwise indicated in parentheses:

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 1/ 
Robertson 
Shepardson 
Swan, Alternate for Mr. Clay

(New York) 
(Philadelphia) 

(Cleveland) 
(Dallas) 

(San Francisco)

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Koch, Partee, Solomon, and Young, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account (New York) 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Vice Chairman Hayes said that today's meeting had been 

called in light of the strike that had begun at a number of major 

airlines on July 8, 1966. The purpose was to discuss a technique

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated in the minutes.



7/11/66

for open market operations that the System Account Manager 

thought might be needed under existing market conditions to 

cope with the emergency circumstances, involving a large rise 

in float and thus in reserve availability, that were likely to 

result from the strike.  

Note: On July 8, 1966, the Secretariat 
had transmitted the following message 
to members of the Board of Governors and 
(by telegram) to all Reserve Bank 
Presidents: 

The following outlines a proposal by the Manager 
of the System Open Market Account to offset the large 
increase in float that is likely to result from the 
airlines strike. Vice Chairman Hayes has called a 
telephone conference meeting of the voting members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee for 10:30 a.m., EDT, 
Monday, July 11, to discuss the proposal, with the 
understanding that no meeting will be required if a 
strike settlement is reached over the weekend.  

The airline strike which began this morning 
threatens to produce a sudden and substantial bulge 
in float and thus in reserve availability. In order 
to maintain the firm money market conditions desired 
by the Committee, large scale open market operations 
may be required to absorb these reserves--operations 
which would likely have to be reversed within a short 
span of time. Under current operating practices, the 
only course open to the Desk to accomplish the desired 
objectives would be to engage in large scale outright 
sales of Treasury issues and subsequent purchases of 
roughly the same magnitude when the strike is terminated.  
Given current market conditions, such operations may be 
difficult to accomplish, heavily taxing the facilities 
of the market and possibly causing sudden, large,and 
undesirable rate fluctuations.  

It is proposed, therefore, that the System utilize 
a new technique to accomplish the absorption and yet



7/11/66

provide an automatic subsequent reprovision of 
reserves. The technique involves sale of securities 
combined with a simultaneous purchase of the same 
securities for delivery at a later date. This 
mechanism would make clear to the market the temporary 
nature of the reserve absorption and would eliminate 

the possibility that the intent of the operations 
would be misunderstood. It would also provide a 
broader base for operations since the dealers would be 
able to reverse the transactions with other investors, 
particularly banks which acquired reserves from the 

float bulge and would, therefore, be in a position to 

acquire such short-term investments.  

There are a number of possible procedures which 
the Desk could utilize in undertaking such operations.  
The most clear-cut and simple approach would be an 
offer to dealers of short-term Treasury bills at the 
current market price together with a request that the 
dealers state the price at which they would be willing 
to resell the same issue for delivery at a fixed future 
date. This would provide a competitive criterion for 

determining the distribution of transactions among 
individual dealers and insure that transactions were 
executed on a best-price basis. The prices that would 
be established on the forward contracts would, of course, 
be influenced by the expected level of money rates over 

the intervening period.  

Transactions of this type would be processed in 

the same manner as all other outright transactions, 
with the usual allocation among the Reserve Banks. No 

change in the continuing authority directive appears 

necessary to carry out the operations envisioned. The 
continuing authority directive authorizes the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York "To buy or sell U.S. Government 

securities in the open market, from or to Government 

securities dealers and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 

System Open Market Account at market prices. . . Sales 

would be made for cash in the ordinary manner and the 
purchases for deferred delivery would be made under 

separate contracts. While there is no present established 

market price for deferred delivery contracts, a market



7/11/66

price would, in effect, be established as the result 
of the competitive reofferings to the System 
envisioned in the proposal. No change in the 
authorization to increase or decrease the amount of 
securities held in the Open Market Account would be 
necessary, since the $1.5 billion leeway presently 
authorized is on a commitment basis, and no net 
change in the Open Market Account on that basis 
would be involved. Because of the unusual nature 
of these operations, however, the matter is being 
submitted to the Committee for expressions of views.  

Mr. Hayes stressed that no change would be required 

in the Committee's continuing authority directive for the proposed 

technique to be employed. In his judgment, however, the suggested 

operations were sufficiently unusual in nature to make full 

discussion by the Committee desirable.  

Mr. Holmes supplemented the message of July 8 with the 

following remarks: 

A quantitative estimate of the impact of the 

airline strike on float is hard to come by. It will 

obviously be very large and the best guesses at the 
moment range upward from $0.5 billion to something 
in excess of $1 billion, with the possibility of 
large and erratic day-to-day fluctuations.  

Operating on the assumption that the Committee 
would not want the full impact of the increased float 

to be reflected in an easing of money market conditions 
and a rise in reserves in the banking system, we should 
try to offset as much as possible through open market 
operations.  

Given the atmosphere in the Government securities 
market, outright sales of Treasury bills on the scale 
needed do not appear feasible. On Friday, dealers had 

to pay as much as 6-1/2 per cent for bank money, and they 
are naturally reluctant to carry any substantial inventories 
at current rate levels. Some of the major dealers are as 
worried about the availability of financing as they are



7/11/66 -5

about the cost. While a large bulge in float would 
tend to produce lower financing costs, dealers would 
know that this would be only temporary, and they 
could not be sure that they could dispose of--or 
finance--any bills they took on now after the strike 
was settled.  

The proposal that was outlined in Friday's wire 
was made because, in my judgment, we could not do very 
much in the way of substantial reserve absorption, 
given all the circumstances, without creating close 
to disorderly conditions in the Government securities 
market. While an upward push in Treasury bill rates 
would not be disturbing, I do not believe the System 
can reasonably expect the dealers to run excessive 
risks in the current environment.  

To spell out the technique we would propose to use 
a bit: 

1. We would offer all dealers (including bank 
dealers) specific Treasury bill or bills at the going 
market price.  

2. We would ask dealers to reoffer these bills 
to us for delivery in two to three days.  

3. We would select from those reofferings those 
that would be lowest in price.  

We are assuming that we will have to pay a higher 
price on the bills we repurchase in order to make an 
allowance for financing costs. We expect competition 
to keep this differential to a minimum, but cannot be 
certain, until we operate, just how much this will be.  

On a three-month bill, for example, a three basis point 

spread would cover dealer financing costs of 5.5 per cent 

for 3 days. On shorter bills the spread would widen 

out substantially.  
If the Committee approves the proposal we would 

contemplate starting operations tomorrow when, according 

to our staff estimates, the first major impact of the 

strike will be felt. This would permit us to explain 

the new technique to all dealers this afternoon and give 

them ample time to determine the basis on which they 

might operate.  

Mr. Robertson said he was highly reluctant to approve the 

Manager's proposal. The suggested technique would, in effect, 

convert dealers to brokers, and it risked creating windfall profits



7/11/66 -6

for them. If the objective was simply to avoid publishing reserve 

figures that might be taken to imply a shift to an easier monetary 

policy, he did not think it was worth running the risk of creating 

such profits. Sophisticated market participants were not likely 

to be misled by shallower net borrowed reserve figures since they 

would be fully aware of the impact of the strike on the level of 

float; and, in any case, the published figures could be accompanied 

by an explanatory statement indicating that the change did not 

reflect a policy shift. Moreover, a rise in float might increase 

banks' demands for Treasury bills sufficiently to enable the Desk 

to sell bills in the usual way.  

Mr. Robertson indicated that he would not object to the 

proposed technique if there was a real problem rather than simply 

one of possibly misleading the public on the stance of policy.  

At present, however, it was not known whether the strike would be 

of long or short duration, and Mr. Farrell of the Board's staff 

had reported at the Board meeting this morning that a spot check 

suggested that the rise in float thus far was small. Perhaps 

float would increase as much as Mr. Holmes had suggested, and a 

real problem would exist; but that should not be taken for granted, 

nor should it necessarily be assumed that the strike would be an 

extended one. In sum, he would be inclined to avoid using the 

proposed technique if at all possible.



7/11/66

Mr. Hayes commented that decisions with respect to use 

of the technique obviously would have to be taken in light of 

actual developments. However, the Board's staff was projecting 

an increase in float by Wednesday of this week on the order of 

$1 billion, which was a very large amount. He agreed that no 

special measures would be required if there was to be only a 

small fluctuation in the figures, but if the change was large 

it would lead to excessive ease in the market of a type he 

thought the Committee would want to avoid.  

Mr. Hickman said that the greatest difficulty appeared 

to be in estimating the change in float. The estimates available 

now were highly uncertain, and whatever the method the Desk 

employed to reduce reserves it might overshoot the mark. Accord

ingly, he thought that for the time being operations should be 

conducted in terms of the tone and feel of the market, while an 

effort was made through a canvass of the individual Reserve Banks 

to develop better figures on float.  

In general, Mr. Hickman continued, his view was somewhat 

similar to that of Mr. Robertson. He would not be overly concerned 

if shallower net borrowed reserve figures were published while an 

effort to get better estimates of float was underway. If some 

special measures then proved necessary, those proposed by the 

Manager seemed reasonable, assuming they were agreeable to the



7/11/66 -8

dealers. He would not want to see the proposed technique used, 

however, unless there was a real need.  

Mr. Holmes remarked that better estimates of float 

obviously would be helpful. However, even the minimum estimates 

of the expected rise were very large, and it was likely that the 

Desk would have to be in a position by early tomorrow to decide 

on operations.  

Mr. Irons expressed approval of the proposed technique, 

which seemed to him an ingenious means of avoiding a disturbance 

in the market. He assumed, however, that it would be employed 

only if there was a substantial rise in float--on the order of 

$500 million or $1 billion--and not if the increase was only 

$200-$300 million or so. He was not worried about possible adverse 

reactions because he thought it would generally be realized that 

the operation had been undertaken to enable the Committee to 

resolve the problem with minimum disturbance. At the same time, 

he would not be concerned about publication of somewhat shallower 

net borrowed reserve figures if they resulted from a substantial 

rise in float. In any case, the strike might not last for more 

than another day or two.  

Mr. Holmes said that the Desk obviously would not propose 

to use the suggested technique unless it appeared necessary. At 

the moment, however, it was his judgment that the technique would



7/11/66 -9

have to be employed unless the Committee was prepared to see 

marginal reserves rise well into the free reserve area.  

Mr. Shepardson commented that the point Mr. Robertson 

had made on the possibility of windfall profits to dealers was 

an important one. Conceivably, the rise in float could get out 

of hand and an operation of the type proposed might be required, 

but at the present time he thought it would be most unfortunate 

if it were undertaken. With the knowledge that the banking 

community would have of the source of whatever degree of ease 

developed, and with publication of a statement to inform the more 

general public, there was little danger that anyone would be 

misled with respect to the Committee's policy by published 

figures. Thus--for the short-run, certainly--he thought it 

would be unwise to undertake an operation of the type proposed.  

Mr. Maisel said that he was somewhat concerned about the 

possibility of excessive ease in the market. However, he would 

suggest a different technique--that of asking the Treasury to 

increase its balance at the Reserve Banks by about $1 billion.  

If that large a volume of reserves were withdrawn the Desk presumably 

would have to operate to ease rather than to firm, and it could 

buy securities in the usual manner. Under the approach he 

suggested the possibility of windfall profits to dealers would 

be avoided.



7/11/66

Mr. Holmes said that plans called for having the Treasury 

balance increase somewhat during this period, perhaps by several 

hundred million dollars, to help absorb reserves. However, he 

thought there was grave risk in relying on changes in the Treasury 

balance to meet a problem that was essentially the System's; on 

other occasions the Treasury might want to change its balance at 

a time when the Committee thought that inadvisable. Thus, while 

there was some room for such an operation it was quite limited.  

Moreover, at the present time Treasury calls to increase its balance 

would fall on the large "C" banks. This week the city banks were 

under extreme pressure, not only because they were in large basic 

deficit positions but also because country banks would be running 

their excess reserves up to very high levels. Since the rise in 

float would be rather evenly distributed throughout the banking 

system, offsetting it by calls on the large banks alone would be 

discriminatory.  

Mr. Brimmer said he was as concerned as other members 

were with the possible embarrassment to the Committee if substantial 

windfall gains accrued to dealers as a result of System operations.  

On the other hand, he thought it would be appropriate for the 

Committee to view such gains as a necessary cost of effecting 

the type of transactions deemed most helpful in producing the 

desired level of reserves. He was prepared to support the proposed

-10-



7/11/66 -11

technique with a clear understanding that the Manager would use 

it only if necessary. He suspected that float would be somewhat 

higher than Mr. Farrell had implied, partly because of pessimistic 

readings of the outlook for a quick settlement of the strike.  

He thought the Committee should focus not only on the size of 

the increase in float but also on the likely duration of the 

problem. He was impressed by the reluctance of dealers to increase 

their positions in bills, given their high financing costs and the 

uncertainties regarding the availability of financing. In his 

judgment the Manager needed additional techniques, and he was 

confident that the Manager would use them only if necessary.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that the Manager had mentioned the 

desirability of holding conversations with the dealers today in 

the expectation that it would be necessary to operate soon there

after. It appeared, then, that it would be inappropriate to 

postpone a decision until better estimates of float were available, 

a possibility mentioned earlier, He did not believe that refinement 

of the statistics would improve the grounds for decision sufficiently 

to warrant delay; the information at hand was adequate to justify 

a decision, particularly since prospects for a prompt settlement 

of the strike were not good.  

Mr. Holmes said that he would expect the forces of 

competition among dealers to minimize the probability of windfall



7/11/66 -12

profits for them. The Desk would be able to assess the spread 

between the price at which bills would be sold to the dealers 

and those at which the dealers reoffered the bills to the System 

for deferred delivery, and to judge whether those spreads were 

excessive in light of current financing costs. If the offers 

turned out to involve excessive spreads a decision could be 

made not to enter into the contracts.  

Mr. Robertson asked whether the proposal was based on the 

assumption that banks acquiring additional reserves as float rose 

would simply let their excess reserves build up.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the banks probably would use 

those reserves to repay any borrowings from the System, and would 

lower their dealer financing rates. In general, there probably 

would be a temporary easing in short-term money rates.  

Mr. Robertson then asked whether the dealers would not be 

in a better position to carry inventories if banks lowered financing 

rates.  

Mr. Holmes responded that they would be better able to 

carry present inventories, but he thought they would be unwilling 

to increase their inventories since they would know that the lower 

financing costs were likely to be temporary.  

Mr. Swan said he felt some reluctance about the proposal.  

He saw no reason for concern, at least in the short run, if the



7/11/66 -13

rise in float resulted in repayment of bank borrowings from the 

System or in a decline in the Federal funds rate; and if banks 

invested the funds in securities the Desk should be able to sell 

bills. In general, he questioned the extent to which the 

Committee should try to offset the rise in float, particularly 

since the reasons for that rise would be well known to market 

participants.  

Mr. Bopp said he was prepared to go along with the 

proposal outlined, recognizing that it carried some risks. Like 

Mr. Irons, he thought it was an ingenious technique for dealing 

with the problem.  

Mr. Hayes observed that if the technique was not used 

wisely it obviously could have unfortunate results, but he was 

prepared to trust the Manager to use it wisely. The uncertainty 

with respect to the probable size of the increase in float and 

the question of the degree to which it would be necessary to 

offset the rise both would call for the exercise of discretion by 

the Manager, as would judgments as to whether proceeds to the 

dealers would involve excessive windfall profits. Despite the 

uncertainties, Mr. Hayes thought it was desirable for the Committee 

to attempt to deal with possible unfortunate developments. He 

would be disturbed by the appearance of sizable free reserves 

even if they could be readily explained, because they might have



7/11/66 -14

pervasive easing effects that could result in confusing the 

general public with respect to the Committee's policy stance.  

The technique proposed seemed to him to be a useful tool, and 

he would be inclined to give the Manager leeway and the benefit 

of any doubts, in the hope and belief that he would use the 

technique wisely.  

Mr. Hickman said he gathered that the Manager would 

consider the technique to be something to be held in reserve 

for use only if needed.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that that was his understanding also, 

but the need to use the technique might develop quite soon--perhaps 

tomorrow.  

Mr. Holmes commented that, according to New York Reserve 

Bank estimates, the strike would result in an increase in float 

tomorrow of about $600 million. The Board's staff expected the 

impact to be on Wednesday, and estimated it at about $1 billion.  

For the next statement week the estimates of the impact ranged 

from $600 million to $2 billion. In short, the problem appeared 

to be an immediate one. He added that in preparing their estimates 

the staffs at the Board and the New York Bank had discussed the 

situation with various Reserve Banks.  

Mr. Hickman observed that the Cleveland Reserve Bank had 

made special arrangements with certain other Reserve Banks for



7/11/66 -15

moving checks. As a result of those arrangements he expected 

there to be no substantial increase in float in the Fourth District.  

Mr. Bopp said that the Philadelphia Reserve Bank estimated 

that there would be no problem with respect to about 60 per cent 

of their checks, which moved by truck. The order of magnitude of 

the float involved in the remaining 40 per cent would be about 

$40 million. With respect to the general problem, the Board might 

temporarily change the deferment schedule on one-day city items to 

cut down the float created by the strike.  

Mr. Swan observed that on the basis of advices from the 

Post Office--which might be overly optimistic--he did not expect 

any great problems in the Twelfth District.  

Mr. Irons commented that at the moment his expectations 

for the Eleventh District were similar to Mr. Swan's. He would 

approve the proposal, however, as a standby tool, and depend on the 

Manager's judgment with respect to the need to use it.  

Mr. Hayes remarked the Manager could be expected to keep 

in close touch with people at the Board and Reserve Banks and to 

try to stay on top of the situation. He (Mr. Hayes) would be 

pleased if there was no need to use the proposed technique, and 

he knew that the Manager was not eager to employ it. Nevertheless 

it seemed both legitimate and wise to have the tool available if 

needed.



7/11/66 -16

Mr. Brimmer asked how the Manager would proceed if the 

Committee did not encourage use of the proposed technique.  

Mr. Holmes replied that for the current statement week 

the Desk would be faced with the prospect of very low net 

borrowed reserves and some risk--although that was less likely--of 

positive free reserves. At the start of the following statement 

week the Desk probably would be looking at free reserves on the 

order of $500 million or higher. He would try to withdraw 

reserves by the usual kinds of operations, but he expected that 

he would not be able to sell any volume of securities in the 

market. Thus, the Committee would have to be reconciled to the 

appearance of free reserve figures. In that connection, he was 

impressed by the operation that had been undertaken on Friday 

to sell $100 million of bills for foreign accounts. Some major 

nonbank dealers had been willing to bid for those bills only at 

yields 15-20 basis points above the market. That represented a 

measure of the reluctance of the dealers to take on additional 

bills, despite the fact that the volume involved was not large.  

Mr. Maisel noted that he had to leave the meeting at this 

point to keep another engagement. To state his position briefly, 

he favored approving the proposed technique, but at the same 

time he would strongly urge the Manager to avoid its use if at 

all possible. It should be thought of as a device for use in a



7/11/66

more severe emergency than now appeared to exist, and in any case 

its use should be postponed for at least a day or so.  

Mr. Maisel then withdrew from the meeting.  

Mr. Robertson noted that the increase in reserve require

ments recently approved by the Board, which would absorb some 

reserves, would become effective at reserve city banks on Thursday 

of this week. He added that the Board had been considering the 

possibility of issuing an explanatory statement if the reserve 

figures published appeared to indicate that the stance of System 

policy had changed. The statement contemplated might be along 

the lines of the following draft: 

The movement of checks between cities and between 
Federal Reserve Districts has been slowed by the air
line strike. The Federal Reserve Banks are making 
every effort to minimize delay of intercity and 
interdistrict check clearances by the use of air 
carriers still operating and by the use of ground 
transportation.  

Nevertheless, some effects of the temporary 
slowdown in check clearings can be expected to be felt 
in financial markets, and to be reflected in various 
data, including the weekly Federal Reserve Statistics 
relating to factors affecting member bank reserves.  

An increase in the amount of reserves available 
to the banking system may be occasioned by the delay 
in check clearings. While the Federal Reserve should 
be able to absorb at least part of any reserve increase 
so occasioned, it may well be that some easing in money 
market conditions may ensue, and that figures on net 
borrowed reserves of member banks may be smaller than 
otherwise might be the case. Such occurrences should be 
temporary, and should not be interpreted as reflecting 
any change in monetary and credit policy.

-17-



7/11/66 -18

Mr. Robertson commented that the Board had not yet decided to 

issue a statement of that kind, but had had the draft prepared 

for possible use if the need arose.  

Mr. Swan asked whether it might not be desirable to 

postpone any discussions of the proposed technique with dealers 

if the Committee decided that it should not be used immediately.  

Mr. Holmes agreed that it would not be wise to discuss 

the technique with the dealers if it was not clear that it was 

likely to be used. He added that he had just been informed that 

the latest projection of net borrowed reserves for the current 

week was $140 million. That projection allowed for the estimated 

impact of the strike on float tomorrow and Wednesday.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he understood that the projections 

also made allowances for the reserve requirement increase. He 

then suggested that the Committee be polled on the question of 

whether the Manager should use the proposed technique if necessary.  

There had been enough expressions of concern today to make it 

quite clear that if used it should be only with reluctance, and 

as the least undesirable of the available alternatives.  

In the course of the poll all members of the Committee 

indicated that they would approve use of the proposed technique, 

but a number supplemented statements to that effect with further 

comments.



7/11/66 -19

Mr. Swan said his position was based on an understanding 

that the technique would not be used until the evidence of its 

need was considerably stronger than it was at present.  

Mr. Robertson said he approved the proposal with great 

reluctance and with the hope that it would be used only if the 

situation worsened considerably.  

Mr. Shepardson associated himself with Mr. Robertson's 

position.  

Mr. Brimmer said it would be agreeable to him for the 

Manager to proceed with the discussions with dealers tomorrow if 

he found that necessary.  

Mr. Hickman said he would prefer some delay in use of the 

technique, and that any use be reluctant. He hoped that it would 

not be necessary to use the technique at all.  

Mr. Hayes said that the Committee's intent seemed clear; 

the Manager could use the proposed technique but he should 

recognize the high degree of reluctance expressed by individual 

members. Since the Committee had unanimously approved the 

proposal, however, he thought it should be prepared to rely on 

the Manager's judgment and analyses. He asked whether any members 

disagreed with that statement.  

Mr. Swan commented that not only would he prefer to delay 

implementation pending further developments, but he also thought



7/11/66 -20

that the Desk should not necessarily offset all of the expected 

increase in float.  

Mr. Hayes acknowledged that individual members had expressed 

various kinds and degrees of qualification. Nevertheless, the 

Manager was faced with the need to make operating decisions, and 

he had to know whether he was free to use the technique if in his 

judgment it was necessary.  

Mr. Robertson said there was no question in his mind on 

that point. All members had confidence in the Manager, and he had 

been empowered to use the technique. The hope had been expressed 

that it would be used with reluctance and that its use would be 

avoided if possible.  

Mr. Hayes commented that Mr. Robertson's observation could 

stand as a statement of the Committee's consensus.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Assistant Secretary


