









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 22, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman, 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Shepardson 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Wayne, Scanlon, Francis, and 
Alternate Members of the Federal 

Committee

Mr. Patterson, President of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee, 

Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors

Swan, 
Open Market



3/22/66 -2

Messrs. Latham and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Ratchford, Taylor, 
Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, 
Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Nelson, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Stiles, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Chairman Martin noted that a new member was attending his 

first meeting of the Open Market Committee today--Andrew F. Brimmer, 

a member of the Board of Governors--and that Mr. Brimmer had executed 

his oath of office as a member of the Committee prior to today's 

meeting. The Chairman also noted that since the preceding meeting 

of the Committee Mr. Robertson had been appointed Vice Chairman of 

the Board of Governors.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of 
the meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on March 1, 1966, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open 

Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the 

period March 1 through March 16, 1966, and a supplemental report for



3/22/66 -3

March 17 through 21, 1966. Copies of these reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said the Treasury might soon have to transfer a sizable amount, 

possibly $75 or $100 million, from the gold stock to the Stabili

zation Fund. Otherwise, prospective orders between now and the 

month end would pretty well clean out the Stabilization Fund. The 

Russians were still out of the market and, while it remained 

possible that they might make some massive sales between now and 

the month end, the probability decreased with each day that passed.  

Meanwhile, however, the continuing prospect of Russian sales sooner 

or later this spring was helping to dampen market speculation, while 

heavy arrivals of gold from South Africa had also helped to relieve 

pressure on the gold pool. Earlier South Africa had been in the 

process of rebuilding its gold stock and had withheld gold from 

the market, but that situation now seemed to have turned, at least 

temporarily. So far this month, intervention by the London gold 

pool had been minimal.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, sterling had 

again been in the limelight, mainly owing to election uncertainties, 

sizable swings in monthly trade figures, and widespread rumors of 

possible discount rate increases in the U.S., in Britain, or on the 

continent. In trying to adjust to those pressures, the Bank of



3/22/66 -4

England allowed the sterling rate to slip from a level of $2.8032 

on February 16 to a low point of $2.7930 on March 9. That was a 

fairly steep decline and created the risk that selling pressures on 

sterling might cumulate on the way down. The Bank of England was 

very much aware of that risk and each day had consulted with the 

New York Bank on the state of sentiment in the London and New 

York markets. On March 9, the New York Bank staff had advised the 

Bank of England that in their view the risk of an adverse shift 

in market sentiment had become serious, and with the concurrence of 

the British the New York Bank had moved in to bid each bank in the 

New York market for sterling. That was more or less a repetition of 

the tactic employed last September 10, except that this time the 

rate was not pursued upward; the object was only to establish a 

temporary floor. In any event, the market reacted strongly upward 

and sterling had subsequently fluctuated in a quiet market within 

the range of $2.7945 to $2.7960. The Bank of England was well 

satisfied with the result of the operation, which provided another 

illustration of how effective such a tactic could be in stabilizing 

expectations. Indeed, it was so powerful that it was important it 

not be overused. The recent operation was only the second of its 

type, and he hoped that similar operations would not be required 

too often in the future.



3/22/66 -5

Mr. Coombs said he understood that, in addition to dollars 

expended for market intervention and settlement of forward contracts 

during March, the Bank of England had reversed a $50 million swap 

drawing with the Bank of Italy and had also paid off another $50 

million of short-term debt to the Bank for International Settlements.  

The British might again want to avoid showing a reserve decline at 

the month end, and so might approach the Federal Reserve for some 

type of credit facility. He thought that it would be appropriate 

to finance part of the reserve short-fall by a drawing on the swap 

line, but he hoped that the British would obtain the bulk of the 

funds they needed by drawing upon the $200 million of Treasury 

funds made available in the September package. He had already raised 

that question with the Treasury and was hopeful that they would 

agree.  

At the last Basle meeting, Mr. Coombs continued, the Bank 

of England reported that they had obtained a sympathetic response 

from the International Monetary Fund to their request for a $500 

million standby facility to provide a partial backstop for the 

$1 billion central bank credit package now under negotiation. The 

BIS might also be prepared to take $250 million of medium-term 

British bonds, equivalent to the U.S. "Roosa bonds," which would 

enlarge the backstop facility to a total of $750 million. In 

his view that probably would be adequate. If the Bank of England



3/22/66 -6

were to use the whole $1 billion credit package provided by the 

central banks and then found that the market situation did not 

reverse itself within a year's time, the Bank could legitimately 

be expected to supplement the $750 million backstop now in sight 

by drafts upon its own reserves in the amount of $250 million, 

thus permitting full liquidation of the central bank credits.  

That, in effect was what they had done to repay drawings on the 

swap line with the System. There were other ways also in which 

the matter could be taken care of, and it would be a pity if the 

whole package were to be unduly delayed by debates over the absence 

of a backstop for the remaining $250 million of central bank credits.  

Mr. Coombs concluded by noting that he had no recommendations 

to set before the Committee today.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that in his judgment the "rescue" 

operations for sterling that Mr. Coombs had described were graphic 

cases of massive intervention in foreign exchange markets that did 

not reflect well on the System. He was sure that Mr. Coombs meant 

what he said about not using such tactics too often. But the 

Committee should be wary of yielding to the temptation to protect 

the market in a way that perhaps was hostile to the nation's long

run interests.  

Secondly, Mr. Mitchell continued, he was concerned about 

the British use of its swap line with the System for window-dressing



3/22/66 -7

purposes. That matter had been discussed by the Committee on 

earlier occasions, and it had been agreed that the System's own 

true position should be made known at all times. If the System 

had not met that goal perfectly, it had come close. He questioned, 

however, whether there was any substantial difference in principle 

between window dressing by the System and the Committee's per

mitting other countries to use its facilities for that purpose.  

Perhaps the latter could be justified at times, but not as a 

continuing policy.  

Mr. Coombs said he would comment separately on each of 

Mr. Mitchell's two points. On the first, he perhaps had not expressed 

himself clearly in his earlier remarks. The New York Bank had 

intervened across the board in the sterling market on two occasions-

successfully both times. The operation last September 10 probably 

was the one factor that had averted a possible serious breakdown of 

the whole international payments system. He hesitated to think of 

what the consequences might have been if it had not been successful.  

The operation had been used again on March 9, when the market was 

unsettled by the British elections, and it had given the market a 

lengthy breathing space. His conclusion was that the tactic was so 

powerful that the Committee would not want to dull its effectiveness 

by using it too often. But the Committee did have responsibility 

for defending the dollar, directly and indirectly. Given the 

power to change market sentiment when that sentiment was based on



3/22/66 -8

exaggerated expectations and not on underlying realities, he thought 

the System would be derelict if it did not use it.  

As to Mr. Mitchell's remarks on window dressing, Mr. Coombs 

said, he supposed it could be argued that to some extent the System 

was disguising the true position of the U.S. every time it drew on 

its swap lines and used the proceeds to buy dollars from foreign 

central banks, thereby avoiding gold losses. The System's swap 

operations were reported fully every six months, and he thought it 

was a reasonable procedure to make such reports after the market 

had had a chance to readjust. British drawings on the swap lines 

came to more or less the same thing; they strengthened the U.K.  

reserve position and forestalled reserve losses. The Bank of England 

reported any use of its swap lines each month, although they did with

hold information on the amount of the drawings for several months.  

In one respect the British might be said to provide a fuller 

accounting than the U.S. did, since they reported drawings within 

a month whereas the System did so only at six-month intervals.  

Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that the Committee should 

give a clear and accurate accounting of its operations. As to the 

British, in his judgment their failure to disclose the amount of 

their swap drawings was tantamount to no accounting at all. He 

then asked whether the System's swap drawings were reflected in its 

weekly statement.



3/22/66

Mr. Coombs replied in the negative. He remarked that such 

a suggestion would raise a major policy issue, and Mr. Mitchell 

agreed.  

Mr. Daane commented that immediate disclosure of operations 

of the type being discussed clearly would have a market impact and 

in his opinion would be undesirable. The System did disclose such 

operations after an appropriate interval, and thus reduced the 

possibility of adverse effects.  

Mr. Mitchell expressed concern that the Committee might be 

drifting into the position of saying that the market was not entitled 

to know the true situation. He thought that would be a dangerous 

position, and one that risked reactions that could lead to a 

worsening of the underlying situation.  

Chairman Martin thought it was important that the Committee 

bear in mind the points Mr. Mitchell had made. At the same time, he 

did not think the Committee would want to go to the extreme of 

reporting all of its foreign exchange operations immediately, just 

as it would not want to announce its domestic policy decision 

following each meeting.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed that the latter procedure would be 

undesirable. He added, however, that the information in the System's 

published statements gave knowledgeable people some idea of the 

nature of the Committee's decisions on domestic policy.



3/22/66 -10

Chairman Martin commented that the situation with respect 

to the System's foreign exchange operations was affected by the 

fact that they were experimental and that the System had not yet 

accumulated a great deal of experience with them. It also was 

important to note that the existing foreign exchange markets had 

developed relatively recently; there were only fragmentary markets 

after World War II, until the major currencies became convertible 

in 1958. He shared Mr. Coombs' view that the two recent operations 

in sterling had been quite successful but if repeated too often 

such operations would lose their effectiveness. And he agreed with 

Mr. Mitchell that the Committee certainly did not want to engage in 

window dressing or to obscure the realities of the situation in 

other ways.  

A discussion then ensued of the technical differences between 

the "across the board" operations in sterling of September and March 

and the more common transactions the New York Bank undertook for its 

own account or that of others.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the 
System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
March 1 through March 21, 1966, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to comment on the 

meetings he had recently attended in Paris and Basle.



3/22/66 -11

Mr. Daane noted that Mr. Coombs had referred briefly to the 

part of the meeting in Basle that was concerned with the British 

credit package. There also had been an extended discussion in 

Basle following the report by the Chairman of the Group of Ten on 

developments at the meeting of the Deputies in Paris during the 

previous week.  

The Deputies met on March 7, 8, and 9, Mr. Daane said. The 

meeting took place against the background of reports in the French 

press during the preceding weekend that General de Gaulle had 

instructed the French delegation to take the position that there was 

no need for any new plan for reserve creation, even on the basis of 

contingency planning. The French made an extended statement of 

their position early in the proceedings at Paris and again at Basle.  

From both statements it appeared that the French position was about 

as follows: First, they did not believe there now was a need for 

any new reserve plan or for additions to liquidity. They stressed 

that their own suggestion for monetary reform, advanced in September 

1963, had been based on the assumption that the U.S. and the U.K.  

would have restored equilibrium in their respective balances of 

payments, but that both countries still suffered from "massive 

disequilibrium." 

Secondly, Mr, Daane continued, the French pointed out that 

in their earlier proposal for monetary reform they had suggested a



3/22/66 -12

new asset closely linked to gold and created for a limited group 

of countries. They now found that in their discussions the 

Deputies had moved a long way from this French concept, and were 

considering a reserve asset not linked to gold. They also thought 

that by considering proposals to include countries outside a limited 

group in reserve creation, the Deputies were confusing the subject 

of aid to underdeveloped countries with that of liquidity creation.  

For those reasons the French felt that it was necessary for them to 

take the position that now was not the time either to consider 

actively or to put into effect a new reserve creation scheme. In 

their view the Deputies should confine themselves simply to "study 

and reflection" on the subject. They did say that the press stories 

had overdramatized the French position by implying that France would 

withdraw from the discussions. They had no such intention; they 

expected to participate in any discussions of reasonable proposals, 

but on a "study and reflection" basis rather than looking toward 

setting up a scheme for actual use in the foreseeable future.  

The reaction of the representatives of the other nine 

countries, Mr. Daane said, was that they should attempt to move ahead 

with contingency planning. They did not agree that the Deputies 

should confine themselves to study and reflection, for several 

reasons. First, the mandate they had been given called for searching 

out areas of agreement, and not simply for coming back with suggestions



3/22/66 -13

for further study. Secondly, there was of necessity a long time 

lag involved between the conception of a reserve asset scheme and 

its activation. That fact was emphasized by Mr. Deming of the U.S.  

delegation, who pointed out that even if the Group agreed in 

principle on some scheme, no new asset could come into being until 

1968 or 1969 at the earliest.  

Another point, stressed by Chairman Emminger and endorsed 

by a number of the delegations, was that a call for further study by 

the Group of Ten at this juncture would be extremely unsettling to 

foreign exchange markets and might provoke speculation in gold, since 

it would amount to saying to the world at large that the Ten were 

unable to devise a method for making the future international payments 

system viable. Finally, the Deputies had been instructed to include 

in their report suggestions for proceeding with the second phase of 

the exercise, and if they were to move into that second phase with 

widely divergent positions they would be exposed to consequences that 

no one really wanted. Thus, it seemed fair to say that the Deputies 

reacted negatively to the French position.  

The Deputies group then turned to a lengthy discussion of 

the first of two papers put forth by the Belgian delegation, Mr. Daane 

said. That paper explained certain well-known Belgian proposals for 

modifying and strengthening the facilities of the IMF--for example, 

by making the gold tranche more automatic and changing its legal



3/22/66 -14

status so that it could qualify as a reserve asset of member 

countries. There also was a fairly full discussion of a paper the 

Italians had submitted earlier, calling for the harmonization of 

gold reserve ratios. While that proposal seemed to elicit little 

enthusiasm, there was fairly general recognition that the problem 

had to be kept in mind in considering any reserve scheme. In 

effect, the Italian proposal was viewed simply as an element of any 

over-all reserve asset plan.  

Also, Mr. Daane continued, there was a discussion of a long 

IMF document entitled "Need for Reserves," which took the position 

that reserves should grow at a rate of 3 to 4 per cent, or $2 to $3 

billion, a year. The consensus at the meeting was that there was no 

really good way of quantifying needed reserve growth. That point 

was emphasized by Chairman Emminger with the support of the Dutch 

delegation, and also by Mr. Deming. It was noted that the figures 

used by the U.S. delegation at the previous meeting, and also those 

in the Emminger proposals, had been purely illustrative. At the 

same time, it was recognized that the question of needed reserve 

growth was not one for decision on an ad hoc basis each year. No 

delegation had specific suggestions on the subject, but there seemed 

to be agreement that reserve needs should be calculated on a global 

basis and in terms of longer-run trends.



3/22/66 -15

The Deputies then turned to a question-and-answer discussion, 

along the lines of that held at the previous meeting, of another 

Belgian paper that put forth a new proposal entirely centered in the 

IMF and quite similar in some respects to one prong of the U.S.  

proposal. There was a proviso, however, that any country using the 

new automatic drawing rights would have to put up an equal amount of 

gold or make equal use of another ordinary IMF drawing right. There 

was little support for that aspect of the Belgian proposal.  

Mr. Daane went on to say that Mr. Polak discussed a two-part 

proposal put forward by the Managing Director of the IMF for the 

creation of reserves through the IMF, so that the Fund now had a 

proposal of its own on the table. The first part involved quasi

automatic drawing rights similar to the special drawing rights of 

the U.S. proposal, which could be implemented without amending the 

Articles. Both the credit lines and the Fund's regular assets would 

stand behind the new drawing rights. The second part involved a 

reserve unit for all members of the Fund, to be created by an 

affiliate of the Fund. The reserve unit would be established by an 

exchange of claims between all members and the Fund affiliate.  

Allocation of units would not be made available to members with 

outstanding credit tranche drawings until they had been repaid in 

an amount equal to the allocation. One important aspect of the Fund's 

proposal was the sequence suggested; namely, to go forward initially



3/22/66 -16

with the first part, with the expectation that it would be gradually 

superseded by the second part. The latter was envisaged as likely 

to prove the more flexible of the two.  

With respect to the Deputies' future schedule, Mr. Daane 

said, a four-day meeting would be held in Washington on April 19-22, 

which hopefully would be the first report-drafting session. Another 

meeting would be held in Rome in mid-May to bring the report close 

to completion, with the aim of putting it in final form by late 

June or early July. The Canadian delegation had been asked to 

prepare a draft of the report's introduction before the April meeting, 

and three delegations, including the U.S., were to prepare suggested 

outlines. The outlines would be considered by a working party on 

the Monday preceding the Washington meeting, and then probably 

would be discussed by the Deputies. The objectives of the group 

seemed to be to continue to move forward and complete the report 

within the time schedule set; and to give it as positive a cast as 

possible, by stressing the areas of agreement--while, of course, 

noting the areas of disagreement.  

At the subsequent Basle meeting, Mr. Daane remarked, Chairman 

Emminger reviewed the proceedings at the Deputies' meeting, and 

emphasized the need for a positive approach. Much of the discussion 

at Basle was a replay of that at Paris, but in some respects the 

thinking was at variance with that in Paris. There was a general



3/22/66 -17

feeling at Basle that there was no need for additional liquidity 

now or in the foreseeable future, and there was little enthusiasm 

for the U.S. proposal or for any of the other proposals. The main 

emphasis was on the need for the U.S. to bring its balance of 

payments into equilibrium. However, there also was recognition of 

the problem noted in Paris--that it would be disadvantageous for 

the System as a whole if the Group of Ten report simply called for 

further study.  

In concluding, Mr. Daane noted that Mr. Robert Solomon of 

the Board's staff was a member of the U.S. delegation at the Paris 

meeting and that Mr. Coombs had attended the Basle meeting. He 

thought they might have additional comments on the proceedings.  

Mr. Coombs said he would note that the reaction he received 

in private conversations at Basle was one of serious pessimism as 

to the possible areas of agreement in the present negotiations. If 

that pessimism was justified it could have serious implications 

for the gold and foreign exchange markets.  

Chairman Martin commented that he had discussed the IMF 

proposal, to which Mr. Daane had referred, at some length with 

Managing Director Schweitzer of the Fund. The proposal was an 

important one, and he thought it would be desirable, if possible, 

for copies of the full text to be made available to members of 

the Committee.



3/22/66

Mr. Daane remarked that copies of the proposal did exist.  

He noted, however, that the representative of the Fund at the 

Group of Ten meeting had made some rather sharp comments regarding 

leaks to the press of matters coming before the Deputies, 

particularly in connection with the French position and with the 

details of the Fund proposal. He was not sure how the Fund would 

react to a request for copies for use of the Committee.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thought there was no 

danger of press leaks through the Committee. He asked whether 

Messrs. Holland and Sherman would explore the possibility of 

obtaining copies for the Committee, on the understanding that they 

would be treated as extremely confidential.  

In response to a question by Mr. Hickman, Mr. Daane said 

that there seemed to be relatively greater support among the Deputies 

for some type of reserve unit creation than for additional 

drawing rights in the Fund. The U.S. proposal had included provision 

for drawing rights, and the Belgian proposal had involved only 

such rights. The British also supported such an approach, but with 

the possible exception of the Italians it appeared that no other 

delegation did.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Brill to comment on a 

meeting that he had attended in Paris last week, of the Economic 

Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 

Development.

-18-



3/22/66 -19

Mr. Brill said that the meeting focused on the domestic 

economic prospects and balance of payments outlook for a few key 

countries and on the issue of the effect of capital controls in the 

United States on European capital markets.  

In commenting on U.S. economic prospects, Gardner Ackley, 

head of the U.S. delegation to the meeting, reported on some recent 

trends in sales and prices and indicated that, while the need for 

further restraint was not clear at the moment, the Government was 

prepared to adopt whatever measures should prove to be needed.  

Mr. Trued, the Treasury member of the delegation, challenged the 

pessimistic forecast that had been circulated in a Secretariat's 

preparatory documentation, and indicated a number of areas in which 

some improvement in the U.S. international position was possible.  

He (Mr. Brill) reported to the meeting on recent developments in 

U.S. money and credit markets.  

There was considerable discussion, Mr. Brill continued, 

of the impact of U.S. monetary restraints and the U.S. voluntary 

foreign credit restraint program on European financial markets, 

particularly with respect to the absorption of capital market funds 

abroad through borrowing by large U.S. corporations. Representatives 

of the smaller industrial countries indicated the difficulties that 

were facing them in obtaining funds in European capital markets.  

The discussion went on to the subject of the need for improvement



3/22/66

in those markets and to the study currently underway under OECD 

auspices to devise methods for facilitating the flow of investment 

funds in Europe. It was agreed that that would be the principal 

topic at the next meeting of the EPC, scheduled for early July.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

March 1 through 16, 1966, and a supplemental report for March 17 

through 21, 1966. Copies of both reports have been placed in the 

files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

Since the last meeting of the Committee a new 
element of uncertainty has crept into the financial 
markets. Underlying market sentiment still anticipates 
pressure on financial markets and on interest rates in 
the months ahead, but expectations have become more mixed.  
There has been at least a pause in the upward movement 
of interest rates in long-term markets.  

Underlying this new caution there appears to be a 
growing conviction that current monetary policy and 
interest rate levels are beginning to bite. Banks are 
now apparently taking a harder look at credit applications 
than for many years, and credit officers are learning to 

say no with greater frequency. The rapid rise in interest 
rates that has already occurred has now tended to make 
some borrowers consider postponing new loans, or at 

least not to rush into the market in anticipation of 

needs, while investors are beginning to find current 
rate levels increasingly attractive.  

Of greater importance over the past week or so has 

been the market's feeling that the Administration may be

-20-



3/22/66

changing its mind about the need for a tighter fiscal 
policy. As a result, despite continuing evidence of 
economic boom and pressure on prices, the financial 
markets are beginning to wonder whether some change in 
fiscal policy on top of current monetary policy might 
not be enough to bring inflation under control. While 
this questioning is still tentative, it has been 
encouraged by the decline in stock market prices, and 
represents a new market element that may require our 
close attention in the weeks ahead.  

Against this background, the System's move into new 
high levels of net borrowed reserves had in itself little 
impact on market rates, although Federal funds did rise 
to an effective rate of 4-3/4 per cent on 3 days during 
the period. While the rise in the prime rate from 5 to 
5-1/2 per cent on March 10, just preceding the March tax 
date, evoked increases in rates on CD's, commercial and 
finance company paper, and bankers' acceptances, Treasury 
bills have been in good demand. In yesterday's auction 
average rates of 4.58 per cent and 4.78 per cent were 
set on three and six-month bills, respectively, about 
8 basis points below rates in the auction three weeks 
ago, after a new high rate of 4.72 per cent had been set 
on the 3-month bill a week ago. Government securities 
dealers had come into the tax period in a strong 
technical position. Bill inventories were only moderate 
and dealers were under little pressure to absorb bill 
sales from corporations who were paying taxes, partly 
because of the large issue of March tax bills outstanding.  

Money market pressures on the whole were surprisingly 
light over the tax date, despite a record level of 
borrowing from New York City banks. Banks seem to have 
made careful advance preparation for the tax date, 
including heavy borrowing from the Reserve Banks before 
the weekend, and there is some evidence that the net 
drain from maturing CD's was somewhat less than feared.  
In fact, on the final day of the statement week ended 
March 16 the funds market eased substantially and New 
York City banks were left with a cumulated excess of 
reserves of nearly $600 million which could not be 
disposed of in the Federal funds market.  

The volume of System operations in the open market 

was relatively light during the interval. The System 

supplied about $225 million reserves on balance, partially 

offsetting reserve drains stemming from market factors

-21-



3/22/66

and permitting net borrowed reserves to deepen somewhat.  
Reserves were released as the Treasury permitted its 
balance at the Reserve Banks to run down to about $200 
million as they passed through a seasonal low point in 
their cash position. The effects of this development 
in limiting the need for additional System action were 
fortuitous indeed, as conditions of acute scarcities and 
a rising level of demand in the Government securities 
market made it quite difficult to purchase these issues 
in large volume, either on an outright basis or under 
repurchase agreements. In this situation, the authority 
to operate in bankers' acceptances also proved to be 
particularly valuable, as the System was able on several 
occasions to meet part of the reserve need through 
acquisitions of these obligations under repurchase 
agreements.  

During the period, the Government bond market had 
its first sustained rally in many weeks with yields on 
bonds in the 5-10 year area falling by almost 1/4 of a 
per cent, and longer-term bonds by as much as 1/8 per 
cent. At the close last night, no coupon issue was 
yielding as much as 5 per cent. The prime rate change 
had apparently been discounted in advance and reassuring 
press comments helped allay any fears of an impending 
rise in the discount rate. The strong technical position 
of the market was a major factor in the price advance; 
while there was moderate investment demand, there was 
significant dealer covering of short positions in light 
of the uncertainties noted earlier. By last Friday 
dealers had moved into a long position of $47 million 
Governments maturing in over 5 years compared with a 
short position of $56 million about 3 weeks ago.  

Developments in the markets for corporate and 
municipal obligations roughly paralleled those in the 
market for Treasury issues. Distribution of new and 
recent offerings accelerated as investors displayed 
current willingness to commit funds at current rate 

levels, and yields declined from the high levels 
prevailing at the start of the period. By the close of 
the period there were no unsold balances in corporate 
accounts and municipal bond dealers had reduced inven
tories to about $350 million, the lowest level in almost 

four years. The markets derived additional stimulus 
late last week, when the underwriting bid for $440 
million New Jersey Turnpike Authority bonds was rejected 
by the State.

-22-



It now appears that no further cash borrowing 
by the Treasury will be necessary over the balance of 
this fiscal year. The Commodity Credit Corporation 
is planning to borrow $500 million late this month by 
an auction of notes maturing in 4 months. Receipt of 
these funds should be enough to see the Treasury through 
its early April cash stringency, although there is still 
a possibility that the Treasury might have to turn to 
the Reserve Banks for accommodation for a few days.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly 
made and seconded, and by unanimous 
vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities and bankers' 

acceptances during the period 

March 1 through March 21, 1966, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economic 

and financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement on economic conditions: 

The additional evidence which has come to light 
since the last meeting of the Committee supports the 

view that the economy is continuing to move strongly 

upward and is pressing harder on available resources.  

This is true even though we now expect a somewhat smaller 

first-quarter rise in GNP than the very large $16 billion 

gain of the previous quarter. Most of the slowing appears 

to be in inventory accumulation, for which our present 

estimates are highly tentative; final demands seem to 

have increased more this quarter than last, with expendi

tures rising along a broad front and defense purchases 
showing a particularly large increase.  

The extent of the rise in consumption expenditures 

this quarter has been in some doubt, due to the leveling 

off in retail sales originally reported for January and 

February. But we now understand that the January sales

3/22/66 -23-



3/22/66

figures are being revised substantially upward, with 
February holding at the faster pace. The current sales 
level thus is well above the fourth-quarter average, 
indicating a substantial further rise in consumer out
lays this quarter, probably exceeding our green book 1/ 

estimate of $7.3 billion. Personal incomes are 
continuing to rise very rapidly, and now that the 
initial impact of higher social security taxes has 
been absorbed, I would expect even greater strength in 
consumer demands. The new tax bill should have little 
impact on consumption, since the amounts of additional 
taxation involved are relatively small. And at mid-year 
the introduction of Medicare will provide additional 
stimulus to service outlays.  

In the investment area, the new survey of plant and 
equipment spending intentions provides confirmation of 
our earlier expectations. The 16 per cent increase in 
spending planned for 1966 is very close to the projection 
included in the staff's chart presentation to the 
Committee at the previous meeting, and the time pattern 
of spending plans suggests a steady rise throughout the 

year. It should be noted that, in each of the two 
preceding years, actual expenditures considerably ex

ceeded those anticipated in March. But I would not 

expect a similar result this year, mainly because 
production rates, manpower shortages, and lengthening 

backlogs in the equipment industries suggest that a much 

larger rise would not be possible, at least in real 

terms.  

The whole economy, in fact, appears to be approaching 

closer to capacity constraints. Thus, the capacity 

utilization rate in manufacturing has edged up above 

92 per cent and the recent further declines in the unemploy

ment rate have been centered in unemployment among women 

and teenagers, suggesting that the pool of employable 

adult male workers is close to minimum levels. On the 

face of it, certainly, it seems doubtful that recent 

rates of real expansion can be long continued. The 

industrial production index, in January and February, 

increased at an annual rate of 11 per cent, well above 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-24-



3/22/66

the 7 per cent addition to manufacturing capacity expected 
this year. And nonfarm employment in the same period 
increased by 250,000 monthly, a rate of gain which could 
not long be supported by expected growth in the civilian 
labor force.  

The greater pressures on labor and plant resources 
seem also to be showing up increasingly in current cost 
and price developments. Hourly earnings in manufacturing 
still are rising at a steady and moderate pace, but it 
may be that larger wage increases are being offset 
statistically by the addition of marginal workers receiving 
less than average rates of pay. This notion is supported 
by a recent narrowing in the year-to-year gain in output 
per manhour in manufacturing, though that could also 
reflect other factors, such as labor hoarding and 
production bottlenecks, Whatever the reasons, unit labor 
costs seem now to be moving up. The large increase in 
January was mainly attributable to higher social security 
taxes for employers, but new data indicate that a further 
rise occurred in February.  

New data also suggest some acceleration in the rate 
of price advance. Wholesale industrial commodity prices 
rose by one-half of one per cent in January and February 
combined; this translates into an annual rate of around 
3 per cent, which is considerably more rapid than the 
1-1/2 per cent rate of increase prevailing during most 
of 1965. A broad range of commodity groups showed 
appreciable increases in these two months, including 
many components of the key metals and machinery lines.  
The February rise in the total wholesale index, which 
received wide publicity, also reflected some sharp 
further advances in agricultural products; but average 
farm and food prices may now be at or close to their 

peaks, since the cycle in per capita meat supplies is 

expected to be reversed beginning in the spring.  
In sum, the broad and pervasive advance in economic 

activity shows every sign of continuing, spurred by 

rising demands in every major sector of the economy 

except housing and, perhaps, net exports. Recent rates 
of gain appear unsustainable in a physical sense and, 

accordingly, pressures on costs and prices seem to be 

intensifying. Under these circumstances, continued 

tautness in the cost and availability of credit, and 

continuing substantial restraint on total credit flows, 
are essential components of appropriate stabilization 
policy.

-25-



3/22/66

This does not necessarily mean, however, that monetary 
policy should be tightened markedly further at this time.  
It seems to me that the Committee may wish to hold at 
about the present degree of restraint for a time, while 
the effects of earlier restraining actions--including 
the increase in the prime rate--are being communicated 
to the markets for goods and services. Given the lags 
in transmission of monetary policy, it clearly is still 
too early to gauge the extent of the impact on spending 
decisions in such areas as housing, public construction, 
business fixed investment, inventories, and consumer 
durable goods. Passage of time also may clarify the 
Administration's position on a tax increase, the outcome 
of which will be a major determinant of the degree of 

monetary restraint that will prove necessary to contain 
the economy.  

Playing the waiting game of course involves risks-
mainly the risk that the situation will get out of hand 

and inflationary momentum really pick up speed. But the 
risk seems to me fairly small, partly because of the 

already substantial degree of monetary restraint and 

partly because of the apparent continuing absence of a 

major ballooning in speculative sentiment. Consumers 
are spending freely, but not over-freely relative to 
incomes; business spending on plant and equipment is 

large, but not overly large in terms of present and 

prospective pressures on capacity; inventory accumulation 
is substantial, but perhaps not too substantial relative 

to growing output and sales; investor expectations of 

rising prices and profits are strong, but not so strong 

as to have prevented a sizable stock market correction.  

The developing economic pressures may appear substantial, 

but at this point I am not yet persuaded that a more 

drastic dose of financial medicine is required.  

Mr. Hickman commented that if less efficient labor was now 

being employed in production the part of the industrial production 

index that was based on man-hour data might be rising faster than 

the part based on physical quantity data. He asked whether the 

staff had made a comparative analysis of the two parts of the index,

and if so what the results were.

-26-



Mr. Partee replied that the staff made continuing comparisons 

of the implied rate of productivity increase in the two components 

of the index, and while he was not prepared to give a full report 

on those studies it was his impression that the rate of productivity 

gain had slowed in both.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the staff might develop 

information on the subject for the Committee's use, and Mr. Partee 

indicated that that would be done.  

Mr. Axilrod made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Financial markets have recently caught their breath-
and a deep one as it turned out--after a rather exhausting 
run since the beginning of the year, with interest rates 
in recent weeks generally losing part of their earlier 
increases. To market participants, the recent rally may 
be a result of their reflections on the distance they have 
come and on whether they have or have not out-paced such 
events as credit demands, monetary policy restraint, and 
the likely course of fiscal policy. For this Committee, 
the change in market atmosphere--no matter how brief or 
extended it turns out--provides an interlude for evaluating 
the effects of monetary policy on financial market condi
tions and monetary aggregates and for attempting to separate 
effects of policy actions from other market processes.  

Since the beginning of the year there still has been 
an over-all rise in interest rates of considerable magnitude 
in long-term rates and most short-term rates, while there 
has also been an apparently slower trend rate of growth in 
bank credit expansion. The lessened bank credit growth-
which reflects both the reduced financial intermediary 
role of commercial banks as well as open market and dis
count policy of the Federal Reserve--appears to be both an 
effect and a cause of the rise in interest rates.  

At first short- and then long-term rates rose as a 
result of the December discount rate action and a consid
erable rise in demands on security markets in early 1966,

3/22/66 -27-



3/22/66

one consequence was a reduction in the financial 
intermediary role of commercial banks, whose net 
time and savings deposit inflows began to diminish 
markedly. Despite the increase in time deposit 
interest rates, corporations became less ready time 
deposit customers. At the same time it is possible 
that the higher interest rates that developed on U.S.  
Government securities as well as on corporate and 
municipal issues attracted some funds from individuals 
that might otherwise have gone into time and savings 
deposits.  

Not only was the intermediary role of banks 
reduced but a further squeeze on banks was generated 
by the reduced availability of nonborrowed reserves 
as winter progressed and by the continuing higher cost 
of borrowed reserves. Most banks have made strenuous 
efforts to maintain their market position and most 
especially their customer relationships. But the 
resources to do so were not available and their efforts 
therefore fed back on market interest rates and 
contributed to the tightening of credit conditions.  
Banks, especially large city banks, were forced to 
liquidate U.S. Government securities, to reduce 
acquisition of other securities, and to raise the 
prime loan rate further.  

The tightening of credit conditions has in turn 
apparently begun to have some impact in restraining 
the amount of over-all credit market borrowing. Since 
early March a number of municipal issues have been 

postponed, cancelled, or cut back, of which the most 

important was the recent New Jersey Turnpike issue.  
There have also been indications of some postponed 
private placements by corporations. In mortgage and 

consumer credit markets, some greater selectivity in 

lending appears to be developing. And banks have been 

reportedly stiffening lending standards. But it is 
certainly not clear exactly how to assess the effect 
of such financial developments on the amount or timing 

of spending.  
While the recent pause in financial markets may be 

partly attributable to early signs of borrower aversion 

to high interest rates and greater lender selectivity, 
there has also been a general assessment that both 
equity and bond markets may have moved too far too 
fast in a kind of herd instinct over-reaction to a

-28-



3/22/66

change in the economic and financial atmosphere. A 
critical factor in extending this re-evaluation in 
credit markets has been the recent discussion of a 
more active use for fiscal policy--specifically tax 
policy--as a restraining measure. This has diminished 
expectations of a further discount rate increase over 
the near-term and generally resulted in some hedging 
of bets as to the inevitability, timing, and extent 
of future interest rate increases.  

All of this does not mean that the months ahead 
will be devoid of further upward interest rate pressures; 
indeed, the recent decline in bond yields may itself be 
something of an over-reaction. It does appear, however, 
that credit markets may be completing their adjustment 
to the December discount rate increase and the first
quarter burst in credit demands, at the same time as 
the recent deepening of net borrowed reserves appears 
to be taking effect.  

In evaluating the degree of monetary restraint 
associated with present levels of net borrowed reserves, 
one is probably justified in concluding that more 
restraint is being obtained per dollar of borrowings 
than in earlier periods. For one reason, the discount 
rate now is higher than in earlier periods of comparable 
bank borrowings; for another, banks have heavy CD 
maturities and are finding it difficult and expensive 
to roll them over; and finally, member banks are 
relatively more loaned up than earlier so that as they 
find loan demand continuing and their intermediary role 
reduced, lending terms tend to stiffen more. In the 
current circumstances, larger banks are apparently 
staying away from the discount window as long as possible-
as testified by the margin of the Federal funds rate 
over the discount rate--since their needs for funds 
because of such developments as CD maturities cannot 
be readily represented as temporary.  

Under the existing degree of monetary restraint, 
the money supply is showing an increase thus far in 1966 
no more rapid than for 1965 as a whole, despite the 
rapid economic expansion and even though time deposits 
are increasing much more slowly than last year. However, 
any pick-up in member banks' demand for credit at the 
discount window could lead to some more rapid increase 
in money and reserve growth from recent levels. Continua
tion of loan demand, difficulties in obtaining time deposits

-29-



3/22/66

and short-term borrowings elsewhere, and a cumulative 
worsening of their liquidity positions are factors that 
could erode the current degree of bank reluctance to 
borrow from the Federal Reserve.  

On balance, though, it appears as if the recent 
trend rate of expansion in monetary aggregates might 
just be continued with current levels of net reserve 
availability, as indicated by net borrowed reserves 
and the Federal funds rate. And it also appears as if 
this complex of conditions is exerting a restraint on 
borrowing that should begin to restrain marginal spending.  
Thus, maintenance of the present degree of net reserve 
availability may represent a fairly effective restraint 
pending further clarification of the economic outlook 
and resolution of the current fiscal policy debate.  
But if this course were adopted, there is some risk, as 
there always is when using a relatively fixed net reserve 
availability target, that an erosion of banks' reluctance 
to borrow at the discount window could generate a more 
rapid expansion in nonborrowed reserves as open market 
operations accommodated the increased demand--with the 

result that monetary aggregates could rise more rapidly 
and that upward interest rate pressure would tend to be 

offset as the monetary aggregates were supported by 
nonborrowed reserves.  

Mr. Hersey presented the following statement on the balance 

of payments: 

I should like to start out with a few words about the 

balance of payments since the turn of the year, and then 

go on to talk about prospects for the rest of 1966 and 

how they will be affected by policy decisions.  

In the green book we used the word "significant" to 

describe the improvement in the payments position in 

January and February. "Significant" is a big word, and 

I'd like to explain just what we meant. First, the im

provement was significant in the sense that it was more 

than just seasonal. Secondly, the improvement was 

significant in that the one explanation we can give for 

it is a rational explanation, and one that carries some 

encouragement for the future--namely, that the tightening 

of bank lending policies after the turn of the year brought 

a slowdown in the granting of new term loans to borrowers 

abroad.

-30-



3/22/66

Having said this, I must add that we don't have 
anything like full details of the January payments 
picture, and we have very little to go on for February 
except preliminary VFCR reports of further repayments 
of bank credit. More to the point, I must remind you 
that time and again the balance of payments has improved 
for a while and then worsened once more. In fact, there 
are very good reasons this time for thinking that a new 
worsening is what lies ahead once again--or what may lie 
ahead, if not prevented.  

The major element of weakness in the U.S. balance 
of payments structure under present conditions is the 
acute strength of import demand. We have been seeing a 
very considerable spillover of domestic demand into 
demand for imported machinery, for imported finished 
consumer goods, for imported materials. Balance of 
payments analysts within the Government are now in 
agreement that there is a great likelihood that in 
1966 we will continue to have disproportionately large 
increases in imports, as we did last year. Instead of 
hoping for a 10 or 11 per cent year-over-year increase, 
to a merchandise import total of less than $24 billion, 
we must fear a 16 per cent increase, to $25 billion. The 
rise within the year, from the very high fourth quarter 
of last year to the fourth quarter of 1966, may be some
what less than 16 per cent, but it is not likely to come 
down to the 7-to-9 per cent range of the prospective GNP 
increase between the fourth quarters. Until the boom 
quiets down, until pressures on plant capacity are eased, 
and until protective inventory buying tapers off, we have 
to expect a more than proportionate advance in imports.  

With this revision in agreed views about the prospect 
for imports, the outlook for the over-all balance is also 
altered. Instead of a deficit of less than $1-1/2 billion 
on the "liquidity" basis we have to fear a deficit of more 
than $2-1/2 billion. The assumptions underlying this pro
jection include a somewhat larger rise in prices--and a 
somewhat larger rise in current value of GNP--than the 
staff projected for you at the last meeting. Also, this 
balance of payments projection doesn't allow for quite 
such a tightening of credit conditions and rise in interest 
rates as was pictured in the chart show. For these reasons, 
it may give too pessimistic a picture. But this new pro
jection must be regarded as lying within the range of

-31-



3/22/66

realistic possibilities if nothing is done to prevent 
its realization.  

The projection I have been describing does make 
some allowance for effects of the change in U.S. credit 
market conditions since December. However, if monetary 
policy exerts intensified pressure on U.S. bank liquidity 
and on non-bank corporate liquidity as the year goes on, 
it may become possible to chop another half billion 
dollars off the estimated capital outflow. Probably such 
a change would be most evident in three types of flow.  
First, the flow of bank credit could become an inflow, 
with repayments exceeding new lending. Secondly, the 
small inflow of corporate liquid assets we were still 
having in the fourth quarter could continue, rather 
than taper off. Thirdly, the net outflow to finance 
direct investment might be reduced below the program 
target if corporations felt so squeezed for liquidity 
that they would step up their borrowings abroad even 
more than now seems likely, or else might even cut back 
their foreign plant and equipment expenditure plans in 
order to reduce financing needs. As of December and 
January, these plans for plant and equipment outlays 
called for a whopping big increase of 24 per cent from 
1965 to 1966, according to a special survey the Department 
of Commerce conducted. No one really knows just how 
flexible these investment plans might prove to be under 
pressure.  

With further fiscal and monetary policy action, the 
current account of the balance of payments ought to do 

better also. The present view is that we have to fear 

a deterioration from a goods and services surplus of 

about $7 billion last year to one of only $6-1/2 billion 

this year. This deterioration would be ascribable to 

increased military expenditures abroad, but the failure 

to get any improvement would reflect the steep rise in 

imports. A moderation of the rise in U.S. prices and 

incomes and a toning down of the intensity of demand 

for plant and equipment and inventories surely would 

make the import picture less bleak.  

The conclusion to which this all leads is that the 

U.S. balance of payments stands in need of all the help 

fiscal and monetary policy can give it. What it needs 

from monetary policy is not higher interest rates, per 

se, but rather a squeeze on the liquidity of banks and

-32-



business enterprises. So far as the external position 
is concerned, help of that kind just can't be overdone.  
At lease not until we have had a 12-month period with 
the payments position averaging out near zero on the 
"liquidity" basis--and that looks to be a long way off.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Mr. Treiber, 

who began the go-around, made the following statement: 

The most important event in monetary matters that 
has occurred since the last meeting of the Committee 
has been the increase in the bank prime rate from 5 per 

cent to 5-1/2 per cent. The increase was an appropriate 

response by the banks to recent economic and credit 
market developments. It should encourage the deferment 

of some credit demands, and should encourage business 
concerns in need of long-term funds to seek those funds 
in the long-term bond and equity markets.  

Business activity is strong. The outlook is for 

further substantial expansion. Capital spending plans 
are strong. Unemployment has declined again. There has 

been further pressures on prices and wages. There have 
been a number of announcements of increases in prices.  

Labor leaders have indicated that they will push for 

wage increases without regard to the guidelines recom

mended by the Administration. There is more and more 

concern over the prospect of inflation.  
For the first quarter of 1966 our international 

balance of payments appears likely to register a 
seasonally adjusted deficit not much different, on an 

annual basis, from the $1.3 billion deficit of 1965.  

Banks apparently are continuing to make a favorable 

contribution to the payments' situation, stimulated 

of course by large loan demands at home.  
The demand for credit upon all types of lenders 

is strong. As banks have made loans in the face of a 

reduced inflow of time deposits, their loan-deposit 

ratios have risen further, and their holdings of U.S.  

Government securities have been reduced to levels lower 

than those of the tight money period of 1959-60.

3/22/66 -33-



3/22/66

Since the beginning of the year we have had several 
personal discussions with the heads of the large banks 
in New York City; and since the last meeting of the 
Committee we have had further personal discussions with 
practically all of them. Most of them report extraor
dinary loan demand. Most of them have reduced their 
holdings of U.S. Government securities and tax-exempt 
securities, and they are reluctant to make further 
reductions. Many of them consider their present holdings 
of U.S. Government securities as minimum holdings needed 
to guard against emergencies. Further liquidation of 
tax-exempt securities would generally bring substantial 
losses. The immediate capital losses coupled with the 
future loss of tax-free income could not be offset by 
loan income. Despite the increase in rates on certificates 
of deposit, the New York City banks as a group have not 
substantially increased the total of such deposits.  

In general, the banks have been reviewing their lines 
of credit and have sought to trim them down as much as 
practicable. But some types of customers are going to 
need credit and are going to demand it. For example, 
many insurance companies have notified their banks to 
this effect. The banks feel they cannot say "no" to 
some customers. If a creditworthy customer has kept 
good deposit balances for many years, "he has earned 
credit," they say. If a bank were to refuse now to 
make a loan to such a customer, the bank would lose the 
customer for good and would lose his balances too. Thus, 
highly valued customers are likely to get loans in some 
amount, while other customers may not fare so well.  

The banks recognize that they will not be able to 
satisfy all customers with good credit standing, and 
they have taken various steps to restrict lending to 
essential loans. In varying degrees the banks have 
encouraged customers to reduce the amounts of requested 
loans, to postpone borrowing, and to go to the capital 
markets rather than to the banks for credit. In some 
cases the banks have established qualitative tests, 
declining to make so-called non-productive loans such 
as a loan to purchase an additional plant or company 
where no over-all increase of production would result, 
or loans for speculative investments or purchases. In 
some cases banks have also established quantitative 

limits on total loans by various departments.

-34-



3/22/66

The recent increase in the bank prime rate should 
complement these other steps being taken by the banks, 
and should help cut down the growth of bank credit.  

Although our inquiry of banks in the Second District 
outside New York City was much more limited, we are of 
the impression that those banks are not likely to 
experience as intense loan demand, and they are in a 
better position to meet the demand.  

Turning now to reserve credit, net borrowed reserves 
have been over $200 million and member bank borrowings 
have averaged above $550 million over the last two weeks.  
These figures are somewhat higher than they have generally 
been since the increase in the discount rate in early 
December.  

While net borrowed reserves and member bank borrowing 
from the Reserve Banks are not nearly as high now as they 
were in periods of restraint in the second half of the 
1950s, the degree of restraint isn't correspondingly less.  
In the 1950s the banks had more U.S. Government securities 
which they could liquidate in order to make loans. In the 
1950s, the negotiable certificate of deposit was not a 

ready fund-raising instrument. Today banks are paying 
high rates to obtain funds for a longer period either 

through certificates of deposit or persistent use of the 
Federal funds market; they prefer to do this rather than 

to borrow for short periods at a lower rate from the 
Reserve Banks. There is no doubt that the banks are now 
under pressure from monetary policy.  

Last week the Tax Adjustment Act of 1966 was enacted.  

It should be helpful in providing some restraint on over

all demand, but many informed observers question whether 

it will be adequate. In their view, a further increase 

in taxes, some reduction in contemplated spending, or 
both, are needed.  

Despite the speed with which this recent tax legisla

tion was enacted, further fiscal action is likely to bring 

more discussion and debate in the Congress, and the enactment 

of effective legislation could take much longer. A proposal 

for a tax increase is likely to produce debate not only on 

the nature of the increase and on whom it falls, but also 

on the question of what expenditures could properly be 

reduced. The likely result would be a compromise measure 

with some general increase in taxes and some cutback in 

spending plans. The Joint Economic Committee of the 

Congress has expressed its concern about inflation and

-35-



3/22/66

has urged fiscal action. The majority stresses increased 
taxes; the minority stresses reduced spending. In my 
view, the Congress, through its appropriate legislative 
committees, should be considering right now what further 
fiscal policy steps would be appropriate.  

Monetary policy is taking hold, but it is still 
too soon to evaluate fully the implications with respect 
to the rate of credit growth. It seems to me that we 
should seek to maintain about the present degree of 
reserve availability. Consistent with this objective 
there might be net borrowed reserves fluctuating around 
$200 million, member bank borrowing fluctuating around 
$600 million, and Federal funds at 4-5/8 - 4-3/4 per cent 
most of the time.  

I see no reason to change the first paragraph of the 
directive adopted at the last meeting, although I certainly 
see no objection to the change in the first sentence of the 
first paragraph of alternatives A and B prepared by the 
staff. Nor do I see any reason to change the last sentence 
of the first paragraph even though there be no change in 
policy. The goal is to moderate this year the growth in 
the three specified items that took place over a long time 
span that included last year. I doubt that we can be 
precise enough to say that current growth rates are the 
right rates that we should seek to maintain.  

As for the second paragraph of the directive, I 
question the advisability of tying the goal to net reserve 
availability. I would prefer that open market operations 
be conducted with a view to maintaining about the current 
conditions in the money market. Net borrowed reserves 
would, of course, be an important factor, perhaps the 
most important, but not the sole factor.  

Mr. Francis commented that, as suggested at the Committee's 

last meeting, he had talked to bankers at most of the large Eighth 

District banks about their demands for credit, actions they were 

taking to balance supplies and demands for funds, and their expected

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-36-



3/22/66 -37

use of the discount facilities. Most of those contacted stated 

that the demands for credit were sizable and that they had had 

to be more selective in granting loans, especially to contractors 

and for real estate development. Regular customers were virtually 

all being accommodated to the normal extent, but much new business 

and large increases in old lines were being rejected. Compensating 

balances were receiving more consideration. Some bankers expected 

further interest rate increases in the near future; others felt 

that they had reached their peak. A few bankers expressed concern 

over the welfare of savings and loan associations in the current 

situation. Business loans had remained about constant since last 

October at large District banks, compared with the 20 per cent 

rate of increase at all weekly reporting banks in the nation.  

In the discussions, Mr. Francis continued, none of the 

bankers thought they would have necessity for large continuous 

borrowing at the Federal Reserve. There was no resentment expressed 

concerning past treatment at the discount window. Some asked questions 

about the mechanics of submitting notes as collateral for their bor

rowings, and many believed that they might have need for more borrowing 

for short-term adjustment purposes. At the present time there were 

no serious cases of continuous borrowing, although there were three 

cases at the "watch closely" stage--but those were the repeaters.



3/22/66 -38

The total amount of borrowing from the St. Louis Federal Reserve 

Bank had been higher in recent months, but the banks borrowing had 

generally paid off after a brief period. The discussions had 

pointed up great concern by bankers over further inflation. They 

understood the Federal Reserve attitude toward excessive discounting 

and he expected their cooperation with, at most, rare instances of 

attempted abuse.  

Economic activity had been expanding sharply, Mr. Francis 

noted. Both in the St. Louis District and in the nation, total 

spending, employment, production, and incomes had been rising 

markedly in recent months. Expectations for future activity were 

exceptionally optimistic. Total demands had gone up faster than 

output, and prices had increased. He was inclined to believe that 

the increases in the general wholesale price index should be taken 

at near face value. It was true that some agricultural and food 

prices had risen exceptionally rapidly but, if supplies had been 

normal in that field of inelastic demand, total demand would have 

spread more into other areas and other prices would have gone up 

more.  

Both monetary and fiscal actions had been expansive, 

Mr. Francis remarked, and it appeared that fiscal actions would 

continue to be stimulative. The "high employment" budget, which 

was at its lowest surplus level in many years during the last half



3/22/66 -39

of 1965, appeared to be in deficit in early 1966 and was expected 

to be in even greater deficit later in the year. Bank reserves, 

bank credit, and money had risen at unusually rapid rates since 

last summer. Whether there had been any change in the rate of 

increase of monetary magnitudes in recent months was a matter on 

which there could reasonably be differences of opinion. In his 

view, bank reserves and the money supply had been following about 

the same trend since the first of the year as in the last half of 

1965, It seemed to him that an illusion of a recently reduced 

rate of increase had been given by the bulge at year-end consisting 

of a great jump and subsequent partial loss of that increase.  

With regard to policy, in view of the inflationary pressures, 

the very stimulative fiscal situation, and exuberant expectations, 

Mr. Francis suggested restriction in terms of slower rates of growth 

in member bank reserves, credit, and the money supply. Bank reserves 

and money might appropriately increase at rates that were significantly 

lower than the rate of growth of real product.  

Several factors warned that restriction on the growth rate of 

money should be moderate, Mr. Francis said. The transactions demand 

for money was presumably rising, some bankers were asking customers 

for additional compensating balances, and there seemed to be few idle 

balances to draw on. Also with the rise in interest rates, the value 

of many assets held by businesses and consumers had declined. That



3/22/66 -40

downward pressure on the value of assets and a resulting reduction 

in net worth might have some moderating effect on the propensities 

for real investment and other spending.  

A substantial slowing of monetary growth would probably 

involve further firming of money market conditions and further 

increase in interest rates, Mr. Francis observed. There was some 

firming in money market conditions in early March which might 

induce some slowing of monetary growth. Nonetheless, he felt that 

in the absence of significant fiscal restraint some further 

tightening in money market conditions and possibly further interest 

rate increases might be necessary to obtain appropriate limitations 

on demand for goods and services. In many ways, he, of course, 

did not like those high interest rates and the accompanying restric

tions on funds for real investment and economic growth. But they 

were, for the time being, imposed upon the Committee by the easy 

fiscal policy of the past nine months and the prospective future.  

In any case, the increasing interest rates had the benefit of making 

the balance of payments situation less troublesome than it otherwise 

would be.  

Mr. Francis would not increase the discount rate at this 

time, although a case could be made that it was low relative to 

other money market rates. He would prefer alternative B of the 

draft directives, perhaps with some rephrasing as indicated by 

Mr. Treiber to eliminate reference to net reserve availability.



3/22/66 -41

Mr. Patterson reported that a tighter labor market continued 

to develop in the Sixth District. Nonfarm employment had increased 

further with especially strong gains in apparel and wood and furniture 

products manufacturing. Average weekly hours worked in District 

manufacturing plants averaged 42.1 in January and probably had 

increased since then. The insured unemployment rate continued 

below the national level.  

When it came to the financial sector, Mr. Patterson said, 

evidence of credit tightening was most evident in respect to rates.  

Most of the larger District banks had announced higher prime rates, 

but as yet no data were available to indicate how much of that had 

been translated into higher rates on business loans. The whole 

rate structure for consumer instalment loans was expected to move 

up very soon. Bankers surveyed in Atlanta, Miami, Nashville, and 

Birmingham reported that quoted rates had not changed but that 

effective rates were higher since they were now making practically 

no loans below quoted rates. Major independent finance companies 

in Atlanta had raised rates, and the captive finance companies 

seemed to be on the verge of change. If that happened, the banks 

would likely follow. A further increase in rates on floor plan 

loans, already increased in January and February, was expected.  

Auto sales in early March were very good in Atlanta, and preliminary



3/22/66 -42

data suggested a substantial rise in automobile instalment credit 

extensions from January to February.  

Total loan growth continued stronger this year, Mr. Patterson 

remarked, while business loan expansion was slightly greater, chiefly 

because of higher loans to trade concerns. Nevertheless, pressures 

for funds were limited to a relatively few banks, mostly the larger 

banks. Apparently, the banks as a group had not found it necessary 

to liquidate investments to meet loan demands. Only twenty-one banks 

obtained funds through the discount window last week, and net 

purchases of Federal funds were lower than last fall.  

Mr. Patterson commented that the flow of funds into the 

District resulting from the greater-than-national rate of economic 

expansion might be responsible in part for the more comfortable 

position of the District banks. In part it might result from a 

deliberate policy to limit lending, judging from the preliminary 

reports received in the quarterly bank lending practices survey.  

Although all reports showed the demand for commercial and industrial 

loans as stronger, they also indicated firmer and more selective 

lending. None of the banks reporting were actively seeking loans.  

Also, the more comfortable position might be explained by the 

customary delay in transmitting changes in money market conditions 

throughout the country. Some effects of the recent tightening in 

the money market were now beginning to show up in the District,



3/22/66 -43

however. Atlanta bankers reported an increased loan demand from 

customers who were shifting their borrowing from New York banks 

and utilizing previously established lines of credit in Atlanta, 

The relatively few District banks active in the CD market had 

adjusted rates upward in line with rates in New York.  

Mr. Patterson went on to say that the churning in the 

Atlanta District illustrated very well that it took some time for 

any policy action to permeate the various sectors of the economy.  

Up to this time, the Committee had been able to observe only some 

of the effects of the policy move of a gradual reduction in reserve 

availability. For that reason, he did not favor further tightening 

at this time. Neither did he favor raising the discount rate.  

On the other hand, he believed the Committee should not dissipate 

the tightening effects of its recent policy action by raising the 

permissible ceilings on time deposits. In the event of a liquidity 

squeeze, he would prefer that, rather than raising the ceiling, 

banks under pressure for funds should be forced to the discount 

window.  

In terms of free reserves, Mr. Patterson favored a net 

borrowed reserve figure of around $200 million. At the same time, 

however, he believed the Committee should pay close attention to 

the relation of the free reserve figure to the level of member 

bank borrowing, bank credit, and the money supply. Under conditions 

of strong credit demands, free reserves might become increasingly



3/22/66 -44

unreliable as a measure of the effectiveness of policy. He favored 

alternative A of the draft directives with the amendment suggested 

by Mr. Treiber.  

Mr. Bopp commented that developments in recent weeks gave 

some evidence that System policies of restraint were being felt in 

financial markets. The question now was whether still more 

restrictive action was called for to meet future developments, 

or whether to mark time for the present to observe further the 

effects of policy actions already taken. In looking to the future, 

one could construct models that would call for either course. A 

case for further restriction could be based on factors such as the 

following: possibility of escalation of the Vietnam effort; delay 

in raising taxes; further intensification of demands in the private 

economy, with inventory building and capital spending cumulating in 

anticipation of higher prices and shortages; growing tightness of 

labor; and further crumbling of the wage-price guideposts.  

Another model would give different emphasis to some of the 

same factors, Mr. Bopp continued. In the absence of new information 

about the Vietnam effort, most current thinking was running along 

the line that the impact of defense orders would moderate after 

mid-year. In the private sector, the latest information on inventories 

provided some reassurance. Inventory accumulation slowed in January, 

and businessmen planned a slower rate of increase in the first and



3/22/66 -45

second quarters of this year than in the fourth quarter of last 

year. Capital expenditures, it was true, now were forecast to 

increase about as fast as they did last year, and in this year's 

economy such an increase imposed considerable strain. There was 

some reassurance in the fact, however, that spending was expected 

to grow fastest in those industries that were hardest pressed for 

capacity. And it still seemed likely that new capacity would be 

coming on stream at least as fast as production increases.  

In short, Mr. Bopp said, although it would be hard to find 

reasons why pressures on the economy might actually diminish, it 

did seem possible that the rate at which pressures had been build

ing might slow down. The relative stability of the weekly figures 

on industrial prices recently offered some hope that that was the 

case, but it would be important to see whether the weekly data 

were borne out in the monthly index for March.  

The difficulty of foreseeing the future, however, argued 

even more forcefully than usual for moving gradually as the 

situation unfolded, Mr. Bopp remarked. He was inclined to feel 

that policy actions already taken had been having considerable 

effect, and it might well be that their impact would intensify in 

coming weeks. Flows of money and credit had been more moderate 

recently, and rationing of credit, both by banks and the market, 

seemed to be increasing. If flows of money and credit were to



3/22/66 -46

continue at those more moderate rates as the economy continued to 

expand, demands for funds might well increase sufficiently to 

produce higher interest rates.  

As to conversations with leading bankers, Mr. Bopp observed 

that the Committee's discussion three weeks ago was too brief and 

inconclusive to answer questions that bankers legitimately asked 

during such conversations. The questions were not internally 

consistent, but they posed great difficulties on either horn of 

the dilemma. These were a few samples: "In the present environment, 

are you trying to tell me in a subtle way to ration credit rather 

than increase rates, particularly the prime rate?" It was agreed 

that the answer should be no; but Mr. Bopp wondered if an increase 

in the prime rate would have been attempted had the Committee 

launched a crash campaign immediately after its last meeting.  

"What criteria should I follow in rationing credit?" The discussion 

last time demonstrated only that there was no agreement as to what 

constituted "productive" credit, but that was not very helpful to 

a banker who was seeking help to cooperate in a general program.  

"Is this merely a first step down the road to guidelines?" 

Assurance that there was no intention to develop guidelines did 

not always remove growing skepticism of intentions.  

Mr. Bopp said he had not made a series of formal appoint

ments, one after the other, with the heads of the District's large



3/22/66 -47

banks. He had, however, seized opportunities arising from other 

contacts to discuss the problem. Such contacts had arisen with 

most of those who had not been on winter vacations. He also 

planned to discuss the problem in the field meetings which would 

begin shortly and would cover the entire Third Federal Reserve 

District. He added that, on the basis of reactions he had been 

receiving, he anticipated widespread and deeply-felt adverse 

reactions to the latest revision in Regulation Q ceilings. That 

would not deter the Reserve Bank from meeting the issue head-on 

as it had met other issues annually over the years.  

Returning to the question of policy, Mr. Bopp said that 

until the next meeting of the Committee he would be inclined to 

hold money market conditions about where they had been in the past 

week and observe closely the effect on financial markets and bank 

credit. If credit flows resumed their earlier rapid pace, further 

restraint might be necessary. He preferred alternative A of the 

draft directives.  

Mr. Hickman commented that reduced rates of growth of bank 

reserves, bank credit, and the money supply in recent weeks indicated 

that the Committee's policy objectives were being met. Related 

developments in the stock and bond markets, including postponements 

of some municipal, turnpike, and utility financing, suggested also 

that the tighter policy was having "real" as well as financial



3/22/66 -48

effects. It was difficult for him to determine whether the 

Committee's policy actions were evoking more realistic attitudes 

towards fiscal policy, but eventually high interest rates were 

bound to have some effect in that area as well.  

Since the Committee appeared to have achieved quite a bit 

in a short time, Mr. Hickman thought it should pause now to observe 

the unfolding of what it had done. Therefore he would vote for 

alternative A of the draft directives, as submitted by the staff.  

Translating that into a specific target for the Manager, he came 

out with net borrowed reserves around $200 million, with borrowings 

averaging about $600 million. In his judgment it would be 

particularly important in this critical period for the Manager to 

be given leeway to deepen net borrowed reserves in the event of 

another surge in the demand for bank credit.  

Mr. Hickman said he could add little to what had been said 

today and in the green book about the recent behavior of the 

statistical indicators, and would comment instead on the latest 

quarterly meeting of Fourth District business economists held at 

the Cleveland Reserve Bank on March 14. The overwhelming majority 

of that group--which, incidentally, represented a number of 

prominent national corporations in steel, autos, rubber, machinery, 

and related industries--called for a reduction in Federal nondefense 

spending and higher corporate and personal income taxes as the



3/22/66 -49

best ways to cool off present inflationary pressures. No one 

favored the use of monetary policy alone at this juncture, and 

very few favored suspending the investment tax credit or imposing 

selective credit controls. Identical views were expressed at a 

joint meeting of the boards of directors of the Cleveland Reserve 

Bank and its Cincinnati and Pittsburgh branches, held in Cleveland 

on March 10.  

Both groups--the economists and the directors--diagnosed 

the present situation as one of too rapid business expansion, with 

mounting pressures on resources and prices, Mr. Hickman said. The 

business economists' median forecasts for industrial production 

showed gains in each quarter through the first quarter of 1967, 

with the over-all percentage gain for 1966 expected to match that 

of 1965. For the second meeting in a row, not a single participant 

expected production to decline in any quarter in the year ahead-

a record unprecedented in the 20-year history of that group.  

There was much less certainty in the forecasts of inventory 

investment, Mr. Hickman commented, which was not surprising in view 

of the lack of reliable information in that key area. As was now 

known, many in the System, and apparently some in the Administration 

as well, completely missed the mark in predicting inventory behavior 

in the fall of 1965, which was a factor in preventing the framing 

of an appropriate public policy package to head off inflation. As



3/22/66 -50

he had mentioned several months ago, something must be done about 

the deficiency in knowledge of inventories. He believed that the 

Federal Reserve System should offer some of its resources to over

come this major obstacle to timely policy determination.  

The Committee might be interested in one other item dis

cussed at the business economists' meeting, Mr. Hickman continued.  

There was a fairly general view that current plans for plant and 

equipment spending in 1966 could not be completely fulfilled because 

of physical and financial limitations. There was also a general 

feeling that capital spending plans might be revised downward 

because of higher construction and financing charges and uncertainties 

associated with bottlenecks in the supply of labor and materials.  

Following the discussion at the last Federal Open Market 

Committee meeting, Mr. Hickman said, he talked with the chief 

executive officers of several of the larger banks--five in Cleveland, 

two in Pittsburgh, and three in Cincinnati. He explained that the 

System was now providing a reduced rate of reserve availability 

and that member banks in turn would be expected to reduce the rate 

of increase of bank credit, either through rationing or higher 

interest rates. The bankers were most receptive to the rate approach; 

subsequently all of them raised their prime rates to 5-1/2 per cent.  

Since then,several of the same bankers inquired about the 

timing of the next increase in the discount rate, Mr. Hickman



3/22/66 -51

remarked. He explained that rate relationships did not seem to 

him, personally, to be out of line with the discount rate, and 

that further discount rate actions would probably depend upon 

market forces of supply and demand. As a matter of fact, he 

believed that most of his board of directors would push for a 

higher discount rate if the 91-day bill rate moved much above 

4.75 per cent.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would not present a formal statement 

on policy today or comment on the directive; he thought it would 

be wise for him first to get his bearings and to learn something 

about the machinery of Open Market Committee policy-making. He 

would, however, offer a few observations on the balance of payments 

outlook. Personally, he thought it most unlikely that an estimate 

of the deficit for 1966 on the order of $2-1/2 billion would prove 

to be a reasonable one. Mr. Hersey had presented the results of 

the appraisal of an Interagency Committee which was in the process 

of revising its own forecasts. The Interagency group would be able 

to make a better appraisal after the fiscal policy situation was 

clarified.  

In his judgment, Mr. Brimmer continued, Mr. Hersey's 

emphasis on imports as the most likely source of deterioration 

was correctly placed. A substantial deficit in travel and tourism 

also would contribute to the deterioration, as would military



3/22/66 -52

outlays abroad and the foreign aid program. But the outlook for 

the capital account for 1966 appeared to be for substantial 

improvement relative to 1965. Preliminary evidence from the 

Commerce Department program suggested that corporations probably 

would not use the full two-year quotas permitted under the targets 

laid down. He thought the information that would be made available 

in a few days would show that corporations had got hold of the 

situation in 1965, and that the actual capital outflow last year 

was substantially less than anticipated. Of course, that meant 

that corporations had greater than expected leeway for 1966, and 

the problem was to persuade them not to use their full quotas. In 

any case, he expected the focus to shift from the capital account 

to travel and imports. Those categories might be somewhat more 

amenable to restraint by fiscal policy than others, and he saw no 

reasonable means for restraining them other than fiscal action.  

Mr. Maisel commented that as was made clear in the blue 

book 1/ one got a somewhat different picture of growth in reserves 

and other credit factors depending upon which recent period one 

considered in his calculations. He had chosen, as one proper base, 

the biweekly reserve period ending January 5. By using the daily 

averages during that period, the base became approximately January 1 

1/ The report "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," prepared 
for the Committee by the Board's staff.



3/22/66 -53

or the start of the year. As his final period he had used the 

daily averages for the current biweekly period ending March 16.  

Thus far this year, the money supply showed no increase while 

total reserves grew a little less than 4 per cent, the bank credit 

proxy grew approximately 8 per cent, and business loans were up 

21 per cent, all at annual rates.  

For the last month, using as a base the biweekly period 

ending February 16, Mr. Maisel found virtually no increase in bank 

credit, an increase of two-tenths of one per cent in reserves, and 

a 9 per cent increase in business loans; but a considerably higher 

rise than previously in the money supply.  

It seemed to Mr. Maisel that considering both periods 

together the Committee was about on a proper target for the year.  

Mr. Axilrod today and the blue book both indicated that, under the 

present policy directive, reserves and bank credit would probably 

continue to expand at a rate roughly consistent with that which 

had prevailed so far this year. Therefore, he would support the 

present policies and alternative A of the draft directives. He 

assumed that the mix of variables should continue to expand at 

about the rate prevailing since January 1, and at a somewhat faster 

rate than had prevailed in the past month. He would think it 

proper for the Desk to react against large movements from the trend 

in growth of reserves by allowing net borrowed reserves to move in



3/22/66 -54

the necessary direction. He would not substitute a money market 

goal for reserves in the directive since that might be construed 

as reflecting a concern with rates.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he would make only a brief comment 

on policy today. He found himself in general agreement with 

Mr. Treiber, and was impressed that the Committee's policy was 

biting. Clearly, the problem facing the country--and it became 

even more clear as time passed--was one of inflationary pressures 

requiring some dampening down of aggregate demands, unless policy 

makers were prepared to accept the prospect of domestic inflation 

and of real deterioration in the balance of payments. But he was 

fearful that any appreciable tightening of System policy now would 

have unduly constrictive--even disruptive--effects on money and 

capital markets. Accordingly, he would keep the degree of pressure 

on the money markets that had been maintained recently. He would 

hope that at least an announcement of effective fiscal action in 

the form of a tax increase would come early enough to help the 

System avoid a difficult situation with respect to the discount 

rate. On that score, he personally was convinced that if such an 

announcement had been made earlier the increase in the prime rate 

would not have been necessary and probably would not have occurred.  

As to the directive, Mr. Daane favored alternative A of 

the staff drafts, except that he would change the last sentence of



3/22/66 -55

the first paragraph to conclude "... by continuing to moderate 

rates of growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money 

supply." He would accept Mr. Treiber's suggestion that the second 

paragraph be written in terms of money market conditions. That 

suggestion was consistent with Mr. Axilrod's point that at this 

juncture maintaining any fixed level of net reserve availability 

might produce conditions that were either too easy or too tight.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he could vote for either 

alternative A or B for the directive, with or without the amend

ments proposed. He had a slight preference for B as amended, 

however, mainly because he thought the Committee should keep the 

banking system under as much pressure as possible during the next 

month or two without raising the discount rate. He noted that 

there were two strings to the bow of discount policy. One was 

the rate itself, which was not changed often. The other was the 

traditional reluctance to borrow on the part of banks which, he 

thought, could be reinforced by the Reserve Bank Presidents in 

discussions with borrowing banks, directed toward encouraging them 

to cut down on their lending. The banks already were under a good 

deal of pressure as rates on CD's approached the ceiling, and 

bankers were apprehensive about that situation because obtaining 

funds through CD's was no longer a very profitable operation.  

During March and April the System ought to do everything it could 

to persuade banks to cut down on their credit extensions.



3/22/66 -56

Mr. Mitchell said he had to admit to some dismay when he 

heard suggestions that the System should advise bankers on the 

types of loans they should and should not make. When bankers 

were told they should not make loans for speculative inventory 

investments their response often was that they could not distin

guish such investments from the non-speculative type. Advice to 

banks not to make loans for nonproductive purposes might well be 

wrong; such loans did not add to the demand for real resources in 

the first instance, and in any case later uses of the funds were 

uncontrolled. The problem had to be resolved by the bankers, 

since there was not much in the way of useful guidance the System 

could offer. Perhaps bank customers should be told to rely more 

on the capital market and perhaps anticipatory borrowing should be 

discouraged to the extent possible, but in his judgment those were 

functions that should be performed by the commercial banks and not 

the central bank.  

Mr. Mitchell was somewhat surprised by the way in which 

Mr. Axilrod assessed the implications of the withdrawal of planned 

tax-exempt security issues. He did not think that kind of action 

was particularly helpful since it was not likely to have any effect 

on spending. He also was surprised to hear Mr. Daane imply that 

he did not like the prime rate increase; he (Mr. Mitchell) thought 

it was a helpful development. What would disturb him would be



3/22/66 -57

another discount rate rise, and he did not think one was necessary 

at present. What was necessary was some further tightening with 

respect to extensions of bank credit.  

Mr. Daane observed that he had not meant to imply disapproval 

of the prime rate increase; under the conditions prevailing he 

thought it was appropriate and necessary. His point was that the 

circumstances bringing about the need for a higher prime rate-

which, in turn, foreshadowed a possible discount rate increase-

would not have developed if there had been an announcement of some 

form of tax increase. That was a matter of judgment, but his 

personal feeling was that such an announcement would have had a 

calming effect.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that some of the information 

becoming available suggested that the Committee's policy actions 

were beginning to have a little effect. But other information 

seemed to indicate that there was still a good deal of inflationary 

fever extant in the economy. Since the Committee did not know 

what other policy steps might be taken, it seemed to him that it 

was faced with the need for doing its own job by keeping the 

pressure on through monetary policy.  

At the previous meeting, Mr. Shepardson said, he had 

expressed the hope that the Committee would not be overly gradual 

in applying pressure, but many of the comments made thus far today



3/22/66 -58

were to the effect that the move toward greater firmness, as gradual 

as it had been, should now cease. He favored maintaining the 

pressure by some further gradual increase in firmness, as indicated 

by alternative B of the draft directives. That might result in 

a deepening of net borrowed reserves, perhaps to a range between 

$200-$250 million. Although it was not clear to him how one would 

word such an instruction in the directive, he thought it might be 

appropriate to follow the course Mr. Robertson had suggested recently-

that of letting net borrowed reserves fluctuate, depending on the 

strength of credit demands. If, as some seemed to feel, the demand 

for bank credit was slackening, net borrowed reserves would not 

have to be deepened as much. His own feeling, however, was that 

there still was considerable pressure on the banking system.  

Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business continued 

to respond to strong expansionary forces. In a special survey of 

manufacturers, a substantial majority reported recent increases in 

the prices they paid for raw materials, machinery, and supplies; 

and a majority, though a smaller one, expected those prices to 

rise further in the weeks immediately ahead. Nearly one-fourth 

of those manufacturers reported recent boosts in their own prices, 

and nearly one-third were planning increases to become effective 

in the near future. Representatives of the construction business



3/22/66 -59

and the bituminous coal industry also reported price increases put 

into effect in the past few weeks. Half of the manufacturers 

participating in the Richmond Reserve Bank's regular survey 

indicated a further rise in new and unfilled orders, and a good 

number reported increases in employment and hours.  

In the policy area the indicators seemed to diverge a 

little but, on balance, Mr. Wayne saw no reason to change the 

Committee's posture of a gradual reduction of reserve availability.  

As Mr. Axilrod had indicated, there were a few signs that the 

policy of monetary restraint was making itself felt. Stock prices 

had dropped substantially and considerable amounts of new bond 

offerings had been postponed or cancelled. The money supply had 

registered one small decline and rates of growth had been reduced 

significantly for total reserves, bank credit, consumer credit, 

time deposits, and retail sales. The long rise in automobile 

production and sales might at last be leveling off as car inventories 

reached record levels.  

But without doubt the economy as a whole was booming, 

Mr. Wayne said, with several sectors moving up at rates which 

could not be sustained for long. A number of major industries were 

operating at forced draft, beyond optimal capacity levels. The 

boom had attained so much momentum that the task of slowing it to 

a sustainable pace without precipitating a recession was an



3/22/66 -60

extremely delicate operation. Recent movements in interest rates 

and the absence of any severe strain in the money market over the 

tax and dividend dates suggested that the monetary pressure was 

being applied smoothly and evenly. Further, the recent behavior 

of banking statistics might provide some evidence that the banks 

were acting more responsibly and with more restraint. In his 

conversation with leading bankers he found reasons for cautious 

optimism.  

In the discussions Mr. Wayne had had with bankers in his 

District since the last meeting of the Committee, he found a 

profound concern with inflationary pressures which all thought 

were a problem not for the future but for the present. There was 

a general feeling to the effect that the leading banks of the 

country had lost control of their credit policies and were seeking 

a crutch to lean on. While the District banks said they were 

becoming selective in their lending policies, to many that meant 

that their primary concern was with the impact of their policy on 

the relative position of their bank, with less recognition of the 

implications for the national interest. He found the actions and 

policy decisions of leading banks varying from the extreme of one 

large bank which had established a policy that probably would 

result in reducing its relative position in the District by the 

end of the year. That bank was willing to follow such a policy



3/22/66 -61

because of its concern with the national interest. At the other 

extreme were banks which felt strongly that unless some kind of 

crutch was provided nothing could be expected from the banks 

themselves.  

Mr. Wayne went on to say that banks in his District thought 

the New York City banks had operated imprudently, and they were 

sharply critical of the New York banks for suggesting, when they 

ran short of funds, that their customers draw on credit lines 

outside of New York and thus relieve the pressure on them. The 

hope had been expressed to him that the System would not raise 

Regulation Q ceilings again because banks could not be relied on 

to exercise prudence in setting time deposit rates.  

Mr. Wayne said he joined Mr. Mitchell in hoping that no 

voluntary credit restraint program would be needed. He thought 

it was naive to anticipate that, when the Reserve Bank Presidents 

talked with bankers, there would not be pressure for the System 

to provide some indications of the priorities to be followed in 

bank lending policy. He had done everything in his power to 

resist such pressure. It was clear, however, that the credit 

officers of banks would use the very fact that there had been a 

discussion with the Reserve Bank as a crutch on which to lean in 

dealing with their customers. Their willingness to enforce "credit 

restraint" simply meant that customers with substantial balances



3/22/66 -62

would get the credit they needed and other customers would find 

it exceedingly difficult to do so.  

Returning to his starting point, Mr. Wayne said he saw 

no reason for changing policy. It was important that monetary 

pressures be maintained and slowly increased, but the Committee 

should be alert for any evidence that pressure might be excessive.  

The behavior of the stock market might be interpreted as such 

evidence but he was inclined to doubt it. Since he saw no convinc

ing evidence, he favored readoption of the existing directive 

without change. In his opinion the differences between that 

directive and the two new alternatives proposed by the staff were 

simply verbal.  

Mr. Clay reported that since the last meeting of the 

Committee he had had discussions with most of the large banks in 

the Tenth District and several of the medium-sized banks. All 

reported unusually heavy loan demand from their regular customers, 

from business customers who had had lines of credit or loan 

commitments over a long period of time which they had never before 

used, from national companies that had been regularly pursued by 

those banks but never won, and from shoppers who were anticipating 

difficulties with their present banking connection. A number 

indicated that the New York banks evidently were telling some of 

their customers to "go west."



3/22/66 -63

The one common response to those increased demands and 

limited availability, Mr. Clay went on, had been the increasing 

of interest rates over several months and now. The banks reported 

little resistance to increases. Several reported almost complete 

lack of success in getting rid of customers by substantial rate 

hikes intended to discourage without a direct turndown. All had 

taken some steps to slow or limit their loan expansion. Those 

steps covered the full range of possibilities and degree, and 

involved selectivity with respect to type, size, area, and so 

forth. There was a general feeling that they must take care of 

their regular customers, and--since they all anticipated 

continuing demand and further tightening--they were working hard 

to learn what demands they might expect from those regular customers 

in the months ahead. No banks had indicated that they would favor 

institution of a program of voluntary credit restraint by the System.  

To date, banks were reasonably conservative in reaching 

for deposits, Mr. Clay said. Most of them wanted only local CD's, 

and were not trying to meet the New York market rates. There were 

exceptions to certain customers, but for most of them 4-1/2 per 

cent for six-month CD's was the high. They reported small growth 

in time and savings deposits over the past few months. Several 

reported efforts to increase compensating balances by relating 

rates more directly to balances.



3/22/66 -64

There seemed to be a general understanding that all their 

potential demands could not be met indiscriminately at the discount 

window, Mr. Clay said, and general acceptance of the fact that 

there were and had to be limitations on the use of the discount 

window. However, there was great variance in the understanding 

as to what those limitations were or should be. He gathered that 

most of them had been studying Regulation A in recent days. Some 

concern had been expressed that the System would change its dis

counting policy to tighten administration of the window.  

Mr. Clay then remarked that analysis of the factors that 

were pertinent to the formulation of monetary policy pointed 

essentially to the same kind of domestic economic situation as 

was apparent three weeks ago. The aggregate picture continued to 

be that of an economy in danger of trying to do too much too fast, 

with unfortunate price consequences. Accordingly, the monetary 

policy objective also remained essentially the same as before-

namely, to facilitate credit expansion in keeping with the 

economy's capacity for real output of goods and services.  

Some progress had been made since the last meeting in 

reducing the rate of growth in member bank reserves, Mr. Clay noted.  

Moreover, the policy objective had been carried out without 

disturbance in the money and capital markets, and along with the 

development of a less tense atmosphere in those markets. That



3/22/66 -65

situation might afford an opportunity to pursue the same policy 

somewhat further. On the other hand, it would be well to proceed 

cautiously at this juncture in order to develop further evidence 

of the financial response to the action already taken. The net 

borrowed reserve target might be set in the range of $200 to 

$250 million for the period ahead. In pursuing that policy, it 

would be well to avoid placing such upward pressure on interest 

rates as would precipitate a Federal Reserve discount rate 

increase. Alternative B of the draft directives appeared satis

factory.  

Mr. Scanlon reported there had been no diminution of the 

upward thrust of economic activity in the Seventh District.  

Reports of labor shortages and slow or incomplete deliveries of 

goods had become more frequent. Many capital expenditure projects 

were behind schedule because of delays in construction work or 

lack of availability of equipment. Automobile sales continued 

strong with sales for 1966 projected at 9.3 or 9.4 million units, 

about the same as last year. Truck sales recently had been at an 

annual rate of about 1.7 million units compared to 1.5 million 

last year. Here again, production would be even higher were it 

not for shortages of some components such as axles and transmissions.  

Perhaps the most significant development of recent weeks 

in the District had been the step-up in demand for single family



3/22/66 -66

homes, Mr. Scanlon said. Housing permits were up 10 per cent in 

the Chicago area in 1965 and there was a rise of 12 per cent for 

the four largest metropolitan areas of the District as a group, 

compared with a decline of 3 per cent for the United States. In 

Detroit there were critical shortages of workers in the building 

trades that prevented a larger volume of new construction.  

Loan expansion at the big Chicago banks had been financed 

largely by CD sales, Mr. Scanlon continued, with outstandings 

rising by more than $250 million prior to the tax week. Replace

ment of maturing certificates from now until after mid-April might 

pose serious problems if rates on those instruments continued to 

rise. Chicago banks had acquired some additional bills, possibly 

looking toward April 1 needs in connection with the local tax 

date. Their bill holdings were not much below the level they had 

on hand prior to the tax assessment date last year when they 

apparently were able to meet demands satisfactorily. With reserve 

positions fairly comfortable through mid-March, reserve city banks 

had not borrowed heavily at the discount window but they indicated 

that pressures could be expected to increase in the period 

immediately ahead. The number of banks using and inquiring about 

using the discount facilities had been growing daily, as he gathered 

was the case elsewhere in the country.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that he had visited with the chief 

executive officer of each of the major banks in Chicago individually,



3/22/66 -67

and also had had conversations with a number of bankers in other 

reserve cities in the District, regarding the prudent rationing 

of credit in a period of credit restraint. Almost to a man, they 

felt that monetary policy was beginning to bite, sharply and 

rapidly; and they felt that bankers should prove they were bankers 

and face up to their responsibilities in this area without benefit 

of guidelines, written or otherwise. Several medium-size banks 

which felt they could not fully compete with money market banks 

in the CD market thought that the Federal Reserve should re

examine its discount window policies. They felt the System had 

encouraged banks to be more competitive and, as a result, the 

banks had gotten into longer-term investments. In light of that, 

they regarded the old criteria for judging steady borrowing as 

obsolete. In several instances, however, those were the views of 

banks to whom the Reserve Bank had been talking about their use of 

the window. Absent fiscal action, all of the banks apparently 

expected tighter monetary conditions given present credit demand.  

Turning to policy, Mr. Scanlon said that because the full 

impact of monetary actions was not evident immediately, and the 

time effects of the recent reductions in capital values were still 

unclear, it appeared desirable at this time to permit some addi

tional time for the economy to digest recent policy actions before 

considering further policy changes.



3/22/66 -68

As to the choice of a directive, Mr. Scanlon was inclined 

to agree that there was little difference among the existing 

directive and the two alternatives proposed for this meeting.  

However, since he favored no change on policy he leaned toward 

alternative A.  

Mr. Scanlon added that he agreed with Mr. Mitchell that 

some resistance at the discount window was desirable at present.  

He would caution, however, against any actions that might be 

interpreted as an arbitrary change in the standards by which 

appropriate use of the window was defined. Officers of the 

Reserve Banks had spent many years educating banks on that subject, 

and if the standards were to be changed he would favor doing so as 

a matter of general policy rather than in the course of informal 

conversations with bankers.  

Mr. Strothman said his report this morning would look at 

the Ninth District economy from two aspects. One would be the 

Reserve Bank's view of District economic and financial developments 

as revealed by the available statistics. The second would be the 

current and near-term banking scene as seen by the heads of major 

banks.  

It appeared that the District economy was still expanding 

at about the rate of the fourth quarter of last year, Mr. Strothman 

observed. According to the latest statistics, production and



3/22/66 -69

employment gains were still substantially above what they were on 

average in 1965. Even the construction industry was getting on 

better than expected and, on slender evidence, might even be said 

to prosper. Building permit and employment data suggested that 

construction activity had recently been increasing much more 

rapidly than it had on average in 1965. The rate of increase of 

consumer spending did not seem to have slowed at all from the 

fourth quarter. Preliminary trade employment data and the recent 

behavior of consumer credit totals indicated that higher social 

security taxes had had little or no immediate effect on consumer 

spending in the District. The seasonally adjusted District un

employment rate for January, the latest month for which figures 

were available, was 3.1 per cent. The average workweek, seasonally 

adjusted, was 41.7 hours. Those data suggested a very tight labor 

market.  

The banking statistics revealed a certain amount of the 

"pressure," or "tightness," of which so much had recently been 

heard in banking circles, Mr. Strothman remarked. Loans by 

District banks had continued to advance at a rapid pace, but with 

the February and March increases somewhat more modest at country 

than at reserve city banks. Commercial and industrial loans had 

dominated the increase for February, while loans to nonbank 

financial institutions accounted for nearly all of the increase in



3/22/66 -70

the early March period. Meanwhile, deposit outflow in February 

was much heavier than usual but growth in the early March period 

was above normal. The average loan-deposit ratio for Ninth 

District weekly reporting banks was higher now than it had been 

for a long, long time--in fact, at 66 per cent it was at an all

time high for the series--and one suspected that the same might 

be true for non-weekly reporting banks. Their ratio, at 55 per 

cent at the end of February, was but one point shy of an all-time 

high on an unadjusted basis.  

Borrowings by the reserve city banks had averaged about 

40 per cent of required reserves, Mr. Strothman observed. That 

was a lot of borrowing, especially for so early in the year. On 

the other hand, such a scale of borrowing was not without precedent.  

Also, it was to be noted that District banks--only a few of the 

largest would be involved--suffered no real embarrassment as a 

result of the early March maturation of a large portion of their 

negotiable CD's. Actually, reporting banks' CD's increased more 

than seasonally in the three weeks preceding March 9. In the 

week ended March 16 there was a relatively modest loss.  

Turning from those elements of the District financial 

picture as seen by the Reserve Bank to the view as described by 

bankers, Mr. Strothman noted seeming differences in perception.  

The major bankers had characterized the situation with such



3/22/66 -71

expressions as "desperate" and "as tight as I have seen it." 

Their banks had registered all-time loan highs in mid-March, and 

the pressures continued. They said they were confining lending 

to regular customers and were trying to hold them to appropriate 

purposes. He would inject, however, that the Reserve Bank's 

instalment loan survey indicated that, despite tight credit and 

customer-selection policies, over-all consumer instalment credit 

had increased and that the larger banks, at least, had not 

endeavored to curtail the allotment of funds to their instalment 

loan departments. Actually, there was some information to the 

effect that increased activity in that area was perhaps encour

aged by the banks' management.  

As seriously as the District's larger banks viewed the 

loan demand situation, it appeared to Mr. Strothman that they 

were equally concerned about the extremely large volume of 

negotiable CD's maturing in April. One banker expressed the fear 

that most of those could not be renewed at any price. He asserted 

that if there was to be a banking crisis it would come next month, 

with the CD run-off coinciding with a further intensification of 

the loan demand.  

Mr. Swan reported that the expansion in business activity 

had continued in the Twelfth District as elsewhere. The Pacific 

Coast States experienced a substantial employment increase in



3/22/66 -72

February which, combined with a much smaller increase in the labor 

force, resulted in an unusually large drop in the unemployment rate 

to 4.6 per cent, from 5.1 per cent in January and 5.4 per cent in 

December. Once more the aerospace companies added significantly 

to their work force in February, and they accounted for almost one

half of the total increase in manufacturing employment in that 

month.  

Lumber markets had come under rather severe pressure in 

March, Mr. Swan said, reportedly because of the combination of a 

large volume of Government buying and some anticipatory private 

buying against the possibility of a strike when the current labor 

contracts expired on June 1. That buying had pushed lumber prices 

up rather sharply this month.  

District banks were under some reserve pressure in late 

February and early March, Mr. Swan continued, and had sold a rather 

substantial volume of securities. In the three weeks ending 

March 9 the loan decline was about the same as a year ago, but 

the decline in investments was much sharper. However, the banks 

apparently had over-allowed for expected loan demands in 

connection with the March tax and dividend dates. After being 

net buyers of Federal funds through the first week ending in March 

they were net sellers in the week ending March 9, and like the 

New York banks they had ended the following week with funds they



3/22/66 -73

were unable to dispose of. As of last Thursday they again expected 

to be large net sellers of funds in the current week. Their com

fortable reserve position also was reflected in the fact that 

borrowings from the Reserve Bank dropped sharply in the week ending 

March 16.  

District banks were maintaining posted CD rates at levels 

somewhat higher than earlier but still a little below those in 

New York, Mr. Swan remarked. They admitted freely, however, that 

they would move their CD rates to the ceilings in individual cases 

if necessary to retain substantial balances of national corporations.  

Rates on savings certificates had edged up a little but also were 

still below those in the east. As of last week, the major banks 

were maintaining a 4-3/4 per cent rate on savings certificates 

and seemed to be a little nervous about going to 5 per cent.  

There had been a good deal of concern about the flow of 

funds to savings and loan associations. In January, the latest 

month for which figures were available, District savings and loan 

share accounts rose slightly--by $112 million--to a total of just 

under $26 billion. That compared with a slight drop for the 

country as a whole in January of this year and to an increase in 

the District in January 1965 of $154 million. Real estate loans 

of District associations rose only $90 million in January, the 

smallest monthly increase since April 1958. Their borrowings from



3/22/66 -74

the Home Loan Bank and other sources were down about $100 million 

in the month. Such borrowings had declined in the country as a 

whole, also, but associations in the Twelfth District accounted 

for about 60 per cent of the national reduction.  

In talking with the major San Francisco banks, Mr. Swan 

said, he found that they were well aware of the loan demand 

situation they faced. They all reported strong demands and some 

mentioned a spillover from national concerns that were not getting 

all of the credit they needed from New York banks. The District 

banks indicated that they had adopted a somewhat firmer attitude 

with respect to both rates and other loan terms. They had raised 

rates not only on prime loans but on other borrowings as well.  

One interesting case was that of a major bank that had just 

notified its branches that it was increasing the rates on auto

mobile loans, effective March 15, when the prime rate was raised.  

The bank rescinded the notification, not because it did not want 

to raise auto loan rates but because it wanted to increase them 

more but preferred not to change them in two steps.  

The banks also indicated that they were somewhat less 

willing to make term loans and loans for real estate development, 

Mr. Swan continued. They apparently were eliminating a few of 

their marginal borrowers and were pressing for larger compensating 

balances, although he had some question about how successful they



3/22/66 -75

were in the latter respect. They were less willing to accommodate 

borrowers without established customer relationships, except for 

particular borrowers that they had long wanted to accommodate.  

The banks had sold a fair amount of real estate mortgages and some 

were actively seeking to make further sales of such mortgages.  

However, the fact remained that, at this point at least, Twelfth 

District banks certainly were not in as tight a position as the 

New York banks.  

Mr. Swan went on to say that the major banks in the District 

were unanimous on one point that came up fairly early in the 

discussions--they hoped that the 4 per cent maximum rate on savings 

deposits would not be raised, for two reasons. First, higher rates 

would add to their costs on the large volume of savings accounts 

they had outstanding. They had experienced some shift out of 

savings accounts into savings certificates, but it had not been 

great; and while there had been persistent small declines in their 

total savings deposits, most recently that trend was reversed.  

Secondly, they were concerned about the possible adverse effect 

on savings and loan associations of an increase in rates on 

savings accounts. The rates currently offered on bank savings 

certificates did not appear to be attracting funds in substantial 

volume from local savings and loan associations, but a higher rate 

on savings deposits might well do so.



3/22/66

In terms of policy, it seemed to Mr. Swan that recent 

developments were just about what the Committee had expected when 

it undertook its program of gradual redaction of reserve availability.  

Like some others today, he did not have a strong preference between 

the staff's two draft directives. On balance, however, he thought 

it probably would be better to maintain the present degree of 

pressure and not to intensify it. Perhaps there still was some 

market reaction remaining to be assessed; and, while developments 

associated with the March tax date had not posed any great problems, 

it might be desirable not to take a further step until after the 

April 15 tax date. Accordingly, he leaned toward alternative A 

for the directive, and he would be inclined to try to keep net 

borrowed reserves around the $200 million level. As to whether 

the second paragraph of the directive should be written in terms 

of money market conditions, as Mr. Treiber suggested, or in terms 

of net reserve availability, as in the staff draft, he would 

suggest a compromise: to accept Mr. Treiber's proposed language, 

but to add the words "including the present level of net reserve 

availability".  

Mr. Swan did not think it was necessary to raise the 

discount rate at this point. The System might not have to con

sider discount rate action until bill rates were substantially 

higher than at present or there was a substantially larger volume 

of member bank borrowing.

-76-



3/22/66

Mr. Swan supported Mr. Scanlon's remarks about the attitude 

to be taken at the discount window, recognizing that the Reserve 

Banks should take a firm position toward continuous borrowers and 

borrowing for inappropriate purposes. He noted, however, that 

there could be a substantial increase in borrowing without a change 

in policy. In particular, certain large banks had not borrowed for 

a considerable period; and if they should begin to do so--which 

he was not necessarily predicting--it obviously would be difficult 

to attempt to discourage them in view of their previous record.  

Mr. Irons said that he had talked informally with the 

presidents of perhaps a dozen banks in the Eleventh District 

during the past three weeks, of which about half were large banks 

and half small. Like Mr. Wayne he had heard from a few banks some 

rather sharp and severe criticisms of the New York banks--not only 

for suggesting to customers that they "go west" for accommodations, 

but also for working up the rates on CD's. Rightly or wrongly, 

some bankers in his District blamed the New York banks for the 

present CD rate levels. Also, some of the bankers contacted had 

commented that they hoped there would be no further revisions in 

Regulation Q. Mr. Irons pointed out, however, that care should 

be taken in generalizing from a few contacts.  

Regarding the discount window, Mr. Irons said that 

borrowings at the Dallas Reserve Bank had not been sizable, and

-77-



3/22/66 -78

he did not anticipate that they would become heavy, as long as 

funds were available in the market from other sources. He expected 

the Bank to continue to administer the window as it had in the 

past, in the manner prescribed by Regulation A. While District 

banks were borrowing relatively little, however, they were 

substantial buyers of Federal funds. Last Friday, for example, 

borrowings at the Reserve Bank totaled only $8 million, but 5 or 

6 major banks held over $250 million purchased in the Federal 

funds market. Obviously, banks were getting a large part of the 

money they needed in the funds market, a source over which the 

System had little control.  

Mr. Irons noted that the bankers with whom he had talked 

fully recognized the tightness of the credit situation and 

expected it to become tighter. They were seeing strong loan 

demands and said they were being more restrictive in their lending 

policies. Perhaps banks could not distinguish precisely between 

productive and nonproductive loans but the bankers contacted 

thought, at least, that they were limiting their lending as far 

as possible to productive as against speculative purposes. One 

of the large banks indicated recently that it was revising its 

loan budget for the year downward by a significant amount. There 

was no lack of awareness of the need for credit restraint, and 

banks were responsive to that need. At the same time, banks had



3/22/66 -79

their own competitive positions to consider. The result was likely 

to be cooperation by banks with respect to their lending practices, 

within the limits set by the competitive situation.  

Turning to economic conditions in the Eleventh District, 

Mr. Irons reported that they were very strong in all areas. The 

employment situation was tight and becoming more so, as the need 

for skilled labor rose with the increase in production of defense 

materiel. Texas plants had received about one-half billion dollars 

in defense orders in the last quarter of 1965 and those orders were 

beginning to flow through the production process. A large hel

icopter manufacturer recently had received an order for 2,000 

machines; the firm had been producing helicopters at the rate of 

60 per month, and it was attempting to find the skilled labor 

necessary to step up production to 160 per month. Defense orders, 

which were likely to continue to come in at a substantial rate for 

some time, were creating a labor problem. District manufacturers 

were scouring the country for skilled labor, looking particularly 

to the areas of high unemployment. One firm had instituted a 

training program in cooperation with the Department of Labor. In 

short, the District economy was one of full employment and full 

production, triggered by defense orders.  

As to policy, Mr. Irons was rather pleased with the devel

opments over the past three weeks. He also was pleased with the



3/22/66 -80

current discussions about the possibility of action in the area 

of fiscal policy. The comments being made on that subject were 

rather contradictory and confusing, but the fact that the subject 

was being talked about more was, in itself, a good sign and might 

have some effects on expectations and on price developments.  

There was no question in his mind but that the Committee's recent 

policy was beginning to bite. He noted also that there had not 

been much distortion in financial markets.  

For the coming period Mr. Irons favored maintaining the 

policy that had been followed for the past three weeks. He 

would not suggest any absolute figure for net reserve availability, 

but thought that net borrowed reserves might be somewhere in the 

$200 million area, or perhaps $200 million plus. With net 

borrowed reserves at $200 or $250 million the Federal funds rate 

might range around 4-5/8 to 4-3/4 per cent, and the rate on 

3-month Treasury bills might move up to 4.70 per cent or slightly 

higher. He did not think there should be an attempt on the part 

of the System to force interest rates upward, and he hoped that 

market factors would bring about a satisfactory situation.  

Mr. Irons favored alternative A of the draft directives 

with Mr. Treiber's proposed amendment to the second paragraph. He 

thought it was better to call for maintaining current money market 

conditions rather than, even if only by implication, for some 

specific level of net borrowed reserves.



3/22/66 -81

Mr. Latham reported that all segments of the New England 

economy continued to approximate the national expansive trends.  

Unemployment had steadily declined. Manufacturing production and 

new orders were strong, and consumer spending continued unabated.  

A preliminary tabulation, based on a 24 per cent employment 

coverage, of New England manufacturers' capital expenditure plans 

for 1966 had a decidedly bullish tinge. The indicated planned 

capital expenditures for 1966 were 32 per cent in excess of the 

actual 1965 total, which in turn exceeded the 1964 total by 16 per 

cent. Those planned expenditures were about equally spread 

between durable and non-durable goods producers. There was, 

however, a wide range among industries, from 85 per cent in trans

portation equipment to 4.3 per cent for the electrical machinery 

industry. Planned expenditures for plant were expected to increase 

by 55 per cent and those for equipment by 26 per cent, with the 

latter accounting for 76 per cent of the total dollar expenditures.  

It was interesting to note that the Reserve Bank's 1965 spring 

survey of capital expenditure plans closely approximated actual 

expenditures for the year.  

The short-term liquid asset ratio and the loan-deposit 

ratio reflected the pressure on banks for credit accommodations 

and the need for funds, Mr. Latham observed. As of March 9, 1966, 

the loan-deposit ratio of District member banks stood at 77 per cent



3/22/66 -82

and at Boston member banks it was 82.5 per cent. The short-term 

liquid asset ratio was only 1.5 at Boston banks and 5.2 for the 

District.  

In the past week Mr. Latham had talked individually with 

the senior officials of the ten largest commercial banks in the 

District for the purpose of discussing the need for credit 

restraint. Without exception, they stated that they not only were 

under considerable pressure to meet the expanded needs of their 

regular customers, but they also were being offered participations 

in loans which were not previously available to them. Mutual 

savings banks, insurance companies, and other customers were 

inquiring as to the continued availability of their little-used 

lines. Bankers contacted indicated that they were definitely 

attempting to limit credit to productive uses, but admitted that 

"productive use" was open to a wide range of interpretation. With 

only oneexception, no attempt had yet been made to limit consumer 

credit other than by raising rates. The one exception was a bank 

reporting that its consumer credit portfolio had been fixed at the 

balance outstanding at the end of February. Bankers stated that 

they were extending very little credit to new customers unless 

good compensating balances were obtained. Some said they were 

setting up repayment schedules on long-outstanding collateral 

loans and were trying to get accounts receivable loans taken over 

by finance companies.



3/22/66 -83

Evidence was reported of customers reacting to the credit 

squeeze in a twofold manner, Mr. Latham said. Good customers were 

increasing the amount of credit requested in anticipation of having 

their requests cut, and other large firms, particularly utilities, 

which had agreed to seek the public market for needed long-term 

funds, were now shying away and again seeking bank credit. Some 

bankers indicated that they were being approached by marginal 

concerns that they knew were being turned down by banks that had 

previously met their credit needs.  

The question was repeatedly asked as to what the Boston 

Reserve Bank's policy would be with respect to the administration 

of the discount window, Mr. Latham remarked. All bankers expressed 

the opinion that public demand would have to be curtailed and that 

a firm fiscal policy was in order. He added that it had been some 

time since bankers were last put in a position where they were 

required to say no to bankable credit requests, and they were 

finding it difficult to do so.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

There are one or two less strong readings among 
the economic signals being reported to us this morning 
(i.e.. less strong inventory growth in January, slower 
rise in retail sales, and lower housing starts in 
February), but the overwhelming bulk of the signals is 
still continuing to come in strong. Expansion of 
demand is building up real pressure on resources. The 
rise in the wholesale price index for industrial 
commodities picked up in February, and supplemental



3/22/66

information suggests that price increases are becoming 
more pervasive.  

In these circumstances, I believe that responsible 
public policy calls for action to moderate the rate of 
growth of demand. As most of you know, I am one of those 
who would like to see some excessive demands trimmed by 
a further round of fiscal tightening. I suspect many of 
us around the table are agreed on this, with the arguable 
points being whether a tax increase is obtainable and 
when and how much it might be. On these points, it seems 
to me that the wisest attitude is not to be so skeptical 

as to expect no further tax increase at all this year, 
but, on the other hand, not to be so certain of its 
likelihood and efficacy as to lay back on the monetary 
oars and coast. To my mind, continued gradual tighten
ing of reserve pressure is the proper order for the day.  

I think there is some reason for us to be gratified 
with what has been accomplished with gradual reserve 
tightening over the last six weeks. The rate of total 

bank credit growth seems to have been slowed down, there 

has been some lessening of bank loan availability, and 
this has been accomplished without a major dislocation 

of financial markets or interest rates. Any tendency 

toward complacency in the light of these achievements, 
however, should have been jarred by the upsurge in 
business loans and money supply just before and over the 

March tax date. Until and unless those increases prove 

to be temporary, some partly offsetting firmness in 

reserve posture ought to be sought.  
This seems to me to be another situation in which 

we could benefit by framing our directions to the 

Manager in somewhat more flexible terms. To be explicit, 

I would like to see net borrowed reserves averaging 

around $200 million, but I would be prepared to see this 

figure drop to $300 million should bank loan and money 

supply expansion hold up strongly and expand required 

reserves in the process. On the other hand, I would be 

prepared to see net borrowed reserves move back to a 

level closer to $100 million if bank loan and money 

movements slacken and required reserves decline more 

than seasonally. On the record, I believe this kind of 

flexible instruction would have worked out rather well 
over the past three weeks, and I think it could prove 

equally apt in the uncertain weeks ahead.

-84-



3/22/66 -85

With this understanding of preferred operating 
techniques, I would be prepared to vote in favor of a 
renewal of the existing directive, or of Alternative B, 
if we want change simply for the sake of change. I 
would not want to expand this language to give any 
special attention to money market rates. I think the 
purposes of the Committee have been well served by our 
recent greater emphasis on reserve availability, and 
I think we should continue with this kind of policy.  

In connection with Mr. Robertson's concluding remark, 

Mr. Shepardson noted that several of the speakers around the table 

had indicated that they favored no change in policy and then had 

expressed a preference for alternative A for the directive. He 

would interpret no change in policy as calling for either readoption 

of the existing directive or use of alternative B.  

Chairman Martin indicated that he favored readopting the 

existing directive; it seemed to him that little, if anything, was 

added by the language changes made in either alternative A or B.  

It was clear that the majority today favored keeping the pressure 

on, but not applying it too stringently. A number of people he 

had talked with were generally agreed that the money market had 

been handled quite well recently. While there were no grounds for 

complacency, he thought the Committee had come through the year

end period well, and it was evident that its policy now was biting.  

In a recent conversation on the subject of credit rationing, 

the Chairman continued, it had been suggested to him that "rationing" 

was the wrong word; what was really needed was intelligent



3/22/66 -86

administration. He hoped that the System would administer the 

discount window intelligently and that bankers would be asked to 

become bankers again. Since there were twelve Reserve Banks with 

discount windows to administer, completely uniform standards could 

not be expected. Basically, however, what the System was trying 

to do was to restrain bank credit growth as much as reasonably 

possible. At the same time, it would be desirable in many cases 

for banks to use the discount window in preference to other forms 

of borrowing because the System could control the volume of dis

counting. For a long time, he noted, many banks had not been 

coming to the window at all. Consequently, the window should not 

be administered in too heavy-handed a manner; it was necessary to 

weigh requests for accommodation in the light of general policy 

objectives. The go-around today had been quite helpful, he thought, 

in pointing up the problem.  

Returning to the subject of the directive, Chairman Martin 

said that in his opinion Mr. Robertson had stated the matter 

correctly--the modifications of language in the staff's two 

alternatives seemed mainly to involve change for its own sake.  

He suggested that the Committee vote on whether to readopt the 

existing directive.  

Mr. Hickman said that he agreed with Mr. Robertson as to 

the type of policy that should be pursued, including centering



3/22/66 -87

the target for net borrowed reserves at the present level of 

around $200 million. He asked, however, whether readopting the 

existing directive would not imply some further firming, rather 

than maintaining the present degree of firmness. He would not 

want to see net borrowed reserves deepen to $300 million, for 

example, unless the demand for bank credit strengthened.  

Chairman Martin observed that it probably would be better 

to have net borrowed reserves fluctuate, depending on the strength 

of the pressures in the money market, rather than to have them 

held at any specific level. He did not believe it was possible, 

however, to spell out that sort of instruction in the directive.  

The problem was typical of those the Committee often faced in 

composing its directive. Perhaps Mr. Brimmer, as the newest 

member, would like to try his hand at working out such problems.  

Mr. Daane commented that he thought the objective sought 

by Mr. Treiber's proposed amendment to the staff's draft directive 

was simply to avoid the kinks in the money market that might 

develop if there was too close allegiance to a target for net 

borrowed reserves. Perhaps that objective could be accomplished 

within the framework of the existing directive.  

Mr. Swan said that Mr. Hickman's point seemed to be a 

valid one, since the existing directive called for further gradual 

reduction in reserve availability.



3/22/66 -88

Mr. Robertson noted that the net borrowed reserve target 

he had recommended in suggesting that the existing directive be 

renewed was one fluctuating around $200 million--the present 

level--and moving up or down from that level depending on the 

strength of required reserves.  

Chairman Martin said he doubted that monetary policy could 

be formulated as a series of still pictures. It was a moving 

stream, constantly flowing in one direction or the other, and to 

try to stop the stream could change the whole course of policy.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that he had favored the recent firming 

actions. He did not want to overdo them, however, and did not 

favor further firming until the Committee had more time to assess 

developments. He was prepared to vote for readopting the existing 

directive if it was to be interpreted in the manner Mr. Robertson 

suggested.  

Chairman Martin said it was clear to him that the Committee 

would not want to overdo firming action.  

Mr. Treiber observed that the existing directive seemed 

workable to him in the light of the discussion around the table.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and 

seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and 

directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the fol

lowing current economic policy directive:



3/22/66

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that the domestic economy is 
expanding vigorously, with prices continuing to creep 
up and credit demands remaining strong. Our inter
national payments continue in deficit. In this 

situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 

policy to resist inflationary pressures and to help 

restore reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments, by moderating the growth in the 

reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to attaining some fur
ther gradual reduction in reserve availability.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, April 12, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-89-



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on March 22, 1966 

Alternative A (no further change) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding vigorously, 
with prices rising further and credit demands remaining strong.  
Our international payments continue in deficit. In this situation, 
it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist infla
tionary pressures and to help restore reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments, by maintaining moderate rates 
of growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 
a view to maintaining about the present level of net reserve 
availability.  

Alternative B (further gradual firming) 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate that the domestic economy is expanding vigorously, 

with prices rising further and credit demands remaining strong, 

Our international payments continue in deficit. In this situation, 

it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist infla

tionary pressures and to help restore reasonable equilibrium in 

the country's balance of payments, by moderating the growth in the 

reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserve 

availability.


