











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 15, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 15, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Robertson, presiding 
Brimmer 
Daane 

Maisel 
Mitchell 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Ellis, Alternate for Mr. Wayne 
Patterson, Alternate for Mr. Francis 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Hickman and Galusha, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 

City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Jones, Partee, and Solomon, 

Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors



8/15/67 -2

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Weiner, Assistant to the Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Heflin and Lewis, First Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond 
and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Mann, Parthemos, 
Taylor, Moffatt, Tow, and Green, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of Boston, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, 
Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas, 

respectively 
Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 

Bank of San Francisco 
Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Gustus, Research Officer and Economist, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, Mr. Robertson was elected to serve as 

Acting Chairman for the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 18, 1967, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on July 18, 1967, was accepted.



8/15/67

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on August 4, 1967, approving renewal of the 

$400 million swap arrangement with the German Federal Bank from 

August 9 to December 15, 1967, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 18 through August 14, 

1967, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period July 18 through August 14, 1967, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 

at this meeting indicate that economic activity has 

been expanding more rapidly in recent weeks. With 

strengthening of private demands for final products 

and further curtailment of inventory investment, a 

better balance between inventories and sales is 

emerging. Upward pressures on costs persist and the 

over-all indexes of both wholesale and consumer prices 

have risen further. The balance of payments deficit 

has remained substantial and is a serious national 

problem. Bank credit expansion has continued large, 

while most short- and long-term interest rates have 

fluctuated close to their highs of the year, under 

the combined pressure of heavy private security



8/15/67

market financing and of current and prospective Federal 
financing. A new fiscal program has been proposed by 
the President, including a sizable increase in income 
taxes, which would make a substantial contribution to 
balanced economic growth. In this situation, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions, including bank credit growth, 
conducive to continuing economic expansion, while rec
ognizing the need for reasonable price stability for 
both domestic and balance of payments purposes.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
expected Treasury financing activity, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining about the prevail
ing conditions in the money market; but operations shall 
be modified, insofar as Treasury financing permits, to 
moderate any apparent tendency for bank credit to expand 
more than currently expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 12, 1967, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Assistant Secretary


