









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 10, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 

Clay 
Daane 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Shepardson 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes 
Wayne, Alternate for Mr. Bopp

Messrs. Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee, 

Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Hersey and Reynolds, Advisers, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors



1/10/67

Chairman 

of the new year, 

caution to those 

decisions of the 

public.

-2

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hilkert, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Taylor, Baughman, 
Jones, Andersen, and Craven, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
New York, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Meek and Monhollon, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Martin said that at this, the first Committee meeting 

it might be well once again to offer a word of 

in attendance in reminder that the discussions and 

Committee were confidential until officially made

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
held on December 13, 1966, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies 

for the period December 13, 1966, through January 4, 1967, and a 

supplemental report for January 5 through 9, 1967. Copies of these 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.



1/10/67

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this week.  

Holdings of the Stabilization Fund were about $50 million, and at 

the moment there were no sizable central bank orders in sight.  

On the London gold market, however, serious trouble appeared to 

be shaping up. During 1966 the gold pool lost $300 million, leaving 

resources at the end of the year of only $60 million. In addition, 

and this was not generally appreciated, during 1966 the U.S. sold 

$150 million for domestic uses. Thus, over the year the total drain 

into market uses from official stocks was $450 million--a very large 

figure and, as he had indicated at previous meetings, one that 

threatened to grow in future years.  

Toward the year-end, Mr. Coombs continued, a good deal of 

gold had been bought for window-dressing purposes, some of which 

might flow back; indeed, in the first few days of the year the gold 

pool picked up about $11 million. But there had been two disturbing 

events recently. One was the First National City Bank letter which 

pointed up the deterioration in the supply-demand situation for gold 

and concluded that all new production in 1966 had gone into private 

hands, with none left for official stocks. The true situation was 

worse than that, but the publication of the National City Bank's 

analysis had had a highly unsettling effect on the market, which 

now was beginning to realize the underlying situation. A second,



1/10/67 -4-

and more disturbing, development was the French campaign against

the U.S., which was now directed at raising doubts about the

official price of gold. Of course, the French were well aware of

the nature of the supply-demand situation through their participation

in the London gold pool. Their campaign moved into higher gear

last weekend with the French Finance Minister, Mr. Debre, calling

for multilateral consideration of the official price of gold. His

statement was taken by the market as an official suggestion that the

price of gold should be increased. Mr. Debre would meet with the

other Common Market Finance Ministers on January 16 and if past

experience was a guide the communique issued after that meeting

might well stir up still further speculation. There had been very

heavy buying of gold in London today, and thus far the pool had

lost $9 million. That situation could get worse.

There had been quite a bit of discussion of Mr. Debre's

press conference at the Basle meeting this past weekend, Mr. Coombs

continued, and the atmosphere was one of genuine alarm. He thought

it fair to say that all of the Governors were angry with the French.

It was not clear what they could do about it; it would be hard for

them to break with France on financial policy because of their

relations in the Common Market. He hoped, however, that it would

be possible to get the cooperation of other central banks in devising

some sort of contingency plan for dealing with a possible breakout



1/10/67 -5

of the London gold price. As he had said many times before, he 

thought that was the single most serious threat facing the U.S.  

in the area of international finance, and it was more dangerous 

today than it had been earlier.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs reported, sterling 

continued to be depressed by uncertainties with respect to both 

short- and long-run prospects. For each of the past three months 

the British had managed to squeeze out some small reserve gains-

on the order of $40 or $50 million--but those gains were highly 

inadequate in relation to the volume of their debts falling due 

this year. They owed well over $1 billion in short-term (6 - 9 month) 

debt that had been on the books since last summer. In addition, 

they owed about $900 million to the International Monetary Fund, 

on which the payment date was the end of November. Thus, they had 

over $2 billion to be paid off within about ten months. Unless 

they got a major swing in their favor they were not going to make 

it, and their failure to do so could have very serious consequences 

for the international payments system. He hoped that in such an 

eventuality the System would be able to protect itself, but much 

of the answer lay in what the British themselves could do in the 

way of policy to bring about a significant turnaround in the situation.



1/10/67

There was some hope for sterling in a general easing of 

international credit conditions, Mr. Coombs said. The discount 

rate reduction by the German Federal Bank had been helpful, and 

it was quite possible that the Bank might cut the rate again during 

the next few weeks. More importantly, the Germans might reduce 

their reserve requirements and thus bring about some easing in 

their credit markets. The British took the position that their 

difficulties of last summer were attributable largely to general 

monetary tightness, and that argument undoubtedly had some merit.  

If they now were to recoup the losses they incurred beginning last 

fall they probably would have to maintain some competitive advantage 

in interest rates and credit availability, in order to attract some 

part of the funds from the U.S. and other countries flowing back 

into the Euro-dollar market. On balance, he thought it would be 

to the advantage of the U.S. to have those funds flow to Britain-

not only in permitting the British to pay off their loans on time, 

but also because the safest place for the money to go that was being 

returned to the Euro-dollar market by U.S. banks was to the U.K.  

Regarding System swap operations, Mr. Coombs reported that 

at present the System owed $85 million to the Bundesbank, $35 million 

to the Netherlands Bank, and a total of $90 million to the Bank for 

International Settlements and the National Bank of Switzerland. He 

hoped that the debt in marks could be cleaned up in the next few



1/10/67 -7

weeks; it had been incurred in connection with year-end pressures 

which had already moderated. Repayment of the Swiss franc debt 

might be delayed somewhat because the Swiss took in a large volume 

of dollars over the year-end both outright and in one-month swaps, 

and the reversal of those reserve accruals had priority over 

System acquisitions of francs as Switzerland moved into its seasonal 

deficit. There was a chance that repayment of the System drawings 

would not begin until near the end of February, but he hoped for 

some repayments in February and full liquidation by the end of 

March. That would mean that the System's Swiss franc borrowings 

would be extended beyond the 6-month period usually thought of as 

a limit, perhaps to 7-1/2 or 8 months, but he did not see much 

possibility of accelerating repayment. The Treasury might be asked 

to issue a franc-denominated bond to the Swiss to permit more rapid 

repayment, but in his judgment it would be better to save that 

device for possible future needs. It might prove more difficult 

to clean up the guilder debt. In part, the problem resulted from 

the fact that the Dutch had no means of increasing their money 

supply except by running a balance of payments surplus or by main

taining domestic money market conditions that pulled money in from 

abroad. This primitive monetary policy was an important factor in 

the frequency of Federal Reserve drawings of Dutch guilders and 

similarly tended to obstruct the repayment process. To repay the 

$35 million now outstanding, it might be well either for the U.S.



1/10/67 -8

to make a drawing on the IMF or for the Treasury to issue a 

guilder bond to the Dutch. Both possibilities were now under 

consideration.  

On the other side of the accounts, Mr. Coombs continued, 

the BIS still owed the System $49 million of the $200 million they 

had borrowed to deal with year-end window-dressing, and he thought 

they would be able to liquidate that remaining debt within the next 

week or two. The Bank of England had paid off $100 million of its 

drawings under the swap line with the System and he thought that 

in using any reserve accruals they would give priority to repaying 

their remaining debt. The System swap line was the most important 

source of credit the British had, and thus far they had been scrupu

lous in paying off their borrowings. Unless some severe problems 

arose over the next month or two--and that was conceivable, given 

the pressures in the gold market--there was a reasonable chance 

that their debt to the System would be liquidated within roughly 

six months from the time it was incurred.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that Mr. Coombs had said it might be 

helpful to the U.S. if Britain maintained some differential in 

interest rates. Did that imply that the U.S. should not encourage 

the Bank of England to lower their Bank rate? 

Mr. Coombs replied that he thought the British would have 

a difficult problem in working out the precise means for taking



1/10/67 -9

advantage of an easing of credit in international markets. He 

felt that it would be appropriate to offer a very general comment 

to the effect that it might be desirable for them to maintain some 

differential. But it probably would be undesirable to suggest any 

specific ways of doing so, since some delicate political questions 

might well be involved.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
December 13, 1966, through January 9, 
1967, were approved, ratified, and 
confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs reported that the two swap arrangements with 

the German Federal Bank--the original $250 million, six-month 

arrangement and the $150 million, five-month arrangement negotiated 

on a temporary basis in September--matured on February 9, 1967.  

At the last Basle meeting President Blessing of the Bundesbank 

indicated that they would be prepared to renew the temporary arrange

ment and to consolidate it with the original arrangement. Mr. Coombs 

recommended renewal of the combined arrangement with the German 

Federal Bank, totaling $400 million, for a period of six months.  

Renewal of the $400 million swap 

arrangement with the German Federal 
Bank for a period of six months was 

approved.  

Mr. Coombs then reported that the $100 million arrangement 

with the Bank of France would come to the end of its three-month



1/10/67 -10

term on February 10, 1967. That arrangement was inoperative, and 

it was becoming somewhat anomalous in view of the French Government's 

attitude, but he thought there was some advantage in continuing to 

maintain it as a bridge to the future when the French might be 

somewhat more amenable to international cooperation than they were 

at the moment. Accordingly, he recommended renewal of the arrange

ment.  

Renewal of the $100 million swap 
arrangement with the Bank of France 
for a period of three months was 
approved.  

Mr. Coombs noted that several drawings under the swap lines 

would reach maturity soon. On January 25, 1967 two Swiss franc 

drawings would mature--one for $25 million with the BIS and one for 

$15 million with the Swiss National Bank. If renewed, both would 

be second renewals, thus extending their terms beyond the usual 

six-month period. As he had indicated earlier, he hoped that the 

seasonal weakening of the franc in the spring months would enable 

the System to clean up those drawings in February and March.  

Mr. Shepardson expressed continuing reservations with regard 

to the extension of swap drawings beyond a six-month period.  

Chairman Martin observed that Mr. Shepardson's reservations 

were well taken. He thought, however, that the Committee could 

approve second renewals since it was still operating on an experi

mental basis in this area.



1/10/67 -11

Renewal of the two Swiss franc 
drawings was noted without objection.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs noted that two drawings on the Netherlands 

Bank would mature soon--a $10 million drawing on January 23, and a 

$25 million drawing on February 7, 1967. Both of those drawings 

also had already been renewed once, but as he had mentioned earlier 

the possibilities of cleaning them up either by going to the IMF 

or by issuing a guilder bond to the Dutch were under consideration.  

In his view the guilder bond might be the more satisfactory method 

since the flows of funds to the Netherlands resulted from their 

tight credit policies, and did not reflect a basic balance of payments 

surplus. But whatever the method used, he thought he could assure 

the Committee that the System's guilder debt would be repaid within 

a month or six weeks.  

Mr. Shepardson expressed reservations about second renewals 

of these drawings also.  

Renewal of the two drawings 

on the Netherlands Bank was noted 

without objection.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period December 13, 1966, through 

January 4, 1967, and a supplemental report covering the period



1/10/67

January 5 through 9, 1967. Copies of both reports have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

Since the Committee last met the capital markets 
have turned in a strong performance in a buoyant 
atmosphere, bank credit has showed renewed strength, 
and the money market has weathered the stresses and 
strains of the tax and year-end statement dates with
out undue problems. In general, bank credit expansion 
moved ahead more rapidly and market interest rates 
declined further than had been anticipated at the time 
of the last meeting without a need to push net borrowed 
reserves to zero or the Federal funds rate to 5 per 
cent or below. And with market rates moving lower, 
banks were able to add to their outstanding CD's in 
December in contrast to the $700 million-$l billion 
decline anticipated a month ago.  

Market expectations--shaped by additional evidence 
of less restraint in monetary policy, by weakness in 
some economic indicators, and to some extent, by develop
ments in Vietnam--in effect succeeded in changing the 
relationships among the short-run monetary variables 
with which we are most concerned in our day-to-day 
operations. As the various written reports to the 

Committee have indicated, much of the rise in bank credit 

can be traced to increased borrowing by dealers to finance 

their substantial inventories of securities and to in

creases in bank portfolios of Government and municipal 
securities, Dealer financing needs have exerted pressure 

on the money market, but with the major New York City 

banks maintaining their dealer loan rates at high levels, 

there has been some restraint recently on dealers' 

willingness to add to their holdings. I would not now 

characterize dealer positions as being dangerously 
over-extended, but they could become a source of market 

pressure if the anticipated flow of corporate and public 

fund money to the market and continued bank demand fail 

to materialize at a time when there is little seasonal 

need for the System to supply reserves.  

Open market operations, as the written reports to 

the Committee have detailed, were frequent and large, as

-12-



1/10/67

they usually are in December, and were complicated more 
than usually by the tendency for reserves to fall short 
of expectations, by the shift in market expectations, 
and by year-end developments involving international 
money flows. Outright purchases of Government securities 
approached $1 billion, and very heavy use was made of 
repurchase agreements against Government and agency 
securities over the period. Over $4 billion in repurchase 
agreements were made, with the average daily balance 
amounting to $575 million.  

Repurchase agreements were a particularly useful 
tool during this period in view of the many uncertainties 
in the reserve picture. They enabled the System to make 
heavy injections of reserves in order to head off money 
market tightness on individual days, when it seemed 
likely that the operation would have to be shortly 
reversed. With dealer financing needs a source of 
recurrent pressure in the money markets, the repurchase 
agreement was a natural instrument for injecting reserves 
at the point of greatest need. A comparable volume of 
outright purchases and sales of securities would 
undoubtedly have subjected the markets to a series of 
unnecessary shocks and could have had unpredictable 
effects on interest rates during a difficult period.  
Moreover, we learned early in the period that very sizable 
sales of Treasury bills by foreign monetary authorities 
would be involved at the year-end in regular and special 
debt repayments to the United States. Although the 
precise amounts and the timing were not clear at that 
early date, it appeared advisable to conduct operations 
in such a way as to leave open an option for the System 
to acquire at least part of these bills, rather than be 
forced to sell as much as $1/2 billion or more Treasury 
bills in the market at the very end of the year. Quite 
obviously the nonbank Government securities dealers 
welcomed the opportunity to sell securities to the System 
under repurchase agreements made at the discount rate, 
but we did not consider it wise to give out a signal that 
could easily have been misinterpreted in the market by 
raising the rate at this particular time.  

Rates on three- and six-month Treasury bills declined 

about 1/4 per cent over the interval, with some tendency 
for rates to level off at the end of the period. In 
yesterday's regular weekly Treasury bill auction, average 

rates of 4.82 and 4.89 per cent, respectively, were set

-13-



1/10/67

on the three- and six-month bills. Rates on bankers' 
acceptances, commercial paper, and FNMA discount notes 
also moved lower over the period. Yields on intermediate
and long-term Treasury obligations declined by 20 to 50 
basis points, and by the close of the period yields in 
the 3- to 5-year area were 1 - 1-1/2 percentage points 
below their August peaks, while long-term bond yields 
were about back to where they were at the time of the 
December 1965 discount rate change. Despite the build-up 
of the calendar of new issues, the corporate and municipal 
markets have maintained a confident tone. The $250 
million A.T. & T. issue, which is up for bidding this 
morning, was expected last night to be reoffered at 
about 5-3/8 - 5-1/2 per cent, compared with a 5.83 yield 
in the last Aaa telephone issue brought to market on 
December 6. The new FNMA 5, 10, and 15-year participation 
certificates--brought to market at a uniform 5.20 per 
cent--received an excellent reception. The 15-year 
issue rose to a premium of as much as 20/32 bid, until 
late yesterday when the price dropped 1/2 point reflecting 
market rumors of an early Export-Import Bank participation 
certificate announcement.  

The next few weeks are apt to be a testing period 
in the market for the pattern of interest rate relation
ships and financial flows that have been emerging since 
monetary policy entered a phase of less restraint. It 
will also be a period in which the markets will be 
assessing the implications of the various Presidential 
messages for the monetary-fiscal policy mix in 1967, and 
will be reassessing the economic outlook as each new 
bit of information becomes available. As the blue book 1/ 
indicates, monetary expansion is expected to be vigorous 
in January, but there are at least the usual number of 
uncertainties in the picture. The Treasury will be 

announcing in about two weeks the terms of its February 
refunding, and the usual "even keel" considerations will 
come into play in the latter part of the interval before 

the Committee meets again.  

In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Holmes said 

that he thought that dealers' positions were not dangerously 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



1/10/67 -15

overextended partly because they were not unusually large relative 

to other recent years; for example, dealer financing needs 

currently were only about 10 per cent larger than they had been 

two years ago. Dealers with whom the Desk had talked appeared 

confident of the market. They were concerned about the high level 

of marginal borrowing costs at New York banks, but were willing 

to incur some negative carry in the expectation that they would 

make out quite well. Their holdings of coupon issues had not 

expanded substantially, which was rather surprising in view of 

the change in expectations. Dealer financing needs had been a 

source of money market pressure recently, as he had noted, and 

they could pose a problem if the flows anticipated this month did 

not take place.  

In reply to another question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Holmes 

said that the volume of System repurchase agreements with dealers 

had been quite high recently, but it usually was high in December.  

In December 1966 the System had financed about 12 per cent of 

dealer positions in Governments, compared to 7 per cent in 

December 1965 and 10 per cent in December 1964. Thus, the Desk 

had been doing a bit more through RP's recently than in earlier 

years, but not markedly more.  

Mr. Mitchell then referred to Mr. Holmes' comment that it 

had been considered unwise to raise the rate charged on RP's in



1/10/67 -16

the recent period on the ground that such a signal could be easily 

misconstrued in the market. He asked whether the same situation 

would hold in the coming period.  

Mr. Holmes replied that RP's were not likely to be made in 

large volume in the coming weeks of January, when the Desk probably 

would not be supplying reserves. He thought that a higher rate on 

RP's could be adequately explained to dealers.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether debt management activity was 

likely to interfere with achievement of Committee objectives over 

the next month or two, apart from sales of participation certificates 

and agency issues. There had been reports to the effect that as 

monetary conditions eased the Treasury would tend increasingly to 

step into the market with the objective of achieving some lengthening 

of the debt. In particular, did the Manager expect that the February 

refunding would impose a greater burden on the market than had been 

anticipated? 

Mr. Holmes replied that it was obvious, given the 4-1/4 

per cent interest rate ceiling on new bond issues, that the Treasury 

would not be offering a maturity beyond 5 years in the February 

refunding. Thinking had not yet focused on the terms of the refund

ing, and probably would not until the end of January approached.  

It was possible that the Treasury might make a split offering,



1/10/67 -17

involving a short-term security and one with a maturity in the 

neighborhood of 4 or 5 years, but no decision had been reached.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether the Committee was not relatively 

free of an even keel restraint, at least for the first part of the 

coming period, in view of the facts that the refunding involved 

less than $4 billion in publicly-held maturing issues and that 

its terms were not to be announced until near the end of January.  

Mr. Holmes replied that he thought the refunding would 

not be an especially difficult one, and accordingly that it should 

not constrain the Committee from changing policy today if it was 

inclined to do so.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Swan, Mr. Holmes said that 

the next Treasury financing after the forthcoming refunding was 

likely to be a cash offering for payment in the second half of 

February.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period December 13, 1966, 
through January 9, 1967, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.



Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

The new information on domestic nonfinancial develop
ments that has become available since our last meeting 
confirms the deceleration in the pace of the economic 
expansion. The staff now estimates an increase of only 
$7 billion in the GNP in the current quarter, despite 
the fact that the fourth-quarter 1966 increase has been 
raised to over $14 billion.  

The most disturbing aspect of recent economic 
developments is the sharply increased extent to which 
production is going into inventories. Business inventory 
accumulation has apparently been even greater than assumed 
earlier and final takings smaller. Christmas sales were 
generally disappointing to retailers and the rise of 
consumer expenditures in the fourth quarter as a whole 
was relatively small. To lagging sales of autos and 
construction materials has been added less strength in 
furniture, appliances, textiles, and other goods.  

As for prices, recent developments have been mixed, 
as indicated in the green book,1/ but the net result has 
been a slowdown in the rate of rise of the broad price 
indices. In the new year, prospects are for further 
advances, but at a slower pace.  

The future course of consumption and of the whole 
economy for that matter will depend importantly on 
developments in the three main areas of more or less 
exogenous spending, namely, business outlays on plant 
and equipment and on inventories and defense spending.  
This is particularly true since consumption has been high 
relative to income for several quarters.  

We have no additional direct information today on 
business fixed expenditures, but the data on new orders 
for durable goods support the finding of the November 
Commerce-SEC survey, namely, that the rise is decelerating.  
New orders were down in both October and November, in part 
due to lower defense orders. The level of new orders in 
November was the lowest in a year and the backlog of 
outstanding orders declined for the first time in three 
years. The National Association of Purchasing Agents 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



1/10/67

also states that the number of its members reporting 
improved new orders and higher production in December 
was the smallest since the 1960-61 recession.  

Definitive information on the Federal budget and 
defense spending is still not available, but the informa
tion from the Daily Treasury Statement on recent months' 
spending confirms staff projections of a tapering off 
in the rate of increase of defense outlays beginning 
last quarter. But, despite a tapering off in the rate 
of defense spending and even if a tax increase is enacted, 
the Federal budget deficit for both this fiscal year 
and next is likely to be large. Of particular relevance 
to economic developments, though, is the fact that part 
of the deficit for the next few quarters at least is 
likely to be a passive reflection of a reduced rate of 
growth in tax revenues resulting from the projected 
slowdown in the economic expansion rather than of increased 
spending. We shall learn more about the fiscal picture 
shortly in the State of the Union and Budget messages.  

Since business inventory developments are a key 
factor in the likely course of the economy in the near
term future, let me turn back to them for a second and 
closer look.  

I mentioned earlier that recent inventory accumulation 
had been larger than anticipated earlier. Despite better 
accounting controls and higher financing costs, stock-sales 
ratios have been on a sharp rise since early 1966, 
particularly in the durable goods manufacturing industries.  
The rise in stocks has been largest in work-in-process 
in the areas of consumer durable goods, defense goods, 
and machinery and equipment.  

What does this mean for the likely future course of 
inventories in particular and of the total economy in 
general? As for consumer durable goods, the recent rise 
in stocks has been in household durables as well as in 
autos. Production has already been cut back in many of 
these lines, in autos to approximately the 8-million-car 
current annual rate of sales. In the defense area, the 
rise in new orders dropped off rather sharply in October 
and November, and, with output of defense equipment now 
rising much less rapidly than earlier in 1966, defense 
work-in-process stocks may also be rising less rapidly 
from now on, particularly if some production bottlenecks 
are broken. Finally, in the area of machinery and 
equipment, the tapering off of the plant and equipment

-19-



1/10/67

investment boom should mean a pronounced deceleration 
in the rise of stocks in these industries in coming 
months, even though the order backlog in this area is 
still large.  

All this tends to confirm the staff estimate of a 
sharp fall-off in business inventory building in the 
current quarter, perhaps by $5 billion or more. Even 
such a drop is not likely to lower stock-sales ratios 
and as a result pressure for further curtailment of 
additions to inventories is apt to continue.  

A sharp decline in inventory accumulation would in 
and of itself create another pause in the economic expan
sion similar to those we have experienced several times 
since World War II. This is a common economic forecast 
for the first half of 1967. It is shared by some 
Administration economists and by most of our staff.  

The inventory deceleration will reduce market 
demands and put to a test the underlying strength of 
business capital spending programs, that is, the extent 
to which such programs are supported by longer-run as 
contrasted with short-run market prospects. The rate 
of increase in business capital spending is already 
decelerating, and if such spending actually begins to 
decline we shall have a situation calling for major 
policy alterations. In the meantime, though, even the 
near-term prospects for moderately reduced economic 
growth call for a continuation of the gradual process 
of overt monetary easing on which the Committee embarked 
two meetings ago.  

Mr. Axilrod made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The policy of reduced monetary restraint initiated 
by this Committee in the fall appears to be gradually 

taking hold in financial markets. This is evidenced 
mainly by the increased flow of time deposit funds to 
banks, including negotiable CD money to large banks, 
and also by the more comfortable position of nonbank 
savings institutions. It is also seen in the further 
declines of market interest rates, both short- and 

long-term, during the past several weeks.  
But in many ways the impact of the new policy on 

markets and the economy is not yet fully secure.

-20-



1/10/67

For one, the substantial rise in the money supply 
from its recent mid-November low point appears to have 
been in large part a short-run response to a decline in 
U.S. Government deposits. We have not yet had evidence 
that at current levels of interest rates the privately
held money stock is capable of sustained moderate growth-
say, at a rate much above the 2 per cent of 1966.  

For a second, the lending policies of banks and 
other financial institutions do not yet appear to have 
altered definitively toward less restraint. Some probing 
in that direction is probably in train, but our contacts 

with banks in recent weeks suggest that a wait-and-see 

attitude still predominates.  

And for a third, the recent interest rate declines 
were in part based on expectations--expectations not 

only that monetary policy was easing but that domestic 
business expansion was weakening and that fiscal policy 

would in one way or another not be a very massive 

expansionary force in the period ahead. I would not rule 

out the possibility that interest rates could rise, at 

least temporarily, over the weeks ahead. On the other 

hand, if expectations of business weakening prove correct, 

even current interest rate levels may turn out to be too 

high to provide the needed encouragement to economic 

demand.  
While one's view as to the likely strength of demands 

for goods and services is fundamental to one's appraisal 

of the appropriateness of current interest rate levels, 
the condition of lending institutions is also a highly 

relevant factor. The stringency that developed in these 

institutions along with the 40-year record market interest 

rates of last year resulted in a marked further erosion 

of their liquidity positions. For commercial banks this 

is most dramatically illustrated by the rise last year 

in loan-deposit ratios (with dealer loans excluded) at 

New York City banks from around 70 per cent to 80 per 

cent. The adverse experience of such banks, savings 

and loan associations, and life insurance companies 

suggests that a significant relaxation of lending policies 

depends in good part on at least a partial restoration of 

their liquidity positions. And for both of those 

developments to proximate each other in time might require 

not only clearer signals as to prospective economic and 

fiscal events but also clearer signals from the monetary 

authority as might be indicated by some further reduction

-21-



1/10/67

in interest rates--or, at a minimum, efforts to forestall 
any reversal of the recent interest rate declines.  

The need to encourage a relatively prompt relaxation 
of lending standards at financial institutions is based 
in part on the nature of the economic imbalances that at 
the moment appear to be developing. A principal danger 
to the economy, as Mr. Koch has pointed out, seems to 
come from a probable relatively sharp decrease in inven
tory accumulation over the period ahead. While some 
inventory readjustment appears to be unavoidable, its 
speed and scope might be modified somewhat if banks 
were more accommodative of business loans. The inventory 
adjustment might also be tempered if consumer spending 
on goods, both durable and nondurable, could be relatively 
well maintained; and given the University of Michigan 
consumer survey evaluation that consumers are gloomy, 
but not outright pessimists, an easing of bank lending 
terms on loans directly to consumers and indirectly 
through finance companies might just make additional 
spending attractive or possible for some of the less 

dour consumers.  
Construction and home-building is, of course, the 

area which might be encouraged to provide most of the 
offset to any developing weakness in other economic 

sectors; and it is an area which has traditionally--and 
very recently--been quite responsive to changes in the 

financial environment. Recent monetary policy actions 

appear to have stopped the deterioration in mortgage 

markets, and set in motion forces--such as the renewed 

flow of savings funds to nonbank institutions--which 
should eventually yield an actual easing of conditions.  

This will depend on a continued good experience for 

savings and loan associations. But, if a prompter 
reversal of present market tightness is desired, it 

will depend on further declines in long-term market 

interest rates so as to increase the relative attrac

tiveness of mortgages to other financial institutions 

such as banks and insurance companies.  

It would appear that the easing of lending terms and 

conditions that major financial institutions seem to be 

approaching could be made more secure, and probably 

usefully hastened, if open market operations were conducted 

in such a way as to sustain continued bank reserve growth 

and to risk a temporarily rather rapid expansion. In 

this context, it may be desirable to attain a somewhat

-22-



1/10/67

lower Federal funds rate and a lower level of member 
bank borrowings than has prevailed on average in recent 
weeks--perhaps even a level of borrowings that would 
bring the net reserve position of banks close to zero 
and the Federal funds rate to around 5 per cent. If 
that were done, it is possible, but by no means certain, 
that the resulting expansion of reserves would be 
fairly rapid on average. But such an expansion would 
be desirable during the turn-around phase of monetary 
policy in the degree that it permits a decline of 
interest rates, a restoration of bank liquidity, and 
some relaxation of bank lending standards ahead of, 
rather than merely in reaction to, a reduction in loan 
demands.  

It is, however, particularly difficult to anticipate 

and quantify the interrelations among aggregate reserves, 
marginal reserve measures, and interest rates in the 
period ahead--given the diversity of economic forecasts 
and pressures and the unknown credit market reaction to 
tonight's State of the Union message and the forthcoming 

Federal budget. It is not difficult to conceive, for 

example, of upward bill rate pressures if dealers were 

to run from their current extended bill positions. On 

the other hand, it is also not difficult to envision 

circumstances--such as worsening business news--which 
might even make it desirable for open market operations 

at some stage to be conducted so as to give more direct 

encouragement to the flow of funds in long-term markets 

by including significant purchases of intermediate- or 

longer-term coupon issues. The slackening of the invest

ment boom appears to indicate that this winter's burst 

of corporate security issues is likely to fade in the 

spring; as a result, investor funds might be relatively 

quickly channeled to the mortgage market once it became 

clear that interest rates on other long-term securities 

would be substantially reduced. I put forth the suggestion 

for System purchases of coupon issues with some tentative

ness, but as indicative of the kind of flexibility in 

approach that monetary policy might wish to keep in 

reserve as some of the current uncertainties are resolved.  

Mr. Mitchell asked which, if any, of the alternative draft 

directives submitted by the staff 1 / Mr. Axilrod thought was 

consistent with the policy course he was recommending.

1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-23-



1/10/67 -24

Mr. Axilrod replied that alternative B could be consistent 

with the course he recommended, depending on the interpretation the 

Committee placed on the phrase, "somewhat easier conditions in the 

money market." 

Mr. Brimmer commented that by adopting alternative B the 

Committee would not necessarily be implying that it wanted to go 

as far as Mr. Axilrod recommended, and the latter agreed.  

Mr. Daane referred to Mr. Axilrod's comments about possible 

System purchases of coupon issues, and asked whether he thought 

that present conditions were parallel to those in the latter part 

of 1961 when "operation twist" was begun.  

Mr. Axilrod replied that he had not had such a parallel in 

mind. In the 1961 period the U.S. balance of payments was an 

important factor in the decision to begin purchases of coupon issues.  

While balance of payments considerations might again be relevant 

to the question, he had been addressing himself to the fact that 

it might be desirable to get a more rapid reversal of conditions 

in the mortgage market, and he had thought of open market operations 

in coupon issues as a possible means of reducing the typically 

long leads and lags in that area.  

Mr. Wayne commented that the policy course Mr. Axilrod had 

recommended seemed to him to be more closely represented by 

alternative C of the draft directives than by alternative B.



1/10/67 -25

Mr. Axilrod remarked that such a policy could be consistent 

with either of those alternatives, depending on what interpretations 

the Committee placed on their language. The problem he had seen 

with alternative C was that it called for "expansion in bank credit 

at a moderate rate," and under the course he recommended the expan

sion rate in the short run probably would be quite rapid. But 

that alternative might be taken as consistent with his policy 

recommendation if the Committee interpreted the word "moderate" as 

applying to the longer run, and was prepared to tolerate a rapid 

short-run expansion as banks acted to improve their liquidity 

positions.  

Mr. Swan observed that, as he had interpreted the analysis 

in the blue book, a shift to somewhat greater ease might well mean 

more rapid bank credit expansion over the longer run but at the 

same time it might have little effect on the January growth rate.  

Mr. Axilrod said his interpretation of the blue book 

discussion was that a move toward further ease at this meeting 

might result in bank credit expansion on average in January at an 

annual rate higher than the 7 - 9 per cent projected under unchanged 

money market conditions, as banks seized the opportunity to capture 

CD money and to restore their liquidity positions, but that the 

growth rate in the following months of the winter would be lower.



1/10/67 -26

Mr. Maisel asked whether the matter might not be clarified 

by concentrating on expected future developments rather than on 

what had already happened. As he understood it, much of the expan

sion included in the projection of a 7 - 9 per cent growth rate 

on average in January reflected strength in the latter part of 

December, rather than expected strength in the weeks ahead.  

Mr. Axilrod agreed. He noted that the blue book projected 

a 4 - 6 per cent growth rate between the end of December and the 

end of January, and that it implied no strengthening in February.  

Mr. Maisel asked whether it was not also expected that 

over the period from this meeting to the next bank credit would 

grow at a rather low rate.  

In reply, Mr. Axilrod said that that would be his guess.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments and related matters: 

In the fourth quarter of 1966, two new tendencies 
appeared in U.S. international transactions. The trade 
surplus began to improve. And the capital accounts 
began to deteriorate. Both tendencies had been expected, 
though perhaps not so soon.  

In anticipating these tendencies, all of us have 
felt concern about the possibility that the trade im
provement might come more slowly than the capital account 
deterioration, so that the over-all position would get 
worse before it got better. We have also felt concern 
that even over the longer span of a year or more, the 

payments position might not show any significant 
improvement.  

Recent events offer no comfort on either score, but 
neither do they add to the gloom. The fact that the



1/10/67

capital account deterioration outweighed the trade 
improvement between the third and fourth quarters seems 
to have resulted so much from special and erratic 
influences that it tells us little that is new about 
future prospects.  

The only recent changes in capital flows that we 
can yet identify relate to U.S. bank credit and to U.S.  
liabilities to the Euro-dollar market. The renewed 
moderate outflow of bank credit in October-November 
probably did not reflect much change in the lending 
attitudes of U.S. banks. Instead, it seems likely to 
have resulted from more active foreign use of existing 
lines of credit, perhaps because of year-end stringencies, 
and some bunching of term-loan disbursements without 
significant change in the rate of new commitments. One 
would expect that large U.S. banks, as their reserve and 
liquidity positions ease, would begin to make foreign 
loans more readily at about the same time that they ease 
their domestic lending. But the October-November out
flows seem to have come too soon to be related to any 
such general change.  

The leveling off and subsequent decline of U.S.  
banks' liabilities to their foreign branches since mid

November is more likely to have reflected the first 

effects of reduced tightness in domestic financial markets 

and in bank positions. But year-end influences play such 

a large role in these flows that we cannot yet judge 

whether the repayments to the Euro-dollar market came 
mainly at U.S. initiative or instead reflected mainly 

year-end difficulties in attracting wanted funds. Hence 

in this case, too, the recent experience provides little 

guide to the magnitude of future flows. It does seem 

likely, however, that given the large banks' preoccupation 

with their liquidity positions, they will want to make 

further repayments to the Euro-dollar market before giving 

the green light to their loan officers.  

These available data on fourth-quarter capital flows 

by no means explain what happened in that quarter. There 

must also have been a substantial deterioration on other 

items. One can only guess at the possibilities. Direct 

investment outflows, having fallen below the expected 

yearly average in the third quarter, may have increased in 

the fourth. There may well have been a reversal in the 

errors and omissions item, which had turned unusually 

favorable in the third quarter, presumably reflecting 

unrecorded capital inflows generated by the sterling crisis



1/10/67

and by the extreme tightness of credit here during the 
summer. There could also have been some further 
deterioration in military and service transactions, but 
these transactions as a group do not often show large 
quarterly changes.  

The improvement in the trade balance from the third 
quarter to October-November is a good deal easier to 
interpret than the changes on capital account; it probably 
represented the beginning of a new trend that will continue 
through at least several calendar quarters. Merchandise 
imports in October-November were little higher than in the 
third quarter. Imports of materials, which account for 
about two-fifths of the total, actually declined, even 
though within that category steel imports remained at 
record highs. Imports of materials tend to fluctuate like 
domestic production of materials, but with wider cyclical 
amplitude. If GNP develops as projected in the first 
half of 1967, with a sharp reduction in the rate of 
inventory accumulation and some decline in production of 
materials, there is likely to be a substantial decline in 
imports of materials.  

Imports of capital equipment increased further in 
October-November, but they should level off soon if the 
domestic projections of a leveling off in business spending 
and an easing of capacity pressures are fulfilled. Thus, 
even if imports of some consumer goods continue buoyant, 
I would not expect total merchandise imports to increase 
appreciably in the months ahead.  

Exports, meanwhile, should continue to advance. The 
pace will probably slow down from the 13 per cent annual 
rate registered from the third quarter to October-November.  
There were temporary elements in that advance, and there 
may be some weakening in Canadian demand for U.S. products.  
Demand has also been weakening in Britain and Germany, but 
our exports to those countries have already declined and 
may not fall much further.  

With shipments still rising to most other countries, 
the rate of growth in total U.S. exports ought not to fall 
below, say, an 8 per cent annual rate over the months 
ahead. This rate, with imports level, would raise the 
annual rate of trade surplus from about $3-1/2 billion in 
the low second half of 1966 to perhaps $5 billion or so 
in the first half of 1967.  

Since net outflows of capital (excluding foreign 
liquid funds) may increase by a roughly offsetting amount



1/10/67

between these two half-years, the liquidity balance seems 
likely to remain above a $2 billion annual rate. In 
addition, there will probably be outflows of foreign 
liquid funds. So the official settlements deficit also 
will probably exceed a $2 billion rate, in marked contrast 
to the exceptional surplus registered during the half-year 
just ended.  

These guesses, as I suggested earlier, are not signifi
cantly different from those of a month ago. What, if 
anything, do they imply for monetary policy, when taken 
together with domestic prospects? 

My answer is the same one that Mr. Hersey gave you 
at the last meeting. I can see no way in which monetary 
policy actions can improve the near-term payments outlook-
gloomy though it is--without jeopardizing the longer-term 
outlook. If for balance of payments reasons, monetary 
policy should seek to minimize capital outflows by denying 
an easing that domestic conditions seemed to require, 
the resultant further weakening of the domestic economy 
would be likely eventually to have adverse repercussions 
on activity abroad and hence on U.S. exports. In 
particular, if we should hesitate to ease as economic 
activity slackens, Britain would have to hesitate also, 
and the German authorities too might move more slowly 
than seems desirable. These three countries together have 
a decisive influence on the world economic climate.  

It remains essential, of course, to minimize domestic 
inflation of prices and costs, since these are the 
touchstone of the longer-run payments adjustment. But 
within that constraint, the objective of working toward 
long-run equilibrium in international payments is probably 
best served at this time by policies aimed at the domestic 
objective of sustaining growth.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement: 

As we enter a new year it should be helpful to look 
back over the old year and see how successful we have 
been as a nation in attaining our broad national economic 
goals of: (1) maximum sustainable growth, (2) reasonable 
price stability, (3) maximum practicable employment, and 

(4) equilibrium in international payments.

-29-



1/10/67

We have done best on the employment goal. Indeed, 
there have been many shortages of skilled labor, and even 
of unskilled labor in a number of places. Economic growth 
was high in 1966 but the high rate was not sustainable.  
After several years of relative price stability, 1966 was 
marked by upward price pressures, and as the year ended, 
further price increases appeared in prospect. A severe 
balance-of-payments problem has become even more acute.  

The combination of strong private demand and an 
additional stimulus from Federal fiscal policy put heavy, 
indeed excessive, pressure on our resources of men and 
equipment. Not only did the boom bring price increases 
at home, but it also contributed to a deterioration of 
our international trade surplus. Monetary policy was left 
with too much of the burden of fighting inflation. Money 
was tighter than it had been in decades.  

As the year-end approached, the hectic pace of busi
ness and credit expansion subsided, interest rates declined 
from their peaks, and there was some relaxation in the 
severe credit pressures of the summer.  

How about 1967? Some forecasters see a business slow
down or recession in 1967. Housing is in a slump, the 
capital boom is moderating, and consumers appear more 
hesitant. But the question is basically whether we are 
in a pause, or about to take a definite and cumulative 
turn downward. The growth in business spending for fixed 
investment and for inventories will doubtless be slower 

in 1967. On the other hand, we may expect a revival in 

residential construction. In any analysis of the economic 

outlook defense spending is a vital factor; indeed it is 

now a major factor. Although we will have to wait a week 

or so before we see the President's budget message it i, 

reasonable to assume that in the coming year there wil1 

be a substantial increase in such expenditures over last 

year. With continued over-all investment demand and high 

Government spending, a continued uptrend in consumer 

spending seems likely. It seems to us, on balance, that 

in 1967 as a whole an excessive expansion in demand is 

a greater danger than recession. In this connection, I 

note that the staff's analysis concentrated on the early 

part of the year.  
Although food prices have declined recently, the 

consumer has seen a persistent rise in the prices of 

nonfood commodities and especially of services. Labor cost 

per unit of output has been rising, and despite the relative 

stability of wholesale prices during the last couple of

-30-



1/10/67

months, a cost-price push seems likely. The demands of 
organized labor are likely to be high, and there are 
likely to be greater pressures on corporate profits.  

Our balance-of-payments record for 1966 is again 
discouraging. The deficit on a liquidity basis is likely 
to be well over $1-1/2 billion, compared with $1.3 billion 
in 1965. Had it not been for special transactions which 
were more than twice as great in 1966 as in 1965, the 1966 
deficit would have exceeded $3 billion. Every effort 
should be made to improve our trade balance. A determined 
effort to check inflation at home is essential to keep 
our exports competitive and to dampen the high demand for 
imports. It is difficult to see an improvement in our 
international balance of payments in 1967. Indeed, without 
a large amount of special transactions, the deficit on a 
liquidity basis is likely to be worse, and it is hard to 
foresee such a large amount of special transactions.  

The problem of financing the deficit is likely to 
become more acute in 1967. On an official settlements 

basis we had a surplus of perhaps $1/2 billion in 1966.  
But this good showing depended essentially on high 
interest rates in the United States which provided foreign 
private holders of dollars with an incentive to hold on 
to, and to increase, their dollar holdings because of the 
good return on them. Thus Euro-dollar lending to American 
banks through their foreign branches increased by $2-1/2 
billion last year and helped finance the deficit. It is 
inconceivable that additional lending of this magnitude 
could occur this year. Any substantial decline in interest 

rates in the United States relative to rates abroad could 
well bring a reversal of these flows. In any case the 

implications for our gold stock are ominous.  
The resumed advance in bank credit in December and 

the projections suggesting a further rise in January are 

encouraging. A persistence of the earlier declines in 

bank credit would have been incompatible with our goals.  

It is worth emphasizing, however, that the loan-deposit 

ratios of banks are still very high--much higher than they 

were at the beginning of 1966. Many bankers tell us that 

they want to improve their liquidity position before they 

seek a substantial expansion in loans.  

Over the coming months the mix of monetary policy 

and fiscal policy will be of particular importance. We 

may have to wait, however, for the President's budget 

message to learn of the Government's proposed expenditures



1/10/67

and the way in which the Administration expects them 
to be financed. In the meantime, it seems to us, there 
should be no change in credit policy. We believe that, 
until the next meeting of the Committee, open market 
operations should be conducted with a view to maintain
ing about the currently prevailing conditions in the 
money market. Under such a policy one might expect the 
Federal funds rate to fluctuate above the 5 per cent 
level, with rates on three-month Treasury bills near 
their present levels. The range of net borrowed reserves 
could be wide, but free reserves should be avoided, 
because their appearance would be likely to bolster 
market expectations of further monetary ease; these 
expectations are already strong, in part because the 

rescinding of the System's statement of September 1 on 

business loans and discount administration has been 
widely interpreted as an overt act emphasizing a System 
intent to continue easing pressure on bank reserves.  

Since I think that the proper policy prescription 
is "no change," I favor alternative A of the draft 

directives prepared by the staff. I have difficulty in 

trying to comprehend alternative C and its implications 

for the conduct of operations. It originally seemed to 

me that it raised more issues than it settled, and the 

discussion following Mr. Axilrod's remarks confirmed that 

view. Even if it means no change, I would prefer to use 
language similar to that used in the past to indicate no 

change. I think that the meaning of alternative A is 

clear. I endorse it.  

Mr. Francis observed that growth in total demand for goods 

and services had slowed somewhat. In view of that moderation and 

of a restrictive trend in most aggregate measures of monetary 

action, the Committee at its last two meetings adopted a less 

restrictive course. Beginning in November the Manager of the 

Account had been asked to attain somewhat easier conditions in the 

money market with an objective of fostering moderate growth in 

money and credit. Subsequently, lower interest rates, lower net

-32-



1/10/67 -33

borrowed reserves, and other indications of ease developed in 

the money market. However, it was not certain that the aggregate 

monetary measures had evidenced less restriction.  

In the last few weeks, Mr. Francis continued, commercial 

banks had obtained more funds and were probably lending or investing 

more. Both time deposits and demand deposits had gone up, and it 

appeared that total bank credit had expanded. However, one hesi

tated to conclude at this point that expansion in those magnitudes 

and the evidence of ease resulted primarily from System actions 

or that they were having an expansionary effect on economic activity.  

The rise in time deposits might merely reflect the facts that, with 

declining market interest rates, banks were now able to compete for 

CD funds, and that the disintermediation of last fall was now being 

reversed without any net gain of funds to borrowers.  

The rise in demand deposits and bank reserves in the last 

several weeks might also be misleading, Mr. Francis said. Around 

the middle of the final month of each of the last ten quarters, there 

had been a marked increase in demand deposits. Hence, the current 

rise might reflect in large measure a problem of seasonal adjustment.  

Mr. Francis recalled that Mr. Partee, in his review of recent 

financial developments at the last meeting of the Committee, had 

noted that despite some easing of money market conditions banking 

aggregates had consistently shown shortfalls from projected levels



1/10/67 -34

for some months. Although increases in reserves and money had been 

recorded since mid-December, there was no reason to believe that 

the problem of obtaining a moderate amount of monetary growth, which 

had been the desire of the Committee, had been solved.  

Mr. Francis noted that the staff projected a marked rise in 

total reserves from December to January, but those reserves were 

expected to be utilized in supporting Government demand deposits 

and time deposits, as the reversal of the disintermediation was 

expected to continue. Private demand deposits, according to projec

tions, would decline and money would remain about unchanged. With 

those projections, and with the experience since last summer of 

shortfalls in final data from projected levels, special effort 

might be required in order to move toward a less restrictive course 

including expansion of the money supply.  

If the prospects for total demand were as weak as the staff 

indicated, Mr. Francis concluded, it behooved the monetary authority 

to do all it could to alter that situation. The Committee should 

not be satisfied with "a gradual reduction in the degree of monetary 

restraint" mentioned on page 6 of the blue book. Assuming the 

relation among variables which was outlined on page 6 of the blue 

book, he suggested the Committee should aim for positive free 

reserves, a Federal funds rate below 5 per cent, and a bill rate



1/10/67 -35

about at the discount rate. It should strive for an upward trend 

of the money supply at about a 3 per cent rate.  

Mr. Francis thought that alternative B of the staff drafts, 

with some alteration, would fit his approach to the situation. He 

would alter its language to read ". . . System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to attaining such conditions in the money market and such an 

increase in total reserves as are necessary to assure a moderate 

rise in the money supply. . ." 

Mr. Patterson remarked that most of the bankers in the Sixth 

District with whom he talked had told him that requests for loans 

from their good customers were still greater than they could satisfy 

and that they saw no signs of a general letdown in the pressures for 

credit. However, the statistics they reported told a somewhat 

different story.  

Loans at all member banks had been practically unchanged 

for three months after account was taken of seasonal influences, 

Mr. Patterson noted. In some areas of the District loans were 

actually lower. Average interest rates on new business loans charged 

by the banks in Atlanta and New Orleans were unchanged between 

September and December, after a 38-basis point gain between June and 

December and a 30-basis point gain during the spring quarter. In 

December Sixth District member bank borrowing was the lowest since



1/10/67 -36

July 1966, and much less reliance was placed by District banks on 

the Federal funds market. Of the banks included in the Quarterly 

Survey of Bank Lending Practices, as of December 15 only a minority 

reported loan demand as moderately stronger. The rest reported 

loan demand as essentially unchanged or moderately weaker.  

District bankers were inclined to attribute those develop

ments to their having adopted firmer lending practices, Mr. Patterson 

said. They inferred that any slight reduction in requests for loans 

at their banks resulted partly from the realization by potential 

borrowers that it would be fruitless to apply for a loan. Some 

bankers stressed their desire to get into a more liquid position.  

Indeed, there actually was some shifting in the security portfolios 

of the large banks in December, and loan-deposit ratios at all 

member banks had declined since September. Moreover, some restriction 

in their lending and investment volume had resulted from a less-than

seasonal increase in demand and time deposits at the larger banks 

and a downtrend in deposits, on a seasonally adjusted basis, in the 

last three months in some areas of the Sixth District. Some change 

in deposit trends, however, was suggested by the statistics for the 

large District banks in late December, when time deposits rose 

slightly.  

On the other hand, Mr. Patterson continued, the behavior 

of the latest available economic indicators continued to confirm



1/10/67 -37

the slowing in the District's economic activity that was reported 

at previous meetings. Employment apparently picked up a little 

toward the end of the year in contrast to the slackness during the 

months of mid-1966, and the unemployment rate in November fell to 

3.5 per cent, the lowest since May. However, the District was 

sharing in the slower pace of auto sales and in the auto production 

cutbacks. Weakness persisted in some types of construction, and 

the tabulation of announcements of proposed new or expanded manufac

turing plants for the fourth quarter promised a slower rate of 

capital expenditures in the future.  

Mr. Patterson thought a reasonable conclusion that could 

be drawn from that mixed collection of information seemed to be 

something like the following: There was a strong demand for loans, 

although some potential borrowers were being excluded because of 

high interest rates and bank lending policies. The slackening in 

loan expansion resulted from both a slowdown in demand, reflecting 

a slower rate of economic expansion, and the efforts of banks to 

get into more liquid positions. Since many bankers were uneasy 

about their declining liquidity, they seemed to be welcoming any 

respite, no matter how small.  

So far as he could determine, Mr. Patterson said, much the 

same conclusion could be reached in respect to the national scene.  

That meant that member banks now were likely to be less responsive



1/10/67 -38

to increased availability of reserves in expanding their loans and 

investments than they would have been early last year. Thus, 

insofar as net borrowed reserves or free reserves reflected reserve 

availability, a net borrowed reserve figure of, say, $100 million 

was much less stimulative now than it would have been at this time 

last year or during a considerable part of 1966. That might explain 

why, despite the turn toward greater ease initiated several meetings 

ago by the Committee, the declining trend in the bank credit proxy 

had not been reversed until very recently.  

In order to be sure that the recent rise in the bank credit 

proxy did not prove to be temporary, therefore, Mr. Patterson 

favored continuing to move gently toward greater ease. Currently, 

the net borrowed reserve figure was especially suspect as a guide 

to reserve availability. But if that figure was to be used, he would 

favor moving toward a zero position. With that understanding, he 

would favor alternative C of the draft directives.  

Mr. Hilkert remarked that indicators for the real sector of 

the economy seemed to him increasingly to be pointing to a lessening 

of demand pressures. Conditions in the Third District continued to 

be generally good, as they were in the nation. However, indications 

of softening were appearing in the District. Manufacturing employ

ment was off a little, and steel production had been declining, as 

had construction contract awards and auto registrations.



1/10/67 -39

On the national scene, Mr. Hilkert found it difficult to 

discover any new sources of significant strength. Consumer demands 

and attitudes seemed relatively lethargic. Although there might be 

some point to the fact that construction could hardly go much lower, 

that did not stir hope for new strength. But most of all, he was 

disturbed--as apparently was the Board's staff--by the recent move

ment of new orders, backlogs, and inventories. The latter pointed 

quite clearly to involuntary accumulation.  

To Mr. Hilkert, the resulting projection by the staff of a 

substantial cutback in the rate of gain in GNP during the first 

quarter was significant. Forecasts appearing daily in the press 

did not now generally support the view that a recession was ahead.  

But if the staff's projection for the first quarter proved correct, 

forecasts might soon become much more bearish.  

Other things being equal, facts like those argued for another 

move toward ease, Mr. Hilkert said. He was, of course, concerned 

about the increase in wages now taking place and likely to continue 

this year. Credit ease should not proceed so fast and so far as 

to aggravate that development. Yet, it seemed to him there was 

little that monetary policy could do now to halt the trend, let 

alone roll it back.  

In the financial sector of the economy, Mr. Hilkert noted, 

substantial and rapid easing in money market conditions had taken



1/10/67 -40

place. As pointed out in the blue book, bank credit and the money 

supply now seemed to be responding. In his view, that easing had 

not been overdone. Information coming to the Philadelphia Reserve 

Bank from the larger banks in the District indicated that they were 

not yet anxious to seek more customers, had not changed their lend

ing policies, and were concerned about their liquidity. Rescinding 

the September 1 letter had had relatively little effect on their 

attitudes.  

Another signal of the Federal Reserve's intent to ease, 

therefore, seemed to Mr. Hilkert to be called for if those attitudes 

were to be changed. On balance, he believed alternative B would be 

appropriate in accomplishing the desired purposes. Although he 

would think of the implementation of the directive as being accom

plished somewhat gradually, the changes contemplated by alternative B 

should be sufficient to impress the market and banks that a further 

change was being made.  

The balance of payments implications of further ease did, 

of course, concern him, Mr. Hilkert said. However, he looked for 

further improvement in the trade account as domestic expansion 

slackened. And, hopefully, easier credit conditions abroad might 

make it possible for the Committee to proceed toward easier 

conditions domestically without adverse effect.



1/10/67 -41

Mr. Hickman commented that recent economic news revealed 

further moderation in some sectors and increased weakness in 

others. Notable developments in December were the increase in 

insured unemployment (reflecting mainly the cutbacks in autos and 

steel), the disappointing performance of retail sales, and the 

further (probably involuntary) buildup in business inventories.  

The industrial production index, on the basis of very preliminary 

estimates made at his Bank, showed little, if any, increase in 

December.  

At the last quarterly meeting of Fourth District business 

economists in mid-December, Mr. Hickman continued, the general 

theme was one of increased anxiety about the economic outlook, 

which was reflected in a lowering of the group's forecasts--the 

third successive time that that had occurred. The group was con

cerned about the hazy outlook for defense spending, the tapering 

of capital spending, the profit squeeze, the erosion of new orders 

and backlogs, and general imbalances among major economic sectors.  

Their median forecast for GNP in 1967 in current dollars was $783 

billion, a year-to-year gain of 6 per cent, with moderate and 

diminishing quarterly increases. That implied a modest increase 

in real GNP, something on the order of 3 per cent. Median forecasts 

for industrial production showed fractional quarterly increases, 

with the annual gain in 1967 amounting only to 3 per cent.



1/10/67 -42

Mr. Hickman noted that the Fourth District business 

economists expected appreciable increases in unit labor costs 

in manufacturing in each quarter of 1967, with the average of 

the medians for the year up 2.5 per cent. The group expected 

corporate profits after taxes to remain level in the first half 

and to decline in the second half, with a year-to-year decline 

of about 1-1/2 per cent. Only about one-fourth of the group 

expected that taxes would be increased in 1967, and almost all 

thought that a tax increase was undesirable. Since he was no 

longer a dues-paying member in the union of business economists, 

he was not allowed to vote. If he could have voted, he would 

have been one of those voting against a tax increase at this time, 

largely for domestic economic reasons, but partly also because of 

glimmerings of hope that tensions were easing in Vietnam.  

In regard to monetary policy, Mr. Hickman was pleased to 

note the substantial increase in both the money supply and the 

bank credit proxy that occurred in December. He would like to 

think that that reflected the economy's prompt response to the 

Committee's recent modest shift in policy, although the usual 

seasonal churning in December made it quite difficult to determine 

if that actually was the case. The staff's projection of no change 

in the money supply for January suggested to him some further eas

ing was still needed.



1/10/67 -43

Mr. Hickman's prescription for policy until the next meeting 

was to provide whatever reserves were needed to produce an increase 

in the money supply in the range of 3 to 6 per cent (seasonally 

adjusted annual rate), as well as to bring about some further modest 

reduction in interest rates. To achieve those objectives, he thought 

the Committee should not be constrained by the public's reaction to 

the published figures on the net reserve position of banks, and 

should permit positive free reserves to develop, if necessary. In 

view of the imminence of the Treasury refunding, he would prefer to 

move promptly in the direction of further ease. The recent reduction 

in the German bank rate from 5 to 4-1/2 per cent provided some basis 

for hope that a further modest reduction in interest rates in the 

U.S. would not trigger a flight of hot money from this country. He 

favored alternative B of the draft directives, and would be receptive 

to System purchase of intermediate- and long-term issues.  

Mr. Brimmer said that the direction in which the Committee 

should move in the next few weeks seemed reasonably clear to him.  

He agreed with Mr. Reynolds' conclusion that the objective of long

run improvement in the balance of payments would be served best by 

policies that sustained domestic growth, and he thought the Committee 

was fortunate in having so smooth a meshing of policy requirements 

for the balance of payments and the domestic economy.



1/10/67 -44

As he looked back at financial developments in the past few 

weeks, Mr. Brimmer continued, he was impressed with the strength of 

the markets and the magnitude of the change in expectations follow

ing the Committee's shift toward less restraint. He thought it was 

now incumbent upon the Committee to validate the present expectations.  

As some observers had noted, there had been a large reaction to a 

relatively moderate change in open market policy and the rescission 

of the September 1 letter. He thought the Committee should now do 

much more to insure that the money supply and bank credit would 

expand at rates approaching those that members had suggested were 

desirable at recent meetings. He was impressed by the degree of 

inertia existing in the banking system but he was not surprised by 

it, given the desire of banks to restore their liquidity positions.  

Nevertheless, low bank liquidity did impede the Committee's efforts 

to affect the economy through changes in money market conditions. It 

was important that bank loan expansion not rest simply on increases 

in loans to security dealers; it should also reflect rising loans to 

business.  

Mr. Brimmer said he had been particularly impressed with the 

policy course Mr. Axilrod had suggested, and he thought that by the 

time of its next meeting the Committee might want to give serious 

consideration to that proposal for a more overt change. For the 

time being, however, in view of the uncertainties regarding the



1/10/67 -45

Administration's tax and expenditure recommendations, he thought 

the proper course for the Committee was to proceed along the path 

it had been following recently. That led him to favor alternative B 

of the draft directives. At the same time, he would not want to have 

the level of interest rates taken as the sole key to the operations 

of the Desk. He would not be disturbed if the three-month bill rate 

declined to the neighborhood of 4-1/2 per cent. Nor would he be 

disturbed very much if net borrowed reserves approached the zero 

level or even if free reserves emerged. But it should not be the 

main objective of the Manager to produce those results; the main 

objective should be to achieve increases in bank credit and the 

money supply.  

In the preceding discussion, Mr. Brimmer continued, a 

question had been implied as to whether the period with which the 

Committee was most properly concerned was the first half of 1967 

or the whole year. He thought it was appropriate for the Committee 

to do all that it could to insure that economic conditions in the 

first half did not deteriorate to the point that the second-half 

conditions would be much weaker. In his judgment, unless there was 

sufficient easing of terms in mortgage markets, the economy was not 

likely to display strength in the second half.  

In sum, Mr. Brimmer concluded, he favored alternative B 

today, and he hoped that by the time of the next meeting the



1/10/67 -46

Committee would be in a better position to decide whether the course 

suggested by Mr. Axilroad was appropriate.  

Mr. Maisel agreed with the staff analysis of the current 

situation. It seemed to him, therefore, that the Committee had to 

make clear its current goal--namely, a monetary policy that over 

the course of this year would help in increasing, rather than decreas

ing, total demand in the economy.  

Given that ultimate goal, Mr. Maisel said, what influence 

could monetary policy have? Either through increased credit avail

ability or through lower interest rates, monetary policy might 

influence those making spending decisions to add somewhat to their 

expenditures. More specifically, liquidity could be rebuilt, credit 

availability might rise so that easier mortgage terms might aid 

housing and that, plus some direct impact through instalment credit, 

might add an incremental amount to expenditures on consumer durables.  

There might also be marginal credit users who had been forced to run 

with lower inventories than they desired and with less investment 

in plant and equipment, but the impacts in those areas would probably 

not be great.  

Given that basic role for monetary policy, Mr. Maisel asked, 

what sort of intermediate policy index could the Committee use in 

directing its action for the next two or three months? The 

Committee's main indexes could, as indicated in the alternative



1/10/67 -47

draft directives, be concerned primarily with either quantities 

or rates. The Committee could use the total increase in the amount 

of credit flows, or, since it had only slight current knowledge 

of total credit flows, it could use as a proxy either bank credit 

expansion or reserves furnished by the Federal Reserve--adjusting 

the amount aimed at for either proxy with time, if the proxy seemed 

to vary from the total credit movement desired. On the other hand, 

obviously the Committee could also set an interest rate goal on 

the assumption that it would require particular changes in the 

interest rate to bring about the desired over-all goal for spending 

in the economy.  

It seemed to Mr. Maisel that, at the moment, the Committee 

would be better off if it chose as its major policy variable changes 

in credit and reserves, using interest rates as a subsidiary guide.  

In the first place, Mr. Maisel feared that by adopting 

interest rates or money market conditions alone, the Committee was 

likely to pay too much attention to most recent events. As the 

green book showed, in many money market areas rates still were 

running 100 basis points or more over November 1965. Even while 

others had come down sharply, a large gap still remained. At the 

same time, the Committee was uncertain as to whether it was the 

level of rates or their change that would make the critical differ

ences in reaching any desired spending goal.



1/10/67 -48

During a period of rapid change, Mr. Maisel also feared 

the Committee was too likely to be bemused by the rate of change 

rather than by the actual level of interest rates. That was partic

ularly true since the real demand for credit during this period was 

uncertain and little was known as to how much it could be expected 

to affect spending. There might be strong pressures to accommodate 

some of the backlog which had been postponed from recent periods 

in order simply to improve liquidity without any spending impact.  

In addition, if a major inventory run-off actually occurred, demand 

for funds might fall far below normal. In either case interest 

rates would not be an adequate guide of the Federal Reserve's 

actions or influence. They would represent a mixture of special 

supply and demand factors and would not mirror the total impact.  

Clearly, Mr. Maisel continued, the same argument might be 

made against using the amount of credit as an index, but here the 

problems were likely to be less strong. The Committee knew that 

the economy had been through a period in which credit had expanded 

far less than normal. It should be simpler to get agreement for 

credit expansion to return to a normal rate. When such an expansion 

was achieved, it could then be determined whether that normal 

expansion was sufficient in terms of related interest rates, credit 

expansion, and liquidity to achieve the Committee's ultimate goal.



1/10/67 -49

With respect to the draft directives, Mr. Maisel said, 

obviously he preferred the third alternative--C. He assumed that 

by "moderate" the Committee would, following the dictionary defini

tion, mean avoiding extremes. Therefore, the directive should mean 

that the Committee was aiming at a normal or adequate movement in 

total deposits to achieve its goal. It seemed clear the Committee's 

goal should be a bank credit proxy that grew at about a 7 per cent 

annual rate. The blue book projection for the next four weeks showed 

required reserves expanding at far less than a normal rate and one 

not sufficient to achieve a desirable rate of expansion in total 

credit. Thus, to achieve the moderate expansion in bank credit 

called for in the directive, conditions would be needed under which 

required reserves would expand at a more rapid rate than that pro

jected in the blue book. That should be the index for action used 

during the next four weeks. Reserves should be added unless or 

until required reserves were showing a far smaller run-off than 

indicated in the blue book. Positive free reserves might well be 

needed to achieve that aim and, as indicated by Mr. Axilrod, a 

considerably lower Federal funds rate. If the Committee was getting 

that expansion it should, as indicated in alternative C's proviso 

clause, be less concerned with rates.  

Mr. Daane said that the course of System policy in recent 

weeks seemed to him to have been clearly appropriate as to direction.



1/10/67 -50

His position at the last two meetings had reflected reservations 

regarding the overtness of the change and the degree of ease the 

Committee sought as it moved down the road toward greater ease.  

Those reservations, in turn, reflected confidence in the underlying 

strength of the economy, his skepticism as to whether public spend

ing might not exceed current estimates in a period of war, and his 

concern about the balance of payments. Those considerations had 

led him to feel more cautious than the majority regarding the 

aggressiveness with which the Committee should move toward ease.  

Today, Mr. Daane continued, he still felt concern about the 

balance of payments--he shared Mr. Treiber's views on possible 

deterioration on capital account--and he was no more assured than 

he had been earlier as to the course of public spending. He was 

impressed, however, by the increasing signs of deceleration in the 

private economy, and he thought it was necessary for the Committee 

to continue to move--and to demonstrate that it was moving--toward 

somewhat greater ease. Accordingly, he favored alternative B, in 

the moderate sense in which he would interpret it. He had some 

sympathy with the view that later in 1967 the Committee might again 

be confronted with a need to restrain the economy, but it seemed 

to him that the immediate problem was the reverse.  

Mr. Daane added that he was not so sanguine as the staff, 

or Mr. Brimmer, that longer-run strength in the domestic economy



1/10/67 -51

and in the world economy would insure against a rather rapid 

deterioration in the balance of payments in 1967, whether on the 

liquidity basis or the official settlements basis. That was why he 

would interpret alternative B as calling for a gradual and moderate 

movement. Operationally, he thought there was some parallel between 

the current situation and that of early 1961 and thus he would favor 

some System purchases in the coupon area. Such purchases seemed 

desirable not only on the domestic grounds that Mr. Axilrod had 

mentioned but also for balance of payments reasons. He did not think 

the Committee could take great comfort in the 1/2 per cent reduction 

in the German discount rate in terms of the totality of international 

flows.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that while several people had talked 

about the longer-run problem for monetary policy he thought the 

basic problem lay in the short run, because the lags in transmitting 

the effects of policy changes through commercial banks to the economy 

at large were rather substantial. The Committee's task was to 

satisfy the banks' desire to rebuild liquidity so that they would 

reverse the loan policies they had been following--and to do so on 

a cautious basis, so that if there were a bounce-back in loan growth 

it would not get out of hand. The economic analysis presented 

today suggested that there would not be such a bounce-back. From



1/10/67 -52

his conversations with bankers, however, he gathered that they 

thought underlying loan demands remained strong, and that if they 

turned their loan officers loose the volume would build up fast.  

He did not think that the bankers were completely confident in 

their view, and he personally did not know the answer. But he 

thought that any policy the Committee adopted for the next four 

weeks should have an element of caution in it.  

As to the directive, Mr. Mitchell said, he had some sympathy 

with the modification Mr. Francis had proposed in alternative B, 

which introduced a reference to the money supply. He noted that 

Mr. Axilrod had said that the money supply was not likely to show 

sustained growth, although he (Mr. Mitchell) was not persuaded that 

that was the case.  

Mr. Axilrod commented that the money supply projection was 

based on an assumption of no change in money market conditions.  

Mr. Mitchell went on to say that while he could accept 

alternative B as written, he would prefer to delete the word "some

what," and to replace the words "significantly faster" with "very much 

faster," so that the paragraph would read, ". . . with a view to 

attaining easier conditions in the money market, unless bank credit 

appears to be expanding very much faster than currently anticipated." 

He also could accept alternative C if the final clause was deleted.  

Whatever the language, however, he favored continuing the trend of



1/10/67 -53

deliberate and steady easing, but with a readiness to pull back 

if and when the liquidity barrier was broken and bank credit 

growth became excessive.  

Mr. Shepardson said there was no need to elaborate on the 

reports of economic conditions that had been made. He thought 

the main consideration influencing the Committee's decision on 

monetary policy for the period until the next meeting was the contin

uing uncertainty regarding fiscal policy. There had been some 

expansion in bank credit recently and the projections made on the 

assumption of no change in money market conditions--as contemplated 

in alternative A of the draft directives--were for further bank 

credit expansion on average in January at a 7 to 9 per cent annual 

rate. That seemed to him to be an appropriate growth rate at this 

time. In his judgment the Committee had to be concerned about the 

more serious implications presently evident for balance of payments 

developments. That fact, together with the uncertainty about 

fiscal policy, clearly called for the type of action contemplated 

under alternative A. The projections indicated that there might 

be no change in the money supply if that alternative was adopted.  

It seemed to him, however, that experience indicated that the money 

supply tended to fluctuate widely in the short run regardless of 

the Committee's policy objectives. Accordingly, he felt that the 

Committee should not be overly concerned about the expected lack



1/10/67 -54

of money supply growth at the moment, as long as there was reason

able growth in bank credit.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business activity showed more signs 

of slowing and that expectations were definitely less optimistic 

in the Fifth District. In November both nonfarm employment and 

man-hours in manufacturing scored gains, but more recent information 

was quite uniformly on the weak side. On balance, manufacturers 

in all categories reported for December lower levels of shipments, 

new orders, and backlogs, and significantly higher inventories of 

finished goods. The insured unemployment rate rose throughout the 

District but remained below the level of a year ago. It appeared 

that a slump in demand might have caused a postponement or cancel

lation of price increases which had been expected in the furniture 

industry.  

In the country as a whole, Mr. Wayne said, a gradual slowing 

of economic activity was becoming increasingly apparent. He had to 

confess that he was impressed with the pervasive downward movement 

of the statistical indicators. The rise in housing starts in 

November was about the only increase which had been reported in 

recent weeks. Even if that should signal a bottoming out of the 

housing cycle, it would still be several months before housing became 

a source of strength. Sales of United States automobiles in both 

domestic and foreign markets continued weak and production schedules



1/10/67 -55

were being cut back to trim new car inventories, which totaled 

well over 1.4 million units. Inventory accumulation by manufac

turers accelerated in November, inventory-sales ratios continued 

to rise, and increases in finished stocks suggested that some of 

the recent accumulation might have been involuntary. Easing of 

materials prices and slower growth of order backlogs in recent 

months would probably reduce voluntary accumulation.  

To Mr. Wayne, those widespread signs of moderation in the 

pace of economic advance were hopefully the signs of adjustment 

toward a noninflationary rate of economic growth and not the signs 

of emerging recession. Much depended on the degree of fiscal stimu

lation which the economy received in the weeks and months ahead.  

But the level of expenditures associated with the war effort and 

the question of a tax increase remained the principal uncertainties 

on the economic scene. While recent figures indicated a leveling 

off in military contract awards and defense orders, those series 

might provide only a hazy indication of future expenditures.  

Despite the uncertainties surrounding the degree of fiscal 

stimulation in coming months, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that in view 

of increasing signs of weakness in the private sector and absence 

of growth in important financial variables in the second half of 

last year, monetary policy should continue to promote the moderate 

growth in the money supply, bank credit, and time deposits indicated 

by the preliminary figures for December. He would not like to see



1/10/67 -56

a rapid acceleration in the growth of those variables, but neither 

would he like to see the plus signs of December washed out by 

negative signs in January. Encouraged by the behavior of interest 

rates and marginal reserve measures and by the rescission of the 

September 1 letter, banks were perhaps becoming somewhat more willing 

lenders, a welcome response in view of recent slow growth in bank 

credit. While recognizing that in conducting day-to-day operations 

the Desk found it difficult to focus on aggregative measures, he 

believed the objective should be to encourage growth in required 

reserves and the bank credit proxy at something close to the 

December rate.  

Alternative B of the staff draft directives, as defined by 

Mr. Axilrod, seemed to Mr. Wayne appropriate.  

Mr. Clay commented that in recent weeks monetary policy 

implementation generally had attained the financial variables goals 

sought by the Committee. In view of the economic information that 

had become available, those monetary policy goals and attainments 

had been appropriate to the prevailing economic situation.  

Mr. Clay said that the timing of this morning's meeting relative 

to the President's message and other Administration messages to follow 

placed the Committee under a handicap in formulating monetary policy 

for the next four weeks. Nevertheless, the information available 

concerning the prospective economic situation appeared to justify a 

continuation of the policy currently prevailing. More specifically,



1/10/67 -57

it appeared desirable that sufficient reserves be provided so that 

bank credit could continue to expand. That would not necessarily 

mean that loan volume would expand. Conversations with bankers 

confirmed that current loan behavior was only partially explained 

by lessened loan demand and limited availability of funds. Bankers 

were reluctant to relax their own credit restraints in a desire to 

improve their banks' liquidity positions.  

Mr. Clay thought it was by no means clear what targets should 

be set in endeavoring to continue the recent improvement in the 

financial aggregates. One could begin by accepting the projections 

of financial aggregates in the blue book, as developed from page 3 

to the middle of page 6,1/ and the money market conditions specified 

1/ This section of the blue book read in part as follows: 
"Bank credit expansion is likely to continue in January, but at 
a slower pace than indicated by the large recent week-to-week 
increases. The increase in the January average of outstanding 
bank credit over the December average may be in a 7 - 9 per cent 
(annual rate) range, but this includes the carry-over effect on 
the monthly averages of the strength in the latter part of 
December. From the end of December through the end of January, 
a growth rate in the 4 - 6 per cent range appears likely . . . .  
The interest rate and credit demand assumptions appear consistent 
with expansion of time and savings deposits at all commercial banks 
by about 12 per cent in January on a monthly average basis . .  
Money supply in January is expected to show little or no net change 
on average. Private demand deposits may decline somewhat, partly 
because of a projected rise of almost $1 billion in U.S. Government 
deposits. But private demand deposits are not assumed to decline 
by as much as Government deposits rise . . . . These deposit pro

jections imply a sizable expansion in aggregate reserves in January 
on average--in the order of 10 - 12 per cent for nonborrowed and 
total reserves. For December-January together, nonborrowed 
reserves may show an increase around the 5 - 7 per cent range."



at the top of page 4 1/ of the blue book. If those projections 

of financial aggregates did not generally materialize, it should 

be understood that instructions to the Manager would call for a 

modification of the money market targets such as those suggested 

2/ 
on page 6 of the blue book.  

Alternative A of the draft economic policy directive, as 

defined in the accompanying staff notes,3/ appeared to Mr. Clay 

to be appropriate for the period ahead.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that economic developments in the 

Seventh Federal Reserve District in recent weeks had presented no 

surprises. There were indications that excessive pressures on 

productive resources had eased further. Unemployment compensation 

1/ This material read as follows: "These projections 
assume that the 3-month bill rate stays roughly within the 
recent 4.75 - 4.85 per cent range over the period ahead, 
that net borrowed reserves fluctuate around $100 million, 
and that Federal funds and dealer loan rates back down some
what from recent high levels of around year-end." 

2/ This material read as follows: "If the Committee 
wishes to continue a gradual reduction in the degree of 
monetary restraint, it might call for open market operations 
to achieve a set of money market conditions that might include 

a net borrowed reserve position averaging close to zero and 
Federal funds averaging near 5 per cent. This would, in all 

likelihood, bring the 3-month bill rate down to a 4.60 - 4.75 

per cent range." 

3/ The staff notes suggested using the complex of money 
market conditions cited in note 1/ as a description of the 
general kinds of conditions to be maintained if alternative A 

were to be adopted by the Committee.

1/10/67 -58-



1/10/67 -59

claims in December were somewhat higher in each of the District 

States than in December 1965, but were still at very low levels.  

The increases had been particularly evident in automobile manufac

turing centers. Also, the rise in help-wanted advertisements in 

major newspapers, while increasing somewhat further, had not 

maintained the spectacularly large increases of earlier months.  

Price increases continued to be announced in a variety of 

goods and services, Mr. Scanlon noted, notwithstanding the evidence 

of better balance in the over-all supply-demand situation. The 

demand for construction equipment had weakened further and major 

firms in that industry did not see an early end to that development.  

In conversations with businessmen, Mr. Scanlon said, he 

detected a greater sensitivity to the possibility of their finding 

themselves with excessively large inventories. A number of firms 

had reported plans to reduce inventories. That had been noted 

especially in steel-using firms, even though there had been some 

evidence recently of strengthening demand for steel. But thus far, 

the transition to a more balanced supply-demand situation had been 

orderly and had not engendered excessive pessimism.  

On the banking scene, Mr. Scanlon remarked, District banks 

shared in the rather sharp increase in credit during December.  

Loan expansion reflected mainly the temporary needs of securities 

dealers and finance companies. Increases in business and consumer



1/10/67 -60

loans were relatively small compared with other recent Decembers.  

The recent growth in deposits which had accompanied the easier 

money market had made it possible for the large banks to acquire 

some Governments as well as to make additional money market loans, 

and the largest banks had shown a significant reduction in their 

loan ratios since early December. Some rebuilding of liquidity 

was to be expected, and banks as well as dealers might find many 

Governments and municipals attractively priced, given the expecta

tion of further declines in interest rates in the period ahead.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that large District banks had acquired 

more than $150 million through net sales of negotiable CD's since 

mid-December, and had shown substantial gains through savings-type 

certificates following their recent boost in rates offered on 

those instruments. While they had attracted some new money, large 

banks in Chicago estimated that about three-fourths of the gain 

in CD's under $100,000 denomination resulted from the transfer of 

other deposits in the bank. Current rate relationships appeared 

conducive to continued growth in deposits and credit.  

As to policy, while Mr. Scanlon would not be satisfied with 

the large magnitude of the increase in bank credit and reserves pro

jected for January if there were reason to expect it to continue, 

he was happy to see them both on the plus side again. Even after 

the sizable increase projected for January, total reserves would



1/10/67 -61

still be below the levels of last September. In view of the signs 

of hesitancy in the private sector of the economy, he thought it 

desirable to continue the upward momentum in total reserves, 

possibly over the longer range at a somewhat slower rate than pro

jected for January, but hopefully at a sustained rate.  

Mr. Scanlon said that his views on policy closely paralleled 

those of Mr. Mitchell. While he could accept alternative B of the 

draft directives in light of Mr. Axilrod's explanation, he favored 

alternative C since it provided for a wider range of fluctuation 

in money market conditions if that proved to be a necessary conse

quence of operations directed at maintaining the desired rates of 

growth in monetary aggregates. He believed that the Committee 

could stabilize either aggregate reserve measures or money market 

conditions, but that it probably could not stabilize both concurrently.  

Mr. Galusha reported that the indices of economic activity 

in the Ninth District confirmed the District's historic lagging 

role, for most of those measures reflected a considerable momentum.  

Recent personal interviews indicated a developing pessimism, however.  

In the Ninth District, no less than in the nation, the 

situation of banks eased appreciably during December, Mr. Galusha 

said. Total deposits of District banks increased more than 

seasonally; for weekly reporting banks, the rise in total loans and



1/10/67 -62

investments was double the usual seasonal increase. The December 

drop in the average loan-deposit ratio was very sharp at weekly 

reporting banks, and those banks ended 1966 with a lower average 

ratio than they had at the end of 1965. The largest Ninth District 

banks were able to increase the average maturity of their CD's 

somewhat. And, finally, he might mention that among Twin Cities 

bankers speculation had turned to when a reduction in the prime rate 

would come.  

In a way, Mr. Galusha observed, all that was gratifying.  

Banking developments, both in his District and in the nation, could 

be interpreted as showing that Committee policy was having the 

desired effect. But the Committee was perhaps some way still from 

getting the supply-side loan response that appeared to be needed.  

That suggested that pressing further--continuing the trend to lower 

market interest rates--would be appropriate. In that regard, it was 

of considerable importance that the Bundesbank had been so obliging.  

Possibly now the Bank of England would follow the Bundesbank's lead.  

For himself, then, Mr. Galusha favored a slight--and he 

would emphasize the word slight--further reduction in market interest 

rates at this time. He recognized, though, that there was something 

to be said for pausing now--for holding to the status quo at least 

briefly--although with a Treasury financing to be announced late in 

January, that hold could be too lengthy.



1/10/67 -63

But one thing was clear, Mr. Galusha said. The Committee 

could not afford a return of market rates to previous, higher levels.  

According to the blue book, the recent welcome decline in the bill 

rate was in considerable measure the result of expectations. But 

from tonight on, and for the next few weeks, expectations could 

prove quite volatile. And the Committee should not, he believed, 

allow any change in expectations to result in higher interest rates.  

It could be that, to maintain the present structure of rates, the 

level of net borrowed reserves would have to be reduced somewhat-

possibly to between zero and $100 million.  

Without knowing what the President was going to say tonight 

and in messages to come, Mr. Galusha continued, it was not easy to 

talk of policy targets. But perhaps it was enough for the Committee 

to agree that, at the very least, the Manager should be given all 

the latitude possible to resist fully any trend to higher interest 

rates stemming possibly from disappointments about announced fiscal 

policies. Either alternative B or C of the draft directives appeared 

appropriate.  

In concluding, Mr. Galusha said he might replow an old furrow 

and urge again that further thought be given to structural reform of 

reserve requirements and, more particularly, to lower requirements 

for small banks. At the moment he was at least as concerned with the



1/10/67 -64

System's image in Sleepy Eye as in Zurich. Lest that appear exces

sively parochial, it might have further usefulness for the System 

because--depending upon what the Administration decided about taxes-

the Committee might want some way of dramatizing a switch to still 

greater monetary ease and, unfortunately, a reduction in discount 

rates would seem out of the question at present.  

Mr. Swan said that in December business loans of Twelfth 

District weekly reporting banks again rose considerably more than 

in the rest of the country, as they had in November, although the 

increase was somewhat less than in the same month last year. Also 

continuing in December was a greater than national increase in total 

time and savings deposits at commercial banks, as large negotiable 

CD's outstanding increased somewhat more than elsewhere. Some 

indications were appearing that the larger banks were reluctant to 

go beyond six months' maturity in their large CD's. Although most 

banks still indicated that the matter was subject to negotiation, 

one bank had adopted a definite policy of not going beyond six months.  

Also, one bank had announced a reduction in maximum rate, from 5-1/2 

to 5-1/4 per cent, on long maturity CD's.  

There were strong indications in the latest survey, Mr. Swan 

continued, that in both the District and the nation the lending 

practices of most banks were unchanged from three months earlier.  

Four of the 17 reporting banks in the District indicated that loan



1/10/67 -65

demands had weakened in the past three months, but none reported 

that they expected demands to be weaker in the first quarter of 

1967. Similarly, their willingness to make loans remained essen

tially unchanged. The only cases of increased willingness to lend 

involved two banks, which expressed that attitude with respect to 

consumer instalment loans. At the other extreme, eight of the 17 

District banks indicated reduced willingness to make mortgage loans 

on multifamily structures. Those findings suggested to him there 

was still some question of the availability of supply to be worked 

out before much reaction could be expected in the lending policies 

of banks. Like Mr. Mitchell, he was somewhat concerned about 

banks' attitudes regarding the strength of underlying loan demands.  

As to monetary policy, Mr. Swan said, it seemed to him that 

the relatively gloomy cast of both the green book analysis and the 

discussion today suggested that the Committee perhaps should move 

somewhat further in the direction of ease. However, he did not 

believe that the evidence was sufficiently clear to justify a marked 

move at this juncture. In view of the balance of payments situation, 

the still relatively tight labor market, the fact that the Adminis

tration would be announcing its current economic policy views before 

the Committee's next meeting, and the fact that a Treasury financing, 

even though not a major one, lay ahead, he would prefer to see a 

rather gradual change over the next two weeks, rather than a more



1/10/67 -66

abrupt move that might lead to various kinds of undesired market 

interpretations. He would certainly like to see some increase in 

bank credit, and also in the money supply. He favored alternative 

B, but because he would interpret "somewhat easier conditions" 

rather conservatively, he was not sure that he advocated the same 

specific targets as others who also favored that alternative. He 

would hope to see the bill rate around 4-3/4 per cent, the Federal 

funds rate around 5 per cent, and marginal reserves ranging from 

$100 million net borrowed reserves to zero, but not becoming positive.  

He agreed with Mr. Brimmer that if much easier money market conditions 

developed and interest rates moved down further the Desk should not 

try to offset those changes, but that such conditions should not be 

actively sought. He also saw no objections to operations in the 

longer term area on a fairly small scale.  

Mr. Swan noted that some sentiment had been expressed in 

favor of adopting alternative C, which called for fostering moderate 

bank credit expansion, for the second paragraph of the directive.  

The second paragraph specified the Committee's immediate goal, and 

he thought that it should be formulated in terms of conditions in 

the money market, as in alternative B. However, he would suggest 

including a reference to the objective of accommodating bank credit 

expansion since it had been the Committee's practice during most of 

last year to refer to bank credit in the concluding "policy" sentence



1/10/67 -67

of the first paragraph. The third sentence of the staff's draft 

of the first paragraph noted that "bank credit expansion has resumed"; 

the last sentence of that paragraph might be revised to say that 

it was the Committee's policy to foster money and credit conditions, 

"including bank credit expansion", conducive to noninflationary 

economic expansion.  

In a final comment on the first paragraph, Mr. Swan said 

he appreciated the staff's suggestion that the language of the 

balance of payments reference should be changed even though no 

change in substance was proposed, in order--as the notes attached 

to the draft said--to indicate that the payments balance was receiv

ing the continuing attention of the Committee. But the new language 

the staff proposed, by referring to "trends in international trans

actions", seemed to imply a more basic change in the situation than 

in fact there had been. Accordingly, he would suggest continuing 

the reference used in the previous directive.  

Mr. Irons reported that economic conditions were generally 

strong in the Eleventh District. At the same time there were the 

cross-currents and the indications of slowing rates of growth that 

were evident in the national economy. Slackening in autos, 

construction, and other areas was partially offset by the generally 

high level of activity prevailing. Employment was up in virtually



1/10/67 -68

all categories, and the unemployment rate was low--about 2 per 

cent. There were signs that labor market pressures might have 

lessened somewhat, but not significantly. Production in the 

District also was up. On the other hand, department store sales 

had not been as favorable as had been hoped. Construction activ

ity was a little lower than might have been expected, but the 

difference was not of large magnitude. Sales of automobiles had 

been relatively favorable; in December they were within 1 per cent 

of the year-ago volume.  

As to District financial conditions, Mr. Irons continued, 

there were increases in the past month in commercial and industrial 

loans, demand deposits, and both total time deposits and CD's.  

The reserve positions of District banks were somewhat less strained 

than earlier. Banks still were borrowing through the Federal funds 

market but in smaller volume. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank for 

window-dressing purposes normally were expected over the year-end, 

but this year there had been virtually no activity at the discount 

window in that period.  

The national picture had already been well described, 

Mr. Irons said. He recognized that most indicators showed a 

tendency towards slower growth, but here again the differences were 

small. The major uncertainty continued to be the nature of the



1/10/67 -69

actions that would be taken in the public sector. Some of the 

answers on that subject would be obtained from the President's 

State of the Union message this evening, and more would be forth

coming in messages to be delivered over the next few weeks. The 

markets seemed to have adjusted to the considerable shift toward 

ease that had been made by the System. It was the general feeling 

in his District that credit policy had become easier; the question 

was how much easier policy would be.  

Mr. Irons commented that he was disturbed by the deteriora

tion in the balance of payments and the possibility of worsening 

in the gold situation. The problems in those areas were serious, 

and they probably deserved an increasing amount of thought and 

attention on the part of the Committee.  

Today, Mr. Irons said, he would favor maintaining an even 

keel, continuing the present conditions in the money market. The 

figures that a number of other members had indicated they would 

like to see emerge seemed appropriate to him. He was not sure that 

it would matter a great deal which of the three alternative 

directives the Committee adopted. He thought the staff had done 

an excellent drafting job, formulating each alternative to 

incorporate a concluding phrase that appropriately modified the 

earlier language. On balance, however, in view of various 

considerations--including the Treasury financing, the basic economic



1/10/67 -70

situation and outlook as he saw it, the uncertainties with regard 

to the public sector, and the balance of payments situation--he 

favored alternative A.  

Mr. Ellis said that the New England economy, measured in 

real terms, appeared to have slowed its rate of advance. Manufac

turing workweeks shortened slightly in November, and the man hour 

index declined a fraction. The index of factory output likewise 

leveled in November from its October peak. Manufacturers' shipments 

in the fourth quarter declined from the previous quarter, as they 

had projected, but were scheduled to rise sharply in the current 

quarter.  

Bankers continued to report strong loan demand, Mr. Ellis 

noted, but they were taking moves to restore liquidity before 

expanding lending. Liquidity ratios had risen more than seasonally 

and loan-deposit ratios had dropped noticeably since late November.  

At least one bank had cut its interest rate on large short-term 

business loans by 53 basis points, and the average for the large 

Boston banks had been a cut of 43 basis points in their lending 

rates between the September and December surveys. Meanwhile, they 

had become more selective in the rates they would pay for long-term 

CD money.  

Mr. Ellis reported having listened to some very direct 

language about the inequity of the revised voluntary foreign credit



1/10/67 -71

restraint program. The thrust of one protest was against the 10 

per cent limit on loans to developed countries since they were the 

countries most likely to be able to qualify for non-export related 

loans. The thrust of another protest was directed to the inequity 

of delaying access to the 109 per cent quota. Those "less cooper

ative" banks who by last fall had reached their ceilings seemed free 

to disburse repayments without regard to the 10 per cent limit.  

Insofar as the banks felt they had been penalized for not having 

used their quotas, and insofar as they might be expected to have 

more lendable funds during 1967, it seemed only logical to expect 

them to move to and hold at their ceilings for fear of losing their 

quotas permanently. If that course was followed, it would naturally 

have a substantial negative impact on the U.S. balance of payments.  

He thought that was important if the Committee had any inclination 

to view the VFCR program as a shelter against an outflow of the 

funds it was putting into the economy.  

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that the weight 

of evidence emerging since the Committee's last meeting had served 

to confirm the short-run forecasts of the staff that the temperature 

of the economic climate had been slowly cooling, which had been a 

clear objective of the Committee's policy only six months ago. The 

evidence also revealed that the shift in monetary policy commenced



1/10/67 -72

in mid-November had introduced a changed--and more optimistic-

outlook for credit availability and effective market performance 

in the months immediately ahead. The paramount issue of policy 

was whether the easing trend should be accelerated or the present 

posture maintained. As Mr. Axilrod had noted, fundamental to one's 

judgment on that score was his evaluation of the underlying strength 

of the economy. His (Mr. Ellis') own resolution of that issue was 

that the economy was unlikely to experience anything more than a 

temporary "inventory" pause--a helpful consolidation period--if 

the country was committed to support a continuing war effort in 

Vietnam and continued expansion of other Government services at 

Federal, State, and local levels. He was inclined to view consumers 

as ready to utilize their enlarged incomes to expand spending when 

credit was available and uncertainties were reduced--conditions that 

seemed likely to prevail increasingly in the next several months, 

especially when the outlines of the Federal budget became clear.  

Mr. Ellis confessed to a considerable difficulty in persist

ing in such an optimistic viewpoint while studying the well-presented 

analysis of the green book. By the same token, he found no difficulty 

in believing that the Committee had already obtained perhaps 80 per 

cent of the impact associated with public recognition of its change 

in policy. How hard should the Committee push to obtain the other 

20 per cent? Should it flood the reservoir to insure leakage to the



1/10/67 -73

economy? To postpone any further moves toward easing while awaiting 

the fiscal counterpart to the Committee's monetary actions seemed 

almost costless in terms of monetary effect to be achieved in the 

interim, and yet it would preserve a greater range of policy alter

natives for selection when better information was available. In 

common with Mr. Mitchell he did not rule out the possibility of a 

bounce-back in bank lending.  

His premise that a "wait and see" posture would be virtually 

costless in a policy sense rested, Mr. Ellis observed, on the blue 

book evaluation of the manner in which bank credit expansion had 

resumed. The bank credit proxy had expanded at an annual rate of 

7 per cent since the Committee's policy shift of mid-November and 

it was projected to expand at 7-9 per cent average rate in January 

without a further change in policy. Time deposit growth had resumed 

since mid-November at an annual rate of 10.3 per cent, which was 

equal to the growth rate in the first half of last year--and was 

a rate that the Committee used to think of as excessive. Without 

further policy change, growth in time deposits was projected to 

accelerate to 12 per cent in January. The staff opened its blue 

book discussion of prospective developments, absent further policy 

actions, by indicating that "Bank credit expansion is likely to 

continue in January, but at a slower pace than indicated by the



1/10/67 -74

large recent week-to-week increases." From the end of December 

to the end of January the staff expectation was for bank credit 

expansion at a rate in the 4 to 6 per cent range, with net borrowed 

reserves averaging around recent levels. Total reserves were 

projected to rise at a 10 - 12 per cent annual rate on average in 

January. In his judgment those projections were an entirely accept

able prospect and they encouraged him to specify as "targets" the 

underlying assumptions of a 90-day bill rate in the 4.75 - 4.85 

per cent range, net borrowed reserves fluctuating around $100 million, 

and Federal funds and dealer loan rates somewhat below their high 

year-end levels.  

As he considered the three alternative directives, Mr. Ellis 

said, he had somewhat the same feeling as Mr. Irons had expressed-

their implications were rather similar. That led him to wonder why 

the Committee should accept any alternative other than A, which 

provided for modification of operations if bank credit growth deviated 

significantly from expectations. Adoption of either of the other 

alternatives would logically mean that the Committee sought expansion 

in bank credit at a rate in excess of 7 - 9 per cent, in reserves at 

a rate in excess of 10 - 12 per cent, and in time deposits at a rate 

in excess of 12 per cent. To seek such growth rates would seem to 

him to go beyond what might be called a "gradual" change. Accordingly, 

he favored alternative A.



1/10/67

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

It is obvious that the effects of our easing of 
monetary policy are gradually spreading through the 
financial system, even though responses have been 
exaggerated in some markets by expectational influences, 
while being restrained in others by overhangs of caution, 
uncertainty, and institutional inertia.  

As yet, there have been few signs of any effects 
of such credit easing on actual spending decisions--they 
could hardly have been expected so quickly, given what 
we know about monetary lags. The business statistics 
flowing in seem to be indicating greater and greater 
moderation of underlying expansive forces, leaving 
us with a present rate of deceleration of growth that 
we would not want to see continued for very long. None
theless, the economy still possesses significant elements 
of strength, to which some added buoyancy will be given 
as the easier credit climate begins to affect business 
decisions. I see no need, therefore, for aggressive 
further monetary easing today (particularly with the 
Government's fiscal program for calendar 1967 still up 
in the air). Furthermore, I am not sufficiently complacent 
about future price increases to be willing to push hard 
on the monetary accelerator at the first signs that the 
economy might slow down more than we contemplated when 
restrictive policies were formulated last year.  

I do think it is essential, however, for us to 
continue the gradual relaxation of monetary restraint 
that we launched a few weeks ago. We should be trying 
to create an environment in which we foster an orderly 
and moderate bank credit expansion, with some moderate 
recovery in large CD outstandings, a continued reasonable 
growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits (but 
not so vigorous as to pull funds away again from other 
savings intermediaries), and a money supply expansion 
that is neither so large nor so small as to have import 
for a significant change from the current flow of spending.  

To foster these intermediate objectives, we should 
seek some further easing of net reserve availability 
and related money market conditions in the interval 
between now and late January when "even keel" consider
ations come to the fore. This means that I would like 
to see net borrowed reserves running regularly below 
$100 million (and perhaps occasionally positive), and

-75-



1/10/67

that I would dislike to see the Federal funds rate 
hanging up around 5-1/2 per cent or higher, or the 
bill rate running up appreciably and giving off confus
ing signals to the market. But I want to emphasize, 
as I have in the past, that these money market factors 
should not be looked at as ends in themselves, and we 
should be quick to take moderating action as suggested 
by the "proviso" clause in the directive if our aggre
gate credit objectives are not being fostered.  

As a practical matter, I know the Manager cannot 
reasonably expect to hit all the targets I have cited.  
Deviations in individual measures will inevitably occur, 
and they can even be positively helpful, so long as 
they are not disruptively large, because they will serve 
to keep both us and the market from settling into ruts.  

If, therefore, the Manager can manage to achieve some 

kind of average of the results I have been describing, 
I will be satisfied.  

With these views in mind, I would be prepared to 
vote for alternative B for the directive, as drafted 

by the staff.  

Chairman Martin commented that the Committee members seemed 

for the most part to be in agreement today. He personally was quite 

well satisfied with the way policy had gone since the decision to 

change; the Committee had been pursuing an easier, but not an easy, 

policy--a distinction he thought was significant--and he would want 

to continue on that course. Adoption of alternative B today would 

seem to him to be quite clearly consistent with such a policy. He 

thought some rather disturbing operational problems could be 

encountered if the Committee adopted alternative C. At its next 

meeting the Committee would have more information on prospective 

fiscal policy that could be taken into consideration, but for the 

time being he would propose adoption of alternative B as drafted.



1/10/67

The Chairman then suggested that the Committee vote on a 

directive consisting of the staff's draft for the first paragraph 

and alternative B for the second paragraph.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Messrs. Irons, 
Shepardson, and Treiber dissenting, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until otherwise 
directed by the Committee, to execute 
transactions in the System Account in 
accordance with the following current 
economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate further moderation in various 
expansionary forces and sharply increased inventory 
accumulation. The pace of advance of broad price 
measures has slowed, although upward price and cost 
pressures persist for many finished goods and services.  

Partly reflecting the recent modification of monetary 

policy, financial market conditions have become less 
taut than earlier and bank credit expansion has resumed.  

With respect to the balance of payments, trends in 

international transactions indicate a continuing serious 

problem. In this situation, it is the Federal Open 

Market Committee's policy to foster money and credit 

conditions conducive to noninflationary economic expansion 

and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, and taking account of 

forthcoming Treasury financing, System open market opera

tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 

conducted with a view to attaining somewhat easier 

conditions in the money market, unless bank credit appears 

to be expanding significantly faster than currently 

anticipated.

-77-



1/10/67 -78

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, February 7, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) January 9, 1967 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on January 10, 1967 

FIRST PARAGRAPH 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate further moderation in various expansionary forces 
and sharply increased inventory accumulation. The pace of advance 
of broad price measures has slowed, although upward price and cost 
pressures persist for many finished goods and services. Partly 
reflecting the recent modification of monetary policy, financial 
market conditions have become less taut than earlier and bank credit 
expansion has resumed. With respect to the balance of payments, trends 
in international transactions indicate a continuing serious problem.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to 
foster money and credit conditions conducive to noninflationary economic 
expansion and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

SECOND PARAGRAPH 

Alternative A: 

To implement this policy, and taking account of forthcoming 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 

about the currently prevailing conditions in the money market, but 
operations shall be modified as necessary to moderate any apparently 
significant deviation of bank credit from current expectations.  

Alternative B: 

To implement this policy, and taking account of forthcoming 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to attaining 

somewhat easier conditions in the money market, unless bank credit 

appears to be expanding significantly faster than currently antic

ipated.  

Alternative C: 

To implement this policy, and taking account of forthcoming 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next



-2

meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to fostering 
expansion in bank credit at a moderate rate, but operations shall be 
modified as necessary to limit any sharp easing or firming of money 
market conditions.


