









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 7, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Hickman 
Irons 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Shepardson 
Wayne, Alternate for Mr. Bopp

Messrs. Scanlon, Francis, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Eastburn, Garvy, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee, 

Solomon, Tow, and Young, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Hersey and Reynolds, Advisers, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Axilrod and Gramley, Associate Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors



2/7/67

Mr. Wernick, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hilkert, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Ratchford, Brandt, Jones, 
and Craven, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Stiles, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Mr. Hocter, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on January 10, 1967, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

January 10 through February 1, 1967, and a supplemental report for 

February 2 through 6, 1967. Copies of these reports have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs said 

that there would be no change in the Treasury gold stock this week.  

The gold balance in the Stabilization Fund would decline to less than



2/7/67 -3

$19 million by the end of the month, however, which might necessitate 

a $100 million cut in the Treasury gold stock within the next two or 

three weeks.  

On the London market, Mr. Coombs continued, there had been a 

good flow of gold from South Africa, which continued to run a moderate 

payments deficit. Speculative demand had been even stronger, however, 

and the gold pool lost an additional $21 million during January. As of 

the close of business yesterday, there was $47 million left of the 

supplementary $50 million contributed to the pool last September, but 

an effort would be made to get agreement for an additional $50 million 

if necessary. The French Government continued to harass the market 

with a succession of announcements designed to cast doubt on the 

official $35.00 price. The latest French move in that campaign, 

announced on January 29, was to internationalize the hitherto domestic 

French gold market. Those new measures now permitted French residents 

to buy gold on the London market and would encourage the growth of 

French gold custody business for nonresidents. European central banks 

expected that the next French move would be to withdraw from the gold 

pool, with some fanfare of publicity. In general, the French seemed 

to have deliberately put themselves on a collision course with U.S.  

policy, and the time might not be far distant when the U.S. would have 

to take fairly drastic defensive measures.



2/7/67

With respect to the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs said, the 

Committee might recall that at the last meeting he had expressed 

concern over the lagging recovery of sterling and the huge amount of 

central bank credits still outstanding to the Bank of England; and he 

had suggested that the best hope for bringing about a major turn for 

the better in the sterling market would be for the Bank of England 

to maintain a rate differential in its favor if the Euro-dollar 

market continued to ease. In fact, that was what they had done during 

the past month, and that policy had helped bring about a major inflow 

of $555 million during January. Of that amount, $30 million had been 

added to reserves and the remaining $525 million had been used to pay 

off central bank debt. The Bank of England had thereby reduced its 

outstanding short-term debt to approximately $800 million at the end 

of January, with further repayments in early February bringing the 

total down to about $625 million today--as compared with a peak of 

$1.5 billion last August. There was some hope, he thought, that the 

favorable trend of the past month would continue throug. the next two 

months, which tended to be seasonally strong. In any event he 

thought there was a pretty good chance that the Bank of England would 

pay off the remaining $100 million due under its swap line with the 

System within the next week or so.  

On the other side of the ledger, Mr. Coombs remarked, the 

System Account had cleaned up all of the $35 million of guilder debt



2/7/67 -5

that had been outstanding at the time of the last meeting, and had 

paid down the System's mark indebtedness from $85 million to no more 

than $10 million. He would hope to clean up the rest of the mark 

debt within the next week or so, leaving only the Swiss franc debt of 

$85 million. As he mentioned at the last meeting, there was a strong 

likelihood that the seasonal weakening of the Swiss franc would 

permit the repayment of that debt by the end of March. He thought it 

might be useful, however, to accelerate such repayment by asking the 

Treasury to issue a Swiss franc bond or to employ some of the 

System's holdings of guaranteed sterling to acquire Swiss francs on 

a swap basis. That might enable the books to be closed as of the end 

of the month with neither loans nor borrowings outstanding under the 

$4-1/2 billion swap network. There had been a good deal of discussion 

of the swap network in the recent meetings concerning international 

liquidity arrangements, and he thought it would be highly useful in 

that connection for both sides of the System's ledger to be clear at 

the end of February. Somewhat over $7.5 billion had been drawn under 

the swap arrangements since their inception; and, if the presently 

outstanding drawings were paid off shortly, more than90 per cent of 

all drawings would have been paid off within a six-month period.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
January 10 through February 6, 1967, 
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



2/7/67

Mr. Coombs then noted that the combined three-month standby 

swap line with the Netherlands Bank, totaling $150 million would 

mature on March 15, 1967. As the Committee would recall, a $100 

million arrangement had been on the books last September when the 

$50 million enlargement was added. He recommended renewal of both 

the longer-standing arrangement and the enlargement, noting that 

the Dutch still seemed inclined to keep them separate. He would 

hope that in due course the two could be consolidated into a single 

agreement.  

Renewal of the combined $150 
million standby swap arrangement with 

the Netherlands Bank was approved for 

a further period of three months.  

Mr. Coombs noted that there was a similar combined arrange

ment with the National Bank of Belgium for $150 million. Of that 

sum, $100 million was on a one-year basis and had been renewed for 

that period in December 1966. The enlargement of $50 million was on 

a three-month basis, and would mature on March 13, 1967. He 

recommended renewal of the $50 million enlargement for a three-month 

period, and for a longer term if agreeable to the Belgians.  

Renewal of the $50 million 
enlargement of the standby swap 

arrangement with the National Bank 

of Belgium was approved on the 

basis recommended by Mr. Coombs.



2/7/67

Finally, Mr. Coombs said,the enlargement of the swap arrange

ment with the Bank of Italy in the amount of $150 million, which had 

been negotiated in September 1966 for a term of six months, would 

mature on March 12, 1967. The longer-standing portion of the Italian 

arrangement, in the amount of $450 million, had been renewed for a 

twelve-month period in October 1966. The Bank of Italy apparently 

would be prepared to renew the enlargement for an additional nine months, 

through the end of the calendar year, and he was hopeful that they 

would be willing to put it on a twelve-month basis. He recommended 

that the Committee approve a renewal of the enlargement for nine 

months, with the understanding that it would be put on a twelve-month 

basis if agreeable to the Italians.  

Renewal of the $150 million 
enlargement of the standby swap 

arrangement with the Bank of Italy 

was approved on the basis recom
mended by Mr. Coombs.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period January 10 through February 1, 

1967, and a supplemental report covering the period February 2 through 6, 

1967. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the 

Committee.



2/7/67

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

Interest rates again moved sharply lower during the 
period since the Committee last met and money flows 

appeared to have accelerated in all sectors of the money 

and capital markets, reflecting the further easing of 

System policy and a succession of new developments that 

tended, on balance, to bolster market confidence. The 

President's State of the Union message, calling for a tax 

increase and for lower interest rates, came the evening 

after the last Committee meeting and had an immediate 

impact on market sentiment. Sixteen days later, when some 

signs of hesitation had begun to appear in the capital 

markets, the cut in the prime rate and the decline in the 

British Bank rate again restored a buoyant tone to the 

market--and generated a particularly enthusiastic response 

to the Treasury's refinancing of $7.5 billion securities 

maturing on February 15. Economic indicators becoming 

available during the period tended to confirm the 

impression that there was less exuberance in the economy, 
the budget message was generally well taken, and 

developments in Vietnam were not such as to upset the 
better market tone.  

While most of the developments during the period 
tended to be bullish for the markets, a note of caution 

appeared from time to time, mainly stemming from reports 
of a growing calendar of corporate and municipal issues 
and from the realization that the country's balance of 

payments deficit might well pose special problems some 
time in 1967, particularly if lower interest rates in the 

United States should lead to an outflow of capital. The 

very extent of the decline in rates to date from last 

summer's peaks made some market participants wonder whether 

the adjustment might not prove to have been a bit overdone, 

particularly if demands on the capital markets should 

increase further.  
In the short-term markets, rates on Treasury bills, 

bankers' acceptances, commercial and finance company paper, 

and CD's all moved significantly lower over the period 

since the last Committee meeting. The three- and six-month 

Treasury bill rates declined about 25 and 35 basis points 

net over the period, and temporarily fell below the discount 

rate before backing up a bit yesterday in the face of light



2/7/67

demand. Bidding was cautious in yesterday's regular 
weekly bill auction, and average issuing rates were set 
at about 4.53 and 4.52 per cent on the three- and 
six-month issues, up 4 and 6 basis points, respectively, 
from the rates set a week earlier.  

Open market operations succeeded in maintaining a 
generally comfortable tone in the money market. Bank 
credit, as measured by the credit proxy, expanded more 
rapidly than had been expected during the period but not, 
in my judgment, so rapidly as to have required implemen
tation of the proviso clause--although the threshhold 
was about reached. The System absorbed reserves over the 
first three weeks of the period, but then turned around 
to provide reserves over the last three days, with the 
net effects of these operations about offsetting over the 
period as a whole. The reserve absorptions were accom
plished mainly by redeeming some portion of maturing 
Treasury bills held in the portfolio and by sales to 
foreign accounts, and matched sale-purchase transactions 
were made on two occasions to absorb temporary bulges in 
reserve availability. Repurchase agreements were made 
on four occasions to meet temporary reserve needs, but 
the scale of such operations was far less than in the 
preceding interval between Committee meetings.  

During the statement week ended last Wednesday, 
money market conditions were very easy as the result of 
float created by the Chicago blizzard, with the Federal 

funds rate below the discount rate much of the time.  

Perhaps we should have done more than we did to prevent the 

excessive ease that developed, but as we viewed the 

statistics at the time, this would have required publishing 

net borrowed reserves of $250 million or so on the same 

day the Treasury would be announcing the results of its 

refunding. We consequently decided to be content with a 

net borrowed reserve position of about $50 million, with 

the expectation that the market would attribute the low 

funds rate and the low level of borrowings at Reserve Banks 

to the special temporary situation that existed. We 

thought we had succeeded in this, but a last-minute revision 

of the Chicago reserve figures unexpectedly added 

$192 million to the weekly averages, and we wound up with 

free reserves of $154 million. I don't believe any 

permanent damage was done by this lapse into easier 

conditions than I believe the Committee had intended, 
although there are some people in the market that may have



2/7/67

read more into the published figures than was there.  
Firmer conditions in the money market yesterday and over 
the remainder of this week may help dispel some of this 
overinterpretation.  

As noted earlier, the Treasury's offering for cash 
of $5.5 billion 4-3/4 per cent 15-month notes and $2 
billion 4-3/4 per cent 5-year notes, both priced at a 
discount, was very well received. The issues were priced 
to yield 4.85 and 4.84 per cent, respectively, in line 
with market rates prevailing on the day before the prime 
rate changes. With the change in the market it was 
readily apparent that the two new issues were underpriced 
and would sell at premiums of at least 1/4 and 1/2 points, 
respectively.  

Against this background there was an inevitable 
attraction for free riders and speculators, as well as 
for regular investors in Government securities. Both 
issues were heavily oversubscribed, with large public 
subscribers receiving allotments of 10 per cent of their 
subscriptions in the short note and only 7 per cent in 
the longer note. As it turned out speculative demand, 
while large, was not as excessive as some had feared, and 
the allotments were about in line with market expectations.  
The System exchanged its holdings of $3,294 million of 
maturing issues for the 15-month note. Nonbank dealers 
have made good progress in selling their awards of $297 
million of the short note and $310 million of the longer.  
At last night's close the new issues were bid at premiums 
of 7/32 and 17/32 over the issue price to yield 4.67 and 
4.71 per cent, respectively. I might note, parenthetically, 
that while dealer positions continue to be large, and their 
holdings of coupon issues have increased with the Treasury's 
refunding, they appear to be relatively cautious about 
building them up further. Their recent profit experience 
has, of course, been very good. Contributing to this 
caution has been the heavy municipal calendar, the large 

volume of participation certificates to be marketed by 
the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Export
Import Bank by mid-year, and the suspicion that the 

decline in corporate bond yields may bring more financing 
into that market.  

Had it not been for debt limit problems, the Treasury 
would most likely have announced an offering of $2-1/2 
billion June tax anticipation bills before the end of this 
week for payment around February 24. It now looks as if

-10-



2/7/67

congressional action on the debt limit will not come 
much before mid-month, and could be longer postponed 
if an unexpected floor fight develops over minority 
party proposals to link an increase in the debt limit 
to proposals for bringing participation certificates 
under the debt ceiling and for permitting the Treasury 
to finance up to $6 billion outside the 4-1/4 per cent 
interest rate ceiling. The latter proposal has a great 
deal of merit and is acceptable to the Treasury, but it 
is bound to cause lengthy debate and would be better 
considered apart from the immediate need to raise the 
debt limit.  

As we look into the period ahead I would not antic
ipate any movement of interest rates comparable to those 
experienced in recent weeks in the absence of either 
further monetary policy moves towards ease or major public 
pronouncements that give rise to further expectation of 
lower rates or some move towards peace in Vietnam or some 
very bad economic news. I think that I would agree with 
the blue book 1/ that some technical upward adjustments in 
long-term rates are a possibility, although some further 
decline in rates could also develop, particularly if 
there is a general move to a 5-1/2 per cent prime rate.  
The bill rate, too, could tend to stabilize somewhere 
around the discount rate, although some minor movements 
above and below 4-1/2 per cent would not be particularly 
surprising. As far as the credit proxy and other aggregate 
measures are concerned, I believe that we should be very 
cautious in interpreting the available measures because 
of the tenuous nature of seasonal adjustments in this 
period of rapid change in financial flows.  

As you know, the Board staff is projecting an increase 
in the credit proxy of about 9 - 11 per cent (annual rate) 
for February, or perhaps somewhat less if Euro-dollar 
borrowings by banks are taken into account. Our pro
jections at the New York bank would show a slightly slower 
rate of growth, centering about 8-1/2 per cent. It would, 
of course, be helpful to me in interpreting whatever 
directive the Committee decides on at this meeting if the 
members of the Committee would indicate their views as to 
whether these expectations are roughly consistent with 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-11-



2/7/67 -12

the policy posture they favor. I should emphasize that 
while the blue book anticipates only a 2 per cent rise 
in the credit proxy from the end of January to the end 
of February, this result is heavily conditioned by the 
forced postponement of the Treasury's cash financing and, 
as the blue book notes, there should be a considerably 
sharper expansion in early March.  

Mr. Maisel asked the Manager about the latter's attitude, given 

the Committee's directive, with respect to intervention in the market 

at the end of a statement week to smooth small changes. He 

(Mr. Maisel) had been somewhat surprised, for example, by the matched 

sale-purchase transactions the Manager had made in the recent period, 

and he wondered whether it might not have been preferable to leave the 

market to itself when it was moving in the direction the Committee 

desired.  

Mr. Holmes said that the problem, as he saw it, concerned the 

speed with which the market was moving. Thus, on Tuesday, January 17, 

when the money market was extremely easy and net borrowed reserves for 

the week appeared very low, participants were tending to interpret the 

market situation as indicating that the Committee wanted easier 

conditions than it in fact did. The Desk decided to make some sale

purchase transactions on that day, and those transactions introduced 

a note of caution into the market which he thought was consistent with 

the Committee's intent. On the following day unexpected pressures 

developed in the market after West Coast banks had suddenly terminated 

their dealer lending operations. In this situation the Desk reversed



2/7/67 -13

operations, supplying reserves through repurchase agreements. In 

short, on Tuesday the Desk absorbed reserves to give a signal to the 

market and on Wednesday it supplied reserves.  

Mr. Maisel said he questioned the philosophy that the market 

had to be given day-to-day signals by the Desk.  

Mr. Holmes replied that he did not hold to such a philosophy.  

The Desk had remained out of the market over much of the recent 

period, but there had been occasions when operations were considered 

useful.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that on the day to which Mr. Holmes had 

referred a question had been raised on the eleven o'clock conference 

call about the Committee's intent when it had authorized the use of 

matched sale-purchase transactions last summer. His feeling was that 

the Committee had authorized the Manager to enter into such transactions 

at his discretion, and had not intended that they should be used only 

under the temporary circumstances of the time. Since there had been 

some difference of opinion on the matter among those participating in 

the call he thought the question should be brought to the attention 

of the Committee.  

Chairman Martin said his understanding was that the Committee 

had authorized matched sale-purchase transactions and had not withdrawn 

the authorization. He then asked Mr. Holland to comment.



2/7/67

Mr. Holland noted that the Committee had initially approved 

such transactions in July 1966 during the emergency for open market 

operations created by the airline strike. Subsequently the Manager 

had engaged in such transactions on several other occasions when 

temporary reserve excesses arose, and had kept the Committee informed 

concerning their use.  

Mr. Holmes said it was his recollection that several members 

had commented on the usefulness of the device.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that he had participated in the eleven 

o'clock call recently and had the impression that the Desk had 

intervened in the market in almost a minimal way in what was a 

difficult and turbulent period. While he had had some questions 

about matched sale-purchase transactions when they were originally 

proposed last July, he now thought they were useful. In any case, the 

Manager had made relatively little use of them in the recent period.  

Chairman Martin said it was well that Mr. Brimmer had brought 

up the subject. If there was no objection, he would propose to have 

the record show that matched sales-purchase transactions were an 

instrument that could be used by the Desk in the regular course of its 

operations.  

No objection was made to the Chairman's proposal.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in

-14-



2/7/67 -15

Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period 
January 10 through February 6, 1967, 
were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.  

Chairman Martin noted that a memorandum had been distributed 

under date of February 1, 1967 regarding criteria for increasing 

membership in the Federal Reserve network of reciprocal currency 

arrangements. (A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the 

Committee's files.) He invited Mr. Solomon to comment.  

Mr. Solomon said the memorandum had been prepared in response 

to the Committee's request at the meeting on November 22, 1966, when 

the question of extending the size of the swap network had been dis

cussed and the central banks of four countries in particular had been 

mentioned as possible additions--Denmark, Norway, Mexico, and 

Venezuela. The memorandum attempted to consider the more general 

question and to develop for Committee consideration some systematic and 

objective criteria for membership in the swap network that would be 

readily explainable to countries both inside and outside the network.  

In response to the Chairman's request for comment, Mr. Coombs 

said it seemed to him that the paper Mr. Solomon and his associates had 

prepared was a very good one. His only comment related to the 

discussion of possible disadvantages of enlarging the swap network. On 

the basis of the System's operating experience to date, he did not 

consider the risks to be serious in connection with the first three



2/7/67 -16-

possible dangers noted--namely, that new members of the network

might tend to hold fewer uncovered dollars; that many countries,

impelled by prestige considerations to seek membership in the network,

might attempt to demonstrate eligibility by appearing less willing to

hold uncovered dollar balances; and that any damping of fluctuations

in new members' reserves might increase public sensitivity to such

fluctuations as did occur and thus lead to unwise policies designed to

minimize even temporary fluctuations. Such developments, in his judg-

ment, were not very likely. As to the fourth possible development

noted--that certain present members of the network would be dismayed

by a widening of the membership--Mr. Coombs thought that might well

occur, especially on the part of the Dutch, Belgians, and French.

Those countries might be somewhat disturbed because the entry of the

Danes and the Norwegians would dilute their influence in matters

relating to the dollar. On balance, however, that might be a desirable

development.

With respect to the question of timing, Mr. Coombs noted that

the Danes and the Norwegians had already indicated interest in joining

the network and he hoped that an encouraging and sympathetic response

could be given to them with a view to bringing them in by the late

spring. There seemed to be somewhat less urgency with respect to

Mexico and Venezuela, with whom the Treasury already had swap lines of

$75 million and $50 million, respectively.



2/7/67 -17

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he thought the staff memorandum was 

a valuable addition to background materials; it set forth some general 

principles under which the Committee could proceed, and that would be 

preferable to continuing to act on an ad hoc basis. While the 

memorandum did not go deeply into political questions, it was clear 

that the Committee had to protect its swap network against political 

attack to the degree possible, and one of the great advantages of the 

memorandum was that it laid out a factual and theoretical groundwork 

for protecting and justifying the network. However, he would want to 

consider adding another criterion to those listed for considering the 

inclusion of particular countries--the volume of U.S. trade with the 

country. He had discussed that matter with Mr. Solomon, who did not 

wholly share his view. But it seemed to him (Mr. Mitchell) that in 

terms of international relationships the trading partners of the United 

States were more important to it than countries that happened to use 

dollars in transactions. Accordingly, he would like to see the tables 

accompanying the memorandum expanded to include a table showing the 

U.S. trading position with each of the countries listed.  

With respect to Mr. Coombs' point on timing, Mr. Mitchell 

thought that it would be well to initiate conversations with all four 

of the countries that had been suggested. He was not sure that the 

Venezuelans were prepared to qualify, but the swap line they had with 

the Treasury did not strike him as a substitute for membership in the



2/7/67 -18

Federal Reserve network. On the whole, he was highly pleased 

with the staff memorandum and hoped that the Committee would give 

it favorable consideration.  

Mr. Wayne said he would not attempt to substitute his 

judgment for those who had spoken, but he was not persuaded by 

the staff memorandum that there was justification for extending 

the network aside from the political considerations, and he had 

some reservations about extending the network for political 

reasons. Accordingly, he would like to see more discussion of 

the justification for adding countries.  

Mr. Robertson indicated that his view was similar to 

Mr. Wayne's. He thought the criteria developed in the memorandum 

represented a long step forward on a path the Committee should be 

exploring. However, he also thought that in a matter of this kind 

the Committee should move slowly since its steps, once taken, could 

not be easily retraced. While criteria could be adopted which at 

the moment seemed to eliminate certain countries, if the network 

was broadened somewhat there was likely to be great pressure to 

include countries that did not meet the criteria. The Committee 

should give careful consideration to the hazards involved in 

broadening the network.  

Mr. Daane said that while he thought the points Mr. Robertson 

had made were valid, the advantages of expanding the network seemed



2/7/67 -19

somewhat stronger to him than stated in the memorandum. As the 

recent discussions of the whole area of monetary reform had progressed 

the concept of participation had been broadened and the matter was 

now viewed as a responsibility of all members of the International 

Monetary Fund. The U.S. position throughout the discussions had 

been in favor of a wider rather than a narrower concept in terms of 

participation, and expanding the swap network would be supportive 

of this. There also would be advantages to expanding the network 

in terms of the System's operations, and he did not regard those 

advantages as merely political. Every country merited equal consider

ation in deciding whether it met the criteria established for member

ship. He would favor moving slowly when new ground was being broken, 

but he did not think this was entirely new ground. He thought the 

Committee should consider the memorandum favorably.  

Mr. Hayes said he found himself of much the same view as 

Mr. Daane, although he recognized the reasons for caution in expanding 

the network. The considerations advanced by Messrs. Solomon and 

Coombs did not strike him as essentially political in nature. They 

were economic considerations, and there was a real logic for including 

more countries on purely economic grounds. The basis on which one 

negotiated with individual countries might well differ in each 

instance, and he personally did not feel qualified to say that 

negotiations should proceed rapidly with one country and slowly with



2/7/67 -20

another; he would prefer to leave such decisions to the staff 

members operating in the field from day to day. He agreed with 

Mr. Coombs' point about the Scandinavian countries; he thought 

there was some advantage to having additional European countries 

in the network that were not members of the Common Market. He 

had nothing against inclusion of Mexico and Venezuela. It should 

be recognized that inclusion of two Latin American countries would 

raise some question in the minds of others, but there were so few 

that were likely to qualify that he did not think the problem would 

be serious. He had a generally favorable view of the matter.  

Mr. Brimmer said he supported the expansion of the swap 

network. He agreed that it was wise to have additional European 

members, but he thought it might be particularly useful to the 

United States to have western hemisphere countries in--especially 

Mexico, which evidently could meet the criteria and might be willing 

to join. He wondered if the subject had been discussed with the 

Treasury Department and, if so, whether they had any attitude toward 

it. Finally, while he agreed with that part of the second proposed 

criterion which read, "The central bank, with its government's 

approval, . . . should be prepared . . to exchange relevant informa

tion freely and frankly, without diplomatic participation and inter

vention," he hoped it would be agreeable to the Committee for the 

diplomats to be kept acquainted with the negotiations.



2/7/67 -21-

Mr. Coombs said he had held only brief discussionswith the

Treasury on the subject. It was his impression that the Treasury

would like to continue its swap arrangements with Mexico and

Venezuela, but that it would have no objection to the inclusion of

those countries in the System's network. In general, he thought

the Treasury would support the proposal. It was also his impression

that the proposal would be warmly welcomed by the central banks of

Mexico and Venezuela.

On the point that had been raised regarding political aspects,

Mr. Coombs continued, he felt sure that the approach that had been

made by the Governors of the Banks of Denmark and Norway had no

political overtones. In his earlier comment about diluting the influ-

ence of the French, Belgians, and Dutch he had not meant to refer to

the Governments but rather to the central banks, which had taken an

unduly aggressive attitude with respect to U.S. negotiations with

other countries.

Mr. Mitchell said that in his earlier reference to political

aspects he had meant to employ that term in a broad sense. He viewed

the System's relationships with all central banks as basically banking

relationships. But those relationships tended to shade into the

political area, and it was with that political periphery that he

thought the Committee had to be concerned. It seemed to him that

if the network of central bank relationships was well conceived the



2/7/67 -22

political infringement would be minimal. The network should have 

a basis--a justification and a logic--which made it immune to political 

attack.  

Mr. Wayne noted that he had raised the question of justifica

tion, but he would add that he was not objecting to enlargement of 

the network. It seemed to him that the principal responsibility for 

broadening international liquidity lay with the IMF and with Govern

ments, and that when the System entered into swap arrangements it 

should do so with the recognition that its prime responsibility was 

to protect the interests of the United States. He would like to see 

a somewhat better case made for extending the network in terms of 

the nation's interests.  

Mr. Daane said that the two matters to which Mr. Wayne had 

referred were quite separate and distinct. The liquidity discussions 

in their present form were concentrated largely on the construction 

of a new reserve asset, which presumably would take its place along

side gold and currencies in international reserves. The swap network, 

on the other hand, was designed to deal not with the basic problem 

of growth in reserve assets but rather with volatile flows that might 

prove upsetting to the U.S. dollar in the first instance and to the 

functioning of the whole international monetary system in the second.  

He thought the basic question at issue with respect to any proposed



2/7/67 -23

swap arrangement was the contribution it would make to the protection 

of the dollar.  

Mr. Wayne responded that he had seen no evidence to indicate 

that swap arrangements should be made with Mexico or Venezuela on 

the basis Mr. Daane had mentioned.  

Chairman Martin said that the staff paper struck him as an 

excellent contribution. Personally, he had been leaning toward the 

view that the System's network should be broadened when it was 

possible to do so. He thought the swap network was one of the distinc

tive achievements of the System, but Mr. Robertson's point that the 

Committee should move slowly in broadening it was a good one. If 

Mexico and Venezuela were included there would be pressures to add 

other countries. On a matter as important as this he thought it 

would be desirable for the Committee to consider today's discussion 

as preliminary in nature and to withhold action pending further consid

eration. He would not want to hamper negotiations but since there 

were differences of opinion he suggested that the Committee postpone 

action until its next meeting to give members time to study the issues 

further.  

Mr. Scanlon said that he favored enlarging the swap network, 

but he questioned whether the Committee could rely on the staff 

memorandum alone to provide the basis for decisions with respect to 

particular countries. The various criteria were well outlined in



2/7/67

the paper and the disadvantages and advantages of enlarging the network 

were noted. However, he thought that the basis for selecting the 

particular cut-off points mentioned--in terms of reserves, foreign 

trade, and so forth--was not sufficiently documented. The Committee 

had to justify those cut-off points; otherwise it would be in the 

position of simply selecting points that would admit the particular 

countries it wanted to include in the network. He recognized, of 

course, that an element of judgment would be involved in any cut-offs.  

Mr. Solomon replied that the cut-offs noted in the memorandum 

had, indeed, been deliberately selected to include the four countries 

in question. The purpose for doing so was to determine what other 

countries would be eligible on criteria that included those four 

countries.  

Mr. Scanlon agreed that the memorandum had made that point 

quite clear. Nevertheless, he believed that further consideration of 

the criteria was required if the Committee was to be able to defend 

them.  

Mr. Solomon said the staff could undertake to prepare papers 

on each of the four individual countries for the Committee. He did 

not know whether it would be possible to complete all of the papers 

before the next meeting, but as many as possible would be done by 

that time.  

Chairman Martin said he thought it would be useful to have as 

many such papers as possible. He repeated his suggestion that a

-24-



2/7/67

decision on expanding the network be held over in the hope that final 

action could be taken at the next meeting.  

There was no disagreement with the Chairman's suggestion.  

The staff economic and financial report at this meeting was in 

the form of a visual-auditory presentation. (Copies of the charts 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.) 

The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Brill, 

was as follows: 

Each year at about this time, the staff presents to 
the Committee an analysis and critique of the GNP projec
tion underlying the Administration's budget. Some of the 
problems we encounter remain the same from one year to 
the next. For example, the official projection, as 
published in the Economic Report, does not include sufficient 
detail on the quarterly time path or on expenditure 
components to permit a close assessment of the financial 
implications of the model. As usual, we have supplied these 
details--in close consultation with the Council--and 
believe the patterns are reasonably accurate, even though 
unofficial.  

What is new this year is the role that monetary policy 
is given in achieving the economic levels forecast by the 
Administration. Although the press and business journals 
have apparently done a better than usual job in describing 
the official economic outlook, what hasn't been made clear-
as far as I know--is just how much monetary easing would be 
required to keep the economy on the growth path envisaged 
by the Council. This is the focus of the staff's analysis 
this morning. The state of the art limits us to rather 
rough approximations, but our estimates of financing needs 
are probably close enough to provide a reasonable basis 

for evaluating alternative long- and short-run strategies 
for monetary policy.  

The first step in the process is a detailed examination 
of the official model to delineate critical expenditure areas 

and timing patterns. Mr. Koch will begin the analysis.

-25-



2/7/67

Mr. Koch then commented as follows: 

The economic model underlying the Administration's 
budget assumes a rise in GNP of almost $50 billion over 
the year ending in the fourth quarter of 1967. The 
increase projected by the Council of Economic Advisers 
amounts to about 6-1/2 per cent--significantly smaller 
than the gain over the preceding year.  

In constant dollars, or real terms, however, growth 
is expected to maintain the 4 per cent rate of the past 
year, with price increases accounting for a smaller part 

of the rise in current dollar GNP. Average prices of 

goods and services, as reflected in the deflator, are 
assumed to increase about 2-1/4 per cent during the year.  

The pace of activity slows decidedly in the first 

half of 1967, with quarterly GNP increases averaging 
$9-1/2 billion, well below the average in 1966. The 

weakness, however, is relatively short-lived. After mid

year, activity is expected to accelerate briskly and by 

the end of the year GNP gains would approach the very 
large gains of late 1965 and early 1966. In contrast to 
last year, Federal defense expenditures slow down during 

1967, and expansion in private expenditures becomes the 

decisive factor sustaining economic growth.  
The first half slow-down results mainly from a sharp 

decline in the rate of inventory buildup and a reversal of 

the uptrend in stock-sales ratios. In the fourth quarter, 

business inventory accumulation climbed to an annual rate 
of $15.6 billion--a new postwar peak--and the stock-sales 

ratio rose to the highest level since mid-1961.  

A downward adjustment in inventory investment thus 

seems likely, particularly in view of the slowing in 
private final sales late last year, and the smaller advance 

in prospect for defense spending. The decline in the rate 
of inventory accumulation projected in the CEA model 

continues until mid-year. The stock-sales ratio recedes-
but not to the low of early 1966.  

The reduced growth of GNP in the first half, though 

mainly the result of the dropoff in inventory accumulation, 
also reflects a slackening in Federal purchases. But the 

substantial step-up projected by the CEA for private final 

sales (including purchases by State and local governments) 

prevents the first half from being considerably weaker. A 

rapid turnaround in residential construction expenditures

-26-



2/7/67

and substantial gains in consumption provide the major 
impetus for the growth in final sales.  

This bullish outlook for private final sales permits 
the speedy cleanup of excess inventories. Postwar 
inventory adjustments generally have been sharp, and have 
acted as a drag on private final sales and over-all 
economic expansion for several quarters. In 1957-58, for 
example, the adjustment in inventories occurred from lower 
levels of accumulation, but private final sales leveled 
off. In 1967, by contrast, final sales are projected to 
accelerate. Even during the inventory adjustment of the 
Korean War period, private final sales advanced less than 
in the 1967 projection, and inventory investment turned 
negative before the adjustment was completed.  

In the Council's model, housing is one of the most 
important sources of stimulus for expansion during 1967.  
The expectation is that housing starts and residential 
construction expenditures will begin to rise soon,and 
accelerate after mid-year. By the fourth quarter, housing 
starts are back to a 1.5 million annual rate, and expendi
tures have almost completely recovered the sharp decline 
in 1966.  

Consumption also rises briskly in the first half, 
following a pronounced lag at the end of 1966. Gains in 
the last half continue sizable, as the contractive influence 
of the mid-year income tax increase is offset by higher 
social security payments. Growth in consumption for the 
year exceeds last year's increase. Higher spending is 
concentrated in nondurable goods and services--autos and 
other durables are expected to show little change.  

This optimistic view of consumer spending depends, 
in part, on a continued growth in disposable income about 
as fast as in 1966. But consumers also spend a somewhat 
larger portion of their after-tax income, and the savings 
rate declines in the last half to the low rate of 4.7 per 
cent.  

Business fixed investment, on the other hand, would be 
a relatively neutral influence in 1967. It shows only a 
small further rise early in the year and then stabilizes.  
This ends the remarkable 5-year expansion which raised 
fixed capital outlays to the highest share of GNP in the 
postwar years. Termination of the investment boom is 
consistent with expectations of declining profit margins 
and reduced capacity utilization. As a share of GNP, 
business fixed investment would decline moderately.

-27-



2/7/67

Our staff projections of GNP in the first half, 
shown in the green book 1/, are less optimistic than those 
of the CEA. For inventories and Federal purchases, our 
projections are close to those of the Council. But we 
are not persuaded that private final sales will rebound so 
vigorously that they offset much of the drop in inventory 
accumulation.  

Turning to major components of private final sales, we 
do not look for a sudden surge in consumption. Certainly, 
there is no evidence of it in recent retail sales figures 
or in surveys of consumer spending plans. Nor are we as 
optimistic as the Council concerning the speed of the 
recovery in residential construction, where we expect 
the increase to be delayed until the second half. Despite 
the rapid revival in savings flows to thrift institutions, 
getting a housing boom under way takes time. Finally, we 
are somewhat less sanguine about business fixed investment 
over the near-term. In our view, all this adds up to a 
slower growth in final sales over the first half.  

Even if we accept the Council's more optimistic first
half estimates, and then translate their GNP figures into 
changes in physical output and capacity use, we find that 
the increase in manufacturing production slows appreciably 
this year. Output would not increase in the first half, 
and the moderate gain after mid-year would raise the 
production index only about 3 per cent for the year. With 
capacity continuing to grow, the utilization rate would 
fall to 87 per cent by the fourth quarter--the lowest level 
since late 1964.  

Unemployment, however, would remain about as low as in 
1966. For while employment gains in manufacturing would be 
small, substantial increases in service expenditures, State 
and local government purchases, and residential construction 
would generate strong demands for labor in these industries.  

Labor force growth this year, moreover, is expected 
to be more in line with normal trends, in constrast with 
last year's extremely large increase. The decline in labor 
force growth would be reflected in a smaller increase 
this year in employment, since unemployment is projected 
to remain relatively stable. Even though the projected 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



2/7/67

increase in the Armed Forces is less this year, the gain 
in civilian employment would also be much smaller.  

Mr. Wernick, turning first to the wage and price implications 

of the projections, continued the presentation as follows: 

Last year's sharp increase in hourly compensation 
was not unexpected in the context of high over-all 
demands, rising consumer prices, and a tight labor 
market. Wage gains after mid-year generally followed a 
5 per cent pattern. Meanwhile, productivity growth in 
manufacturing slowed, and there was little further gain 
in output per manhour after mid-year. Unit labor costs 
then began rising faster, and in the last quarter of 1966 
were 2.7 per cent higher than a year earlier.  

As we interpret the labor market implications of the 
Council's projection, we see little basis for expecting a 
change in the trend of hourly compensation, despite some 
easing in industrial employment indicated for the first 
half. Lagged effects of last year's consumer price 
increases, together with higher minimum wages, point to 
continued gains of 5 per cent or more in hourly compensa
tion. With capacity utilization declining, while 
manufacturing output grows slowly, a sharp increase in 
output per manhour does not seem likely to us, so we are 
projecting only a moderate rise. Consequently, unit 
labor costs should advance about as rapidly as in the 
latter half of 1966.  

The upward movement of wholesale prices slowed late 

in 1966, as the influence of improved supplies--for 

foodstuffs and a number of sensitive materials--outweighed 

cost pressures on industrial commodities.  

In the consumer sector, prices of foods began to 

decline in the fall, and the rise in the consumer price 

index then slowed appreciably. But demand and cost 

pressures remained strong for the broad spectrum of con

sumer services, and these prices continued to rise at a 

5 per cent annual rate.  

Favorable developments with respect to food prices 

and materials, together with some slack in capacity use, 

might continue to offset upward cost pressures on 

industrial prices--in the early months of 1967. But with 

profit margins under pressure, and the pace of activity 

accelerating in the second half, it seems optimistic to

-29-



2/7/67

assume that the rise in prices can be kept close to 2 
per cent during 1967, if economic activity does advance 
in line with the Council's projection.  

As we noted earlier, the Council's model has the 
economy bouncing back quickly from the inventory 
adjustment of the first half. But the deficit in the 
Federal budget is not the principal factor accounting 

for the speed of the recovery. The quarterly pattern 

for the national-income-accounts deficit projected by 

the Council does suggest some fiscal stimulus during 
the first half, but the deficit in this period stays 
close to the fourth-quarter 1966 level. Thereafter, it 

tapers off, and turns into a small surplus by early 1968.  
The declining deficit after mid-year partly reflects 

the slower advance of expenditures following the large 

rise proposed for social security benefits in the third 

quarter. Subsequently, expenditures rise more slowly 

than in 1966, mainly because of the moderated expansion 

in defense spending.  
Receipts, meanwhile, are bolstered by continuing 

growth in private incomes and scheduled tax increases.  

The effect of the Administration's income tax proposal 

is concentrated in the third quarter, when receipts rise 

rapidly. Social security taxes also advance in January 

1968.  
If fiscal policy provides so little of the impetus 

to the second-half acceleration in GNP growth, what, then, 

accounts for the quick and vigorous recovery from the 

inventory adjustment? 
The Council appears to assign the strategic role to 

easier monetary policy in its assessment of economic 
performance in 1967. The rebound foreseen for the second 
half would be unlikely unless private final sales responded 

promptly and strongly to measures of monetary ease.  

Business incentives to invest in fixed capital would be 

weakening in the first half, but ample availability of 

credit at low costs could be an important sustaining 

factor. Also, consumer spending has recently been 

sluggish, but here, too, the cumulative effect of last 
year's credit restraint may still be taking its toll.  

It is in the housing sector that dependence of the 

Council's projections on monetary easing is most clearly 
evident. Starts must turn up soon, retrace last year's 

abrupt decline, and reach 1.5 million units by the fourth 

quarter. Residential construction expenditures also

-30-



2/7/67

recover most of the 1966 decline. The implication is 
clear: mortgage funds must soon become cheap and readily 
available. Monetary ease sufficient to stimulate this 
rapid recovery in housing would, of course, directly 
affect other types of spending, such as business fixed 
investment and consumer durables. And since increased 
expenditures in these areas would raise incomes and 
output, there would also be an induced increase in 
spending, especially for consumer goods and inventories.  

We conclude, therefore, that the financial 
assumptions underlying the Council's GNP model imply a 
return to conditions in the mortgage, and in other credit 
markets, broadly similar to those prevailing, on average, 
during 1965. This conclusion provides the basis for our 
financial projection, which will be presented by Mr. Gramley.  

Mr. Gramley commented as follows: 

The financial conditions implicit in the Council's 
GNP model suggest the likelihood of a rise in borrowing 
relative to net investment. Last year, even though net 
investment outlays rose, household and business borrowing 
declined. Tight money took its toll in private credit 
expansion, especially in the last half.  

In 1967, net investment in the CEA model drops 
abruptly, mainly because of reduced inventory accumulation.  
Nevertheless, our financial projections suggest that if 
the investment total were realized, borrowing would stay 
close to last year's level, narrowing the gap between 
investment and borrowing.  

The increase in borrowing relative to spending occurs 
mainly in household use of mortgage credit. Mortgage money 
must be amply available to finance new construction, and 
also to meet pent-up credit demands to finance existing 
property transactions. The ratio of mortgage borrowing to 
housing expenditures, which fell precipitously in 1966, 
thus is projected to rise toward the 1964-65 peaks.  

Corporate borrowing was also limited last year by 
severe restrictions on the availability of bank loans, 
and corporations made deep inroads into liquid asset 
holdings late in the year. Some liquidity rebuilding 
seems in prospect. Thus, corporations are projected to 
borrow about as much in 1967 as in 1966, even though their 
investment in real assets is lower and their gross retained

-31-



2/7/67

earnings higher. Borrowings would be especially large in 
the first half, when the final instalment on accelerated 
tax payments is made, but would tail off in the final six 
months.  

This half-year pattern shows up mainly in bank loans, 
which are projected to rise somewhat more in the first 
half than in the same period of last year. Loan growth 
slows appreciably in the second half, when the stimulus 
of tax borrowing is withdrawn, and inventory accumulation 

is quite low. The projection also calls for another big 
year for bonds and stocks, since corporations seem likely 
to stretch out debt maturities this year to improve their 
liquidity positions.  

In sum, funds raised by private nonfinancial 
borrowers during all of 1967 are projected at about last 

year's average level. Credit expansion would once again 

be higher in the first half, but with mortgage borrowing 

rising over the year, the half-year pattern would be 

less uneven than in 1966.  

Total Federal borrowing, including sales of partici

pation certificates indicated in the budget, would be about 

$9 billion for the calendar year, compared with $7 billion 

in 1966. And perhaps it would be well to recall that the 

Federal deficit often turns out to be larger than depicted 
in the January budget document. Foreign borrowing, as 

measured in flow of funds accounts, is projected to 

increase, reflecting easier domestic credit conditions.  

This total of funds raised is substantial--a bit 

larger than the advanced levels of 1965 and 1966. High 

rates of credit expansion would be required at banks and 

other financial institutions to make this amount of funds 

available on favorable terms.  

To stimulate residential construction, an abundance 

of funds must flow into nonbank intermediaries specializing 
in housing finance. Inflows of shares and deposits to 

savings banks and associations would have to be restored 

to about 7 per cent--or near the 1965 pace. Marked 

improvement has already occurred--in December, the net 

inflow equaled the 7 per cent annual rate projected for 

all of 1967. Special factors influenced December gains, 

however--including larger interest credits, a high 

fourth-quarter savings rate, and a return flow of money 

transferred earlier to the securities markets. Maintaining 

this growth rate through all of 1967 would likely require 

some further widening of the yield spread between market 

instruments and savings shares.

-32-



2/7/67

In the banking system, the amount of credit expansion 
consistent with a significant thawing in lending policies 
depends importantly on bank desires to rebuild liquidity.  
The ratio of securities to total earning assets has 
declined markedly in recent years, to about one-third 
by the end of 1966.  

Growth of total loans has been quite rapid through
out this long period of economic expansion. Last year, 
loan growth fell below the extraordinary 1965 pace, but 
the growth of total bank credit fell even more, and 
security holdings were reduced for the first time since 
1959. Moreover, bank attitudes toward liquidity were 
colored by the discovery that CD's could not always be 
counted on as a source of reserve adjustment.  

Our projection calls for banks to rebuild liquidity 
somewhat during 1967 as an accompaniment to relaxing 
loan policies. The projected improvement in the ratio 
of securities to earning assets is small, but--with loan 
growth projected at nearly $17 billion--a $10 billion 
expansion in security holdings would be needed to 
accomplish it.  

Total bank credit would thus have to rise by $27 
billion--about a 9 per cent rate--for the full year.  
Growth would be largest in the first half, in line 
with the more rapid expansion of credit demands during 
this period.  

The accompanying deposit expansion would likely 
be registered principally in bank time deposits. The 
projected rate of 13 per cent is below that for 1965-
when interest rates on time deposits rose sharply--but 
well above the rate for 1966. This year, accelerated 
growth would be stimulated mainly by the decline in 
market interest rates relative to those on time deposits.  
Time deposit expansion has already achieved a 17 per 
cent annual rate in January, but this high rate reflected 
shifts of existing assets from the money market accompanying 
the sharp decline in short-term market yields, and is not 
expected to continue. Offering rates on CD's recently 
have been cut back, and the weekly gain in CD's at 
New York banks last week was moderated.  

Expansive policies giving rise to rapid time deposit 
growth would, of course, reduce interest rate incentives 
to economize on money holdings, and money stock growth 
would accelerate also. Our projection of a 4-1/2 per 
cent growth rate in 1967 represents a rough judgment,

-33-



2/7/67

based on recent experience, as to how the public might 
distribute its deposit increase between demand and 
time deposits. With this distribution, bank reserves 
would have to increase by about 7 per cent to support 
the deposit expansion.  

Sources of funds supplied to borrowers would be 
altered appreciably by these large inflows to commercial 
banks and nonbank intermediaries. The bank share would 
return to 36 per cent, or close to the 1965 level, while 
the share supplied by nonbank intermediaries would also 
recover the ground lost in 1966. As usual, the offset 
would be a marked reduction in the share supplied by the 
nonfinancial public directly to credit markets through 
security purchases.  

This decline in the public's share, in our projection, 
does not reflect the attraction of increased rates on 
savings deposits pulling funds from the securities markets.  
Average yields on deposits and shares are not likely to 
change much this year, apart from downward adjustments 
in CD rates. The reduced attractiveness of market secu
rities would thus reflect reductions in their yields.  

Market interest rates already have declined abruptly 
from last fall's peaks. In the long-term securities 
markets, expectations have been a fundamental factor, and 
a continued high rate of bank credit expansion would likely 
be needed to validate the decline that has occurred.  
Nevertheless, it seems probable that interest rates would 
have to fall further to be consistent with the GNP model 

and our financial flow projections.  
As a rough judgment, rates on long-term marketable 

securities--represented here by corporate new issues--might 
have to fall by another 25 basis points, or more, to about 
4-3/4 per cent--by mid-year or earlier. For three-month 

bills the drop in rates might well be greater, since the 

present yield curve is less steeply sloped than is customary 

for a period of easy credit markets. A range around 4 per 

cent for bills would be consistent with the long rates 

projected, but the shape of the yield curve would be affected 

importantly by the Treasury's debt management policies this 

year.  

Mr. Reynolds will continue the presentation, focusing 

on the international implications of the GNP model and the 

financial projection.

-34-



2/7/56

Mr. Reynolds then commented as follows: 

The easing of domestic credit conditions that has been 
described would significantly affect international capital 
flows, although the IET and the voluntary restraint programs 
should help insure that outflows of U.S. private capital 
will not mushroom as in 1964. Net outflows into direct 
investments and foreign securities may not change much. But 
bank credits to foreigners could easily swing from last year's 
$300 million reflow to an outflow of $1/2 billion this year, 
even if European financial markets continue easing. In total, 
net outflows of U.S. private capital are likely to increase 
by roughly $1 billion, mainly reflecting the swing in bank 
credit.  

Short-term borrowing abroad by U.S. banks through their 
foreign branches would be even more strikingly affected by 
domestic financial ease. Liabilities to foreign branches 

tripled last year, rising by $2 billion in the second half 
alone, when the U.S. financial squeeze was tightest and when 
funds were being shifted out of sterling. We expect a 
substantial reduction in these liabilities this year--part 
of which has in fact already occurred. Mere cessation of 
last year's inflow represents a change in flow of $2-1/2 
billion. To the extent that liabilities to branches decline, 
the change, and the resulting deterioration in the official 

settlements balance, is that much greater.  
For transactions in goods and services, the Council's 

GNP model suggests a marked improvement this year, in con

trast to the worsening on capital account. Exports of 
goods and services should continue rising despite slackened 

demand from Canada, Britain, and Germany during the first 

half; shipments to Japan and to nonindustrial countries will 
be expanding vigorously.  

The rise in imports of goods and services slackened 
at the end of 1966. Total imports should decline in the 

first half of this year because merchandise imports will 

decline. In the second half, however, merchandise imports 

and the total will be rising again.  

The favorable balance on goods and services should 
increase during the year; but it will be flattening out at 

year-end, at a rate about $2-1/2 billion higher than in 1966 

but $1 billion below the peak attained in 1964.  
Merchandise imports will decline during the first half 

mainly because of the effects that reduced inventory growth 

will have on imports of industrial supplies. These imports

-35-



2/7/67

should temporarily fall almost as much as they did 
in 1960-61. Imports of nonfood consumer goods should 
level off; much of the recent rise has reflected 
adjustment by automobile companies to the 1965 agree
ment with Canada. Imports of capital goods should 
also level off as domestic pressures on capacity 
diminish.  

Results of our projections for 1967 within the 
Council's framework thus include an improvement of about 
$2 billion on goods and services, and a $1 billion increase 
in net outflows of U.S. private capital. There could also 
be a decline of $1 billion in net inflows of foreign non
liquid capital. Investments by foreign official and 

international agencies in nonliquid U.S. assets may be 
more difficult to arrange this year. Also, debt prepay
ments may be smaller.  

In terms of the over-all balance, these and other 
minor changes add up to a probable enlargement of the 
liquidity deficit this year. Of longer-term importance, 
if domestic demand is advancing as swiftly by year-end as 

the Council anticipates, and especially if prices and costs 
rise more than it anticipates, the improvement on trade 
might be relatively short-lived.  

The balance on official reserve transactions would 
shift from last year's small surplus to a large deficit.  

For 1966 and 1967 together, the average deficit on 
reserve transactions might be roughly $1-1/2 billion, 
which would be about the same as in 1964 and 1965. The 
ballooning of this deficit in 1967 could imply another 
substantial drain on our gold reserves, depending on 
which countries gain reserves.  

Mr. Brill will now discuss the implications of 
the projections for Federal Reserve policy.  

Mr. Brill's concluding remarks were as follows: 

Let me first underscore, as we often have, that 
the state of the forecasting art is still primitive, 
especially with respect to changes in relationships 

between financial variables and GNP. Nevertheless, 

our estimates strongly indicate that realization of the 

Council's GNP model would call for still easier conditions 

of bank credit and in credit markets than have developed 

since the turn in policy last year. The strategic question 

facing the Committee is whether policy actions should be



2/7/67

directed towards creating this further ease in the 
months ahead, and in particular, whether continued 
policy easing is appropriate at the moment.  

A case can be made for pushing further at this 
time. Our own projections of GNP for the first half 
are, as noted earlier, less bullish than those of the 
Council. But neither of us is projecting the weak 
economic picture often associated with periods of 
inventory adjustment. Final sales often weaken more 
than is suggested here when declining inventory 
investment leads to production cuts and income loss.  
It is much too early to conclude that this prospect 
can be ruled out. The production index was down in 
January--perhaps by a full point--and retail sales 
did decline. Monetary hesitation now, therefore, 
still runs the risk of results that are too little 
and too late.  

But there also are serious risks running the 
other way. It appears to us that output per manhour 
will increase slowly next year. With increases in 
hourly compensation of at least 5 per cent, there 
could well be significant upward pressure on costs.  
In the climate of rapidly expanding activity pro
jected by the Council for later this year, incentives 
would be strong to pass through these cost increases 
to prices.  

Cost and price increases could cut short the 
recovery anticipated in our trade balance, so essential 
in light of the expected worsening in U.S. capital 
accounts this year. De-escalation of the international 
interest rate war is not a complete guarantee that 
monetary policy can ignore balance of payments constraints.  

Finally, the odds must be carefully weighed as to 
whether fiscal policy will develop along the lines envisaged 
by the Council. We adhere to our position that military 
and budget officials are in a better position than central 
bankers to gauge the probable trend of defense expenditures.  
Nevertheless, barring an end to active hostility in Vietnam, 
the official estimates are undoubtedly best regarded as 
minimum estimates.  

Uncertainty with regard to passage of the tax proposal, 
and its implications for the deficit, also raise questions 
for monetary policy. Instead of a decline in the Federal 
deficit after mid-year, there would be a significant increase 
if the tax proposal were not passed.

-37-



2/7/67

Prospects for passage of the tax bill will depend 
partly on the course of economic events in the first half.  
In the context of the slower growth projected by the Council 
during this period, Congressional approval is by no means 
certain. If our own weaker first-half forecast materializes, 
the chances of passage are even smaller.  

Failure to pass the tax bill would, of course, change 
greatly the economic outlook for the second half. With the 
monetary easing stipulated earlier, omission of the 6 per 
cent surcharge would mean significantly more rapid GNP 
growth in the third and fourth quarters of this year and 
into 1968.  

On balance, then, it seems to us that there are 
several critical aspects of the CEA projection with which 
forecasters' judgments may differ, with consequent differences 
in policy prescription. On the one hand, the projection 
could be overstating the strength of the economy in the winter 
and spring, and it could be overstating the vigor of the 
rebound after mid-year, particularly in consumers' willingness 
to spend. But on the other hand, the CEA could be overoptimis
tic about the likelihood of additional fiscal restraint, and 
even with a tax increase, the projection may be underestimating 
the potential for cost and price pressures emerging later in 
the year and into 1968.  

Weighing the risks involved, it would appear to us 
that a prudent longer-run strategy for monetary policy would 
be to continue to work toward ease, but to stop somewhat short 
of the conditions called for in a strict interpretation of the 
CEA model. We don't want to carry ease so far as to require 
another severe wrench to the financial structure later in the 
year if our GNP forecasts have to be modified.  

With respect to shorter-term developments, the speed 

of adjustment in financial conditions we've had over the 

past two months is somewhat frightening to an economist who 

is not yet sure of the consequences of rapid changes in the 
value of the community's financial wealth. This concerned 
me last March, when rates were rising so rapidly, and the 
converse worries me now.  

Given the longer-term strategy just noted, and weighing 
shorter-term concerns, the staff's view of an appropriate 

policy decision today would be to hold the line on financial 

conditions until the next meeting of the Committee, while 
intensifying efforts to assess the effects of recent monetary

-38-



2/7/67

easing on the real economy. As the blue book indicated, 
holding the line over the next four weeks would mean 
bill rates remaining in a 4.40 to 4.60 per cent range 
and long-term rates hovering close to their current 
levels. Marginal reserve availability would drop back 
from the storm-induced peak, with net borrowed reserves 
averaging close to $50 million over the period.  

These market conditions would, we hope, be con
sistent with a bank credit proxy averaging about 10 per 
cent higher in the month of February over the month of 
January, although the rise would be much less on a 
month-end to month-end basis. If deviations from the 
money and credit conditions specified should begin to 
emerge, I would argue that action should be prompt to 
dampen tendencies of rates to move up. Any persisting 
rise in yields could, at this juncture, inhibit the 
trend toward liberalization in bank and thrift insti
tution lending policies before financing of a strong 
spring building season is assured. But a persisting 
downward pressure on yields accompanied by shortfalls 
from the projected banking aggregates could be signaling 
a greater-than-expected weakness in basic demands for 
both credit and goods, to which the System should respond 
with generous reserve provision.  

Mr. Ellis said that he understood from the presentation that 

the staff questioned the Council's projection that the GNP deflator 

would rise by a little over 2 per cent in 1967. He noted, however, 

that the green book projected a similarly reduced rate of increase 

in the deflator, and he asked Mr. Brill to comment.  

In reply, Mr. Brill noted that the green book projection 

related only to the first half of 1967. He did not recall at the 

moment whether there was any significant difference between the 

deflators projected for the first half in the green book and in 

the Council's model. However, what the staff questioned was the

-39-



2/7/67 -40

likelihood that the price rise could be kept close to 2 per cent 

for the full year, and in particular, in the second half.  

Mr. Swan noted that among the money market conditions the 

blue book suggested might be taken as representing no change from 

prevailing conditions was a Federal funds rate in the range of 

4-3/4 - 5 per cent. He asked whether such a range would not be 

higher than that which had actually prevailed recently.  

Mr. Axilrod said that such a Federal funds rate, if anything, 

probably would be a shade lower than the recent average, if one 

excluded the effects of the snowstorm in the Midwest on the figures 

for the February 1 statement week. In general, the complex of condi

tions to which Mr. Swan had referred reflected those recently prevail

ing, excluding the effects of the storm.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether in his concluding remarks Mr. Brill 

was recommending that interest rates should be permitted to ease if, 

with net borrowed reserves around $50 million, bank credit failed to 

expand.  

Mr. Brill said he was suggesting that an easing in interest 

rates associated with a failure of bank credit to expand as expected 

would indicate that the economy was weaker than projected. Under such 

circumstances he thought that rates certainly should be permitted to 

decline.



2/7/67

Mr. Mitchell asked whether his understanding was correct that 

the staff projected a decline in bank loans in the first half of 1967.  

Mr. Gramley indicated that that was not the case. For the 

full year 1967 the staff projected bank loan growth to be a little 

slower than in 1966, but the increase indicated was still substantial.  

The reduction from 1966 growth in the projection reflected relatively 

weak demand for bank credit in the second half of 1967, associated 

with the relatively low levels of inventory accumulation shown in 

the Council's model, plus the ending of the stimulus to corporate 

borrowing from the acceleration of tax payments.  

Chairman Martin remarked that the chart show was highly 

illuminating and he thought it was an excellent presentation. The 

Chairman then called for the go-around of comments and views on 

economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he also had found the presentation 

illuminating. He then made the following statement: 

We find ourselves in one of those periods when 

uncertainties in the business situation are very great, 

or, as we sometimes express it, when "visibility" is 

unusually low. Estimates of the probable strength of 

the economy range over a fairly wide spectrum. But I 

think the picture becomes somewhat clearer if we make 

an effort to distinguish between shorter-term and 

longer-term prospects.  

The short-term outlook is bound to be strongly 

influenced by the fact that the fourth-quarter accumula

tion of inventories was much greater than expected and 

that inventories appear excessive in relation to sales 

in a number of industries. Hence the main question

-41-



2/7/67

facing the economy in the near term concerns the speed 
and extent of the needed inventory adjustment and its 
repercussions on other economic developments. The 
momentum of the private economy may weaken further in 
the next few months. A slowdown in the expansion of 
total output is likely to continue or even to become 
more pronounced, and there may perhaps be some slight 
rise in unemployment.  

However, while we cannot exclude the possibility 
of a resultant deterioration in the whole business 

climate, it seems much more likely that the underlying 
forces in the economy are strong enough to absorb the 
inventory drag relatively smoothly. Indeed, in the 
latter part of 1967 the elimination of the inventory 
drag and a vigorous revival of residential construction 
could lead to another excessive rise in private demand.  
I might say parenthetically that GNP projections made at 
the New York Reserve Bank are very close to the Council's, 
and perhaps a shade stronger for the second half of the 
year. Already the housing indicators are pointing 
upward, so that one very large drag on the growth of 
the economy over the past few quarters seems about to 
be reversed. Also, the boost that enlarged social 
security benefits will give to consumer spending will 
be considerable--more than enough to offset the impact 

of the personal income tax increase, if the latter is 
enacted. According to our analysis, the fiscal 1968 
budget, while less stimulative than those of 1966 and 

1967, will still provide greater stimulus to the 
economy than did the budget in the early sixties when 
large unused resources were available. Furthermore, 
the stimulus is likely to be more pronounced in the 

second half of calendar 1967, when private demand may 
well be expanding more strongly than in the first half.  
I hasten to add that the budgetary outlook is of course 
full of uncertainties, including the major question as 
to Vietnam developments, the possibility of additional 
outlays for anti-ballistic missiles, and obvious questions 
as to Congressional disposition of the Administration's 

latest spending and tax proposals.  
While the current business slowdown has moderated 

price pressures, unit labor costs continue to rise, and 

I think we all agree that the prospects are disturbing 
with respect to possible excessive wage increases in 

1967. This persistent danger of inflation has particularly

-42-



2/7/67

serious implications when we are banking heavily on some 
considerable improvement in the trade surplus as a major 
means of reducing our international payments deficit. It 
may be worth noting that, without the benefits of special 
transactions, our liquidity deficit in 1966 would have 
approximated $3 billion, and on the same basis the annual 
rate of deficit in the fourth quarter was around $5 

billion. The need for improvement in our trade surplus 
is highlighted by the evidence that some outward capital 
flows have already been induced by the easier domestic 
credit conditions and lower interest rates of the last 
few months. For example, liabilities of U.S. banks to 
their foreign branches are now substantially below their 
mid-December peak; and a further reflux of these funds 

would not be surprising, with the probable consequence 
of growing pressure on our gold stock.  

The very large rise in total bank credit in January 
on a seasonally adjusted basis was attributable largely 
to security acquisitions and loans to security dealers; 
and business loans also rose more than seasonally. Opinions 

differ among bankers on the probable strength of loan 

demand in the coming months, but a majority of the big 

New York banks expect to see ample lending opportunities.  

Bank lending policies remain cautious despite some drop 

in loan-deposit ratios. There is no doubt that many 

large banks looked upon the Chase reduction in the 

prime rate to 5-1/2 per cent as decidedly premature. I 

believe many of them would not have initiated a move at 

this time even to 5-3/4 per cent, although they found 

that rate an acceptable compromise. One banker expressed 

to me the view that the 5-1/2 per cent prime rate was 

warranted only on the assumption that the Federal Reserve 

System was planning an additional major policy move in 

the direction of ease.  

Expectations are playing a very big role in all 

credit markets for the moment; and it would seem wise 

under present circumstances for the System to avoid 

feeding unduly the expectation of a further easing of 

credit and a further major decline in interest rates.  

It would be well to let the market settle down after the 

sharp changes of the last month or two. We could easily 

find ourselves a little later in the year faced with the 

necessity of sharp back-tracking, with all the political 

repercussions that might accompany such an effort. I 

recognize that monetary policy should always enjoy

-43-



flexibility, but to me that does not mean excessive 
preoccupation with the immediate future to the exclusion 
of serious longer-run problems. Moreover, the balance 
of payments must remain an important consideration for 
monetary policy and cannot simply be left to be taken 
care of by specific Government restrictions. It is 
clear that the year ahead will be difficult in this 
area in any case, without compounding the problem now 
through excessive monetary ease. Finally, as I have 
already indicated, we have only a rather vague view at 
this time of the over-all impact of the Federal budget 
on the economy in 1967.  

I feel, therefore, that we would do well to hold 
to a steady policy at this time and refrain from further 
easing. We are achieving our objective of a revived 
growth of bank credit. In fact, the January rate of 

growth would be clearly excessive if maintained for 
several months running. The Board staff's projection of 

9 to 11 per cent for growth of the credit proxy in 
February is a bit in excess of our own projection and 
is at the upper end of what I would consider a desirable 
range. I would suggest keeping about the present set 
of money market conditions, with the Federal funds rate 
generally above the discount rate--perhaps in the 
4-1/2 - 5 per cent range--and a Treasury bill rate 

fluctuating around the discount rate but not consist

ently below it. This might mean small net borrowed 
reserves, say in the zero - $100 million area, with 
borrowings of $200 to $400 million. The Manager, however, 
needs ample leeway to deal with conditions as they develop.  

Having in mind our balance of payments problems, I can see 

a real advantage in using coupon issues to supply reserves 

and bills to absorb reserves--both, of course, within the 

limits of practicability.  

As for the directive, the staff's draft with 
alternative A for the second paragraph seems to me 
excellent.1/ 

Mr. Ellis commented that measures of physical production and 

activity in New England suggested the economy was moving sideways or 

1/ Alternative draft directives submitted by the staff 

for Committee consideration are appended to these minutes 

as Attachment A.

2/7/67 -44-



2/7/67 -45

expanding slowly. Manufacturing output in December recovered part 

of the drop since its October peak, influenced in part by a recovery 

in shoe production. Gains in nonmanufacturing employment lines such 

as construction were enough to offset some fallback in output of 

nondefense durable goods. Several of the District's defense 

producers had order backlogs substantially above year-ago levels.  

The dominant development in the financial area, Mr. Ellis 

continued, had been the changed or changing posture of bank lending 

officers. Having made substantial progress in rebuilding liquidity 

and finding their time deposits rising, both mutual savings banks and 

commercial banks in the District were in the process of re-energizing 

their loan officers. There soon should be some direct evidence as to 

whether loan demand had depth and was just waiting to be recognized 

or whether loan officers would have to move aggressively to put their 

funds to work.  

Now that the budget message with accompanying materials and 

testimoney was available, Mr. Ellis thought it was possible to quantify 

to some degree the expectations and differences in expectations that 

underlay Committee members' approaches to monetary policy. In that 

respect, the staff's GNP projection for the first two quarters of 

1967 performed a real service. Referring specifically to the projec

tions as they appeared in the green book table, he counted himself 

as somewhat more optimistic about the rate of GNP expansion--which



2/7/67 -46

was set at $7 billion in each quarter. The Boston Reserve Bank's 

analysis of the inventory situation suggested that the fourth

quarter bulge traced principally to a corresponding unusual bulge 

in defense orders last June. If so, delivery against those orders 

would be reflected in a sharp expansion in the defense component of 

Government purchases in early 1967--thereby adding to the $7 billion 

increment forecast for GNP.  

The high and sustained rate of personal saving projected for 

the next two quarters would set a nine-month record that had not been 

matched since 1958, Mr. Ellis said. Personally, he would expect a 

lesser rate of saving and a somewhat higher rate of consumer spending.  

Alternatively, it might be statistically possible to achieve such 

high savings rates if residential construction were to expand--but 

here the projection again was for virtually a no-change plateau for 

nine months. He was more inclined to expect that greater availability 

of funds would combine with some catch-up need and result in some 

expansion in residential construction by the second quarter of 1967.  

In short, he anticipated that GNP growth would exceed $7 billion in 

each of the first two quarters of 1967.  

One of the exogenous forces Mr. Ellis expected to be at work 

to accelerate GNP growth would be the stimulative effect of greater 

credit availability. The sharp expansion in total bank credit in



2/7/67 -47

December and January could be expected to continue, given the present 

trend of policy, if the economy remained as strong as he judged it 

to be.  

Changed expectations coupled with the reserves the Committee 

had supplied had set in motion a decline in rates, Mr. Ellis noted.  

That run-off had proceeded to the point where the discount rate was 

beginning to exert a drag slowing the downward trend. To the extent 

that the Committee sought to stimulate investment, especially home

building, such a rate decline should be fostered. The rate decline 

also served to reestablish some freedom of movement for CD rates 

beneath the Regulation Q ceiling.  

For those reasons, and to avoid the emergence of the discount 

rate as a prop holding up market rates, it seemed appropriate to 

Mr. Ellis to consider the policy possibilities of a reduction in the 

discount rate. There seemed little point in providing the reserves 

that supported the rate declines while simultaneously impeding those 

rate declines by retaining a discount rate level of 4-1/2 per cent.  

In a strategy framework, lowering the rate soon would hasten the 

stimulation of residential construction, which was needed. By the 

same token it would set up another avenue of policy action next 

summer if needed to restrain an economy beginning again to overheat 

in the possible absence of Congressional surtax action.



2/7/67 -48

Mr. Ellis commented that, even with the less optimistic outlook 

projected in the green book, the accompanying projection of bank credit 

in February was for growth at an annual rate of 10 per cent, continuing 

the rate achieved since the Committee's November 1966 policy shift.  

That rate of expansion seemed entirely sufficient, in his judgment.  

At the same time, he would judge it entirely possible that the recent 

trend of declining rates had not run its course. Bill rates below 

4.40 per cent and Federal funds rates near the discount rate would 

not surprise him in the next four weeks. All of that inclined him 

to prefer alternative A of the draft directives.  

Mr. Irons reported that, despite some differences, conditions 

in the Eleventh District generally were following about the same 

pattern as reflected in the nation as a whole. Industrial production 

had declined slightly and there had been further declines in 

construction contract awards. Retail trade, as reflected by depart

ment store activity, was off a shade, and automobile sales continued 

to run below 1966 by a margin in the area of 10 per cent. Employment 

was up more than seasonally and the advance was rather general. On 

the whole, however, the recent changes were not highly significant.  

Agricultural cash receipts were up about 5 per cent from a year ago 

and prices received by farmers in the past month were about 7 per 

cent above a year ago.



2/7/67 -49

Eleventh District banks apparently were under less pressure 

than banks nationally, Mr. Irons said. However, the figures around 

the turn of the year were suspect. Loans and investments were shown 

to have declined, and time deposits had increased. District banks, 

on the whole, were somewhat more liquid than they had been a few 

months ago. There had been a moderate increase in CD's, and banks 

reported that the demand for loans was perhaps a little less than 

late last year. Borrowings from the Dallas Reserve Bank had been 

negligible in the last few weeks; with only a few country banks and 

no large city banks coming to the window, average borrowings had 

been running in the neighborhood of $3 million.  

As to the national situation and policy, Mr. Irons thought 

that his views were generally in agreement with those of Mr. Hayes 

and with those reflected in the chart show. The ease that had 

characterized the market during the past month had certainly been 

accompanied by a substantial growth in the monetary aggregates 

and by a sharp decline in interest rates. The question now was 

whether the Committee should undertake further easing deliberately-

and if so how much; or whether it should attempt to maintain the 

existing conditions in the money market over the next month and 

observe developments. He would favor attempting to maintain the 

prevailing money market conditions. If such a course were followed 

he would expect that the Federal funds rate might be in a 4-1/2 - 5 per 

cent range, the Treasury bill rate around the discount rate in a



2/7/67 -50

4.40 - 4.60 per cent range, and net reserves at zero plus or minus 

$50 million. He would like to see continued growth in the monetary 

aggregates, but at a rate somewhat below that of the past three or 

four weeks.  

One reason he would advocate maintaining the prevailing 

money market conditions for the time being, Mr. Irons continued, 

was the possibility that the question of a change in the discount 

rate would be raised increasingly in the market, the press, and so 

forth, if the Treasury bill rate should decline to the discount rate 

or lower. He would not like to see a change in the discount rate at 

this time, and he thought there would be less speculation regarding 

a possible change under a policy of continuing prevailing money 

market conditions than would be the case if there were further 

deliberate and overt easing. He would favor alternative A of the 

draft directives.  

Mr. Swan reported that economic conditions were relatively 

good in the Twelfth District. Manufacturing employment increased in 

December for the fourth month in a row. A very modest gain was 

recorded in the category of aerospace employment, despite the first 

month-to-month decline in some time in aircraft employment itself.  

The labor force increased somewhat faster than employment, however, 

and the unemployment rate rose by one-tenth of a point to 5 per cent.



2/7/67 -51

Mr. Swan commented that there had been very little change 

in total bank credit at District weekly reporting banks from the 

year-end through January 25, in contrast to the considerable decline 

for the country as a whole. However, the data were not seasonally 

adjusted and there might be some differences in the seasonal patterns 

in the District and the rest of the country. Business loans had been 

maintained very well, and reporting banks had increased their loans 

to Government securities dealers substantially. Rather surprisingly, 

the banks had been able to buy sizable amounts of Federal funds for 

relending to dealers at a profit. The recent increase in CD's 

outstanding had been less rapid than elsewhere, but the earlier 

losses also had been smaller. And, as elsewhere, reductions in 

CD rates were being announced by larger banks.  

There had been some recent stirrings in mortgage markets, 

Mr. Swan continued, with reports of interest on the part of institu

tional investors of the types that traditionally bought mortgages 

from banks. As inflows to savings and loan associations increased 

there had been scattered announcements of reductions in mortgage 

interest rates, and at least one association had indicated that it 

would no longer pay the high rate of 5-3/4 per cent on those special 

three-year certificates for which such a rate was permissible.



2/7/67 -52

As to policy, Mr. Swan said he was in virtually complete 

agreement with Mr. Brill's recommendations. He was impressed by 

the rapidity of the decline in interest rates and by the pervasiveness 

of the decline which, to some degree, extended through almost all of 

the rate structure. Given the growth rates in the aggregates 

experienced in January and projected for February, he would be 

satisfied to see no change in prevailing money market conditions 

until the next meeting of the Committee. He would shade the targets 

a little from those given in the blue book; specifically, he favored 

net reserves in a range of plus or minus $50 million around zero, 

and the Federal funds rate in a range of 4-1/2 to 5 per cent, or even 

4-1/4 to 5 per cent. With that interpretation, he would accept 

alternative A of the draft directives.  

As far as the discount rate was concerned, Mr. Swan said, 

while it might be well for the System to start thinking about possible 

action at some point, he saw no reason for such an overt action at 

present. In particular, he did not have the impression that at 

4-1/2 per cent the discount rate was impeding declines in other 

interest rates.  

Mr. Galusha remarked that the Ninth District--the home of 

the bank that had initiated the recent round of reductions in the 

prime rate--wore its new mantle of pace setter for the U.S. banking 

community with something almost approaching complacency, inconsistent



2/7/67 -53

as that might be with an only slightly lower level of expectations.  

The strength in the agricultural sector caused by the high level of 

cash farm income had sustained country bank positions and kept support 

industry activity at reasonable levels.  

Mortgage rates had turned down sharply, Mr. Galusha reported, 

with a demand for portfolio paper appearing after the doldrums of 

the last year. Labor leaders in the Twin Cities were pessimistic 

that the renewal of construction activity would occur fast enough 

to prevent more than a seasonal rise in unemployment, particularly 

with the drying up of the alternative employment opportunities in the 

District such as interstate highway construction. Some encouragement 

could be found in the search for new and expanded credit lines by 

the major tract builders for the upcoming season.  

As to open market policy, it seemed to Mr. Galusha that the 

Committee was now in a position where to hold steady was a reasonable 

course. Before dosing the patient again, it would seem no more than 

appropriate to allow sufficient time for this ministration to work a 

little longer. He would not attempt to amplify on the comments 

already made with regard to money market and reserve objectives.  

However, he could easily vote for a "no change" directive, since he 

believed the Committee might have already largely succeeded in one 

of its basic objectives of the past few months--namely to foster a 

considerable recovery, later this year, in residential construction.



2/7/67 -54

On that the green book was quite reassuring. The spreads between 

market rates and deposit rate ceilings were not too much different 

from what they were through a good part of 1965. In the present 

context, that would seem to be the important point.  

Mr. Galusha went on to say that a logical concern--shared 

apparently by some of the blue book authors--was that somewhere along 

the line the Committee would get a change in expectations and, unless 

it acted decisively, another increase in market rates. Yet it was 

particularly important, what with recent experiences so fresh in 

mind, that market participants be continually reassured about the 

financial outlook. He would thus like to see the Committee's concern 

extend across the whole range of market rates.  

With respect to the comments made on the discount rate, 

Mr. Galusha hoped that the inquiry into reserve requirements conducted 

last summer would not be overlooked and that plans for changes in 

requirements would at least be in workable form for possible use as 

an alternative means for signaling further ease, if such a signal 

should be considered necessary soon. He would favor alternative A 

of the draft directives.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that the past several weeks had seen 

the development of increased caution in the Seventh District concerning 

economic prospects for 1967. Recent evidence of a marked turn in 

monetary policy, as reflected in most banking data, however, was tending



2/7/67 -55

to offset any tendency toward outright pessimism. Price increases 

continued to be announced for a wide variety of hard and soft goods 

and there prevailed an attitude that the general price level would 

rise as much in 1967 as last year, mainly because of upward cost 

pressures, especially wages. There was a growing view that corporate 

profit margins were narrowing, and that capital expenditure prospects 

were dampened as a result. He heard frequent reports of financial 

managers putting pressure on purchasing agents to hold down or reduce 

inventory investments even in cases where inventories were not large 

relative to sales.  

Evidence continued to mount that the capital expenditure 

boom had lost momentum, Mr. Scanlon continued. Orders for construc

tion machinery remained at a sharply reduced level and, more recently, 

new orders for various types of industrial equipment had declined 

markedly. Cancellations of orders, however, did not appear to have 

been significant. Defense work was taking a steadily increased share 

of District output. Some firms reported that slack in civilian 

demand was being absorbed by military orders. With auto sales in 

January about 15 per cent below last year, and with used car prices 

weak, output schedules for the first quarter were being reduced.  

Overtime and extra shifts were being eliminated in many plants.  

American motors had laid off more than 4,000 workers indefinitely and 

an additional 13,000 would be furloughed for 10 days later this month.  

Nevertheless, the job market in the District continued very strong.



2/7/67

December and January saw pronounced strength in savings and 

loan share accounts, Mr. Scanlon said. A number of large Chicago 

associations had stated that net inflows in January were the largest 

on record for the month, in contrast to a very poor showing a year 

earlier. A number of associations had announced cuts of one-quarter 

of a per cent in rates on new mortgages. Others, having improved 

their liquidity positions, were said to be interested in buying 

mortgages in the secondary mortgage market. As a result, prospects 

for home building in the District in 1967 appeared to be improving 

more rapidly than expected a month or two ago.  

Credit at large Seventh District banks showed a contraseasonal 

rise in January, Mr. Scanlon observed. Much of the contraseasonal 

gain in business loans at District banks was concentrated in machinery 

manufacturing. He had no reason to believe that there had been any 

basic strengthening of loan demand compared with late 1966. Large 

Chicago banks continued to show a deep basic deficit position through 

the January 25 week despite increases of almost $200 million in CD 

money. Offering rates on all maturities of CD's had been lowered.  

Government security portfolios were increased further.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon favored no change at this time and 

would accept the figures projected in the blue book as being associated 

with that position. He favored alternative A for the directive and 

would prefer to defer a change in the discount rate at this point.

-56-



2/7/67 -57

Mr. Clay commented that the recent record and the present 

prospects of the economy justified the shift in monetary policy that 

had taken place and the continuation of an expansive monetary policy 

in the period ahead. There was no particular need to detail those 

developments and the factors involved, since they were already covered 

in staff materials. It could be observed, however, that a significant 

change had occurred in available resources and productive capacity 

relative to aggregate demand, and price pressures had lessened.  

Moreover, prospects indicated a much slower rate of advance in 

economic activity in the months ahead, with marked crosscurrents 

among major sectors of demand.  

It had to be recognized, Mr. Clay said, that the Committee was 

not talking about a depressed economy. Presumably it was talking about 

policies and programs for encouraging economic growth within the limits 

of reasonably full employment of manpower and other resources, along 

with a goal of stable prices. Presumably it also was talking about 

relieving the uneven impact of the tight credit experience of 1966, 

notably with respect to mortgage markets and real estate activity.  

In endeavoring to attain those goals, Mr. Clay said, the 

monetary policy moves thus far had been aggressive. The interest rate 

movements that had occurred in response to policy changes and other 

factors had been dramatic. The growth in most monetary aggregates

had been pronounced.



2/7/67 -58

In evaluating the situation for the period ahead, it seemed 

reasonable to Mr. Clay to assume that further financial responses 

would result from the policy moves already made, and time should be 

allowed for those developments to unfold. Moreover, the Committee 

must recognize that the economy was influenced by war activity and 

that it was still operating at a high level even though growing more 

slowly than earlier.  

Under those circumstances, it would seem prudent to Mr. Clay 

to maintain essentially the prevailing money market conditions for 

the period ahead. Operational targets would be a Treasury bill rate 

in a range of 4.40 to 4.60 per cent, a Federal funds rate of 4-3/4 to 

5 per cent, and net borrowed reserves of about $50 million, as 

described in the blue book. The anticipated increase in bank credit 

under such a policy, following the expansion of recent weeks, would 

be satisfactory. Accordingly, economic policy directive alternative A, 

including the proviso clause, would be appropriate for the policy 

desired.  

Mr. Wayne reported that most measures of business activity in 

the Fifth District continued to ease, and business sentiment remained 

generally bearish. Nonagricultural employment increased in December 

but at a slower rate than earlier in the year, and rates of insured 

unemployment rose significantly in early January in all District States.  

In the Richmond Reserve Bank's latest survey all textile manufacturers



2/7/67 -59

reported lower backlogs of orders and a majority reported lower 

levels of shipments and new orders and higher inventories of 

finished goods. The survey also indicated definite weakness in 

the furniture and building materials industries and in some parts 

of the machinery and equipment industry. One large furniture 

manufacturer reported that he was cutting back his work force 

because his warehouses were filled with finished goods. Cash 

receipts from farm marketings in the District were up 3 per cent 

in 1966 compared with a national gain of 9 per cent. Net sales 

of Federal funds by Fifth District banks, which were abnormally 

high in December, advanced further to set a new record in January.  

It seemed to Mr. Wayne that the transition of the economy 

toward a slower rate of advance was continuing, but without any 

significant increase in the rate of deceleration. In view of the 

large advances of late 1965 and early 1966, the relatively moderate 

adjustments of recent months would seem to indicate considerable 

stability in the economy. For the near future, inventory fluctuations 

were likely to be confusing and contradictory, but on balance the rate 

of accumulation should decline substantially. Similarly, he would 

expect some weakening in business capital outlays, with some decline 

in industrial and commercial construction, and he found no basis for 

expecting any early recovery in consumer purchases of automobiles and 

other durable goods. The new minimum wage law would probably give



2/7/67 -60

added impetus to the fairly rapid rise in unit labor costs already 

under way, and might impede further reductions in unemployment.  

On the other hand, it was reasonably clear that considerable fiscal 

stimulus could be expected over the next two quarters at least. In 

addition, the substantial improvement in the availability of mortgage 

funds, coupled with recent improvement in the housing statistics, 

would seem to offer some promise that residential construction outlays 

might turn the corner earlier in the year than he had anticipated.  

Considering the steady growth of State and local government spending 

and in consumer spending on services and nondurables, it seemed to 

him that the immediate prospects were for a continued but moderate 

expansion of aggregate demand. In brief, he saw little evidence of 

a cumulative downward movement.  

In the financial area, Mr. Wayne said, the movement toward 

lower interest rates abroad had considerably simplified the Committee's 

task and underwrote, so to speak, its recent easing measures. The 

external problem was still acute, however, especially with respect to 

gold, and that should act as a restraint on the speed with which rates 

here could be reduced.  

In the policy area, Mr. Wayne continued, the precipitate drop 

in the whole pattern of short-term rates in recent weeks seemed quite 

disproportionate to the increased reserves supplied. Although reserves, 

and particularly nonborrowed reserves, increased more than was desirable



2/7/67 -61

in the circumstances, much if not most of the rate decline was 

caused by the market itself. A major shift in the pattern of 

expectations, induced by official statements, undoubtedly was an 

important reason for the change, and might well have created 

expectations which were not realistic in view of the heavy demands 

likely to be made on the capital market. Another reason for the 

decline was a sharp turnaround in the funds used by Government 

securities dealers. From mid-October to mid-January those dealers 

built up their holdings of Government and agency securities by more 

than $3-1/2 billion to a record high level, and they increased their 

direct use of commercial bank funds by almost $2-1/2 billion. In 

early January that buildup receded slightly but since then it 

appeared to have returned to the former peak. During the same 

period banks were gaining large amounts of funds through increasing 

sales of negotiable CD's. In addition, business investment 

expenditures had been slowing, reducing the need for bank loans.  

Those developments, plus the Committee's own actions in increasing 

reserve availability, set the stage for the decline in rates which 

was triggered by official pronouncements, both here and abroad, 

concerning the future trend of interest rates.  

In Mr. Wayne's view some decline in rates was quite appropriate 

and proper but the movement had gone too far too fast and had helped 

to create a very vulnerable technical situation. He would like to see



2/7/67 -62

reserve availability grow at a rate much lower than was realized 

in January. The February projections for reserves and the bank 

credit proxy in the blue book were, in his view, higher than the 

situation required and he would prefer to aim at lower rates. He 

did not favor a change in the discount rate at this time.  

Alternative A of the draft directives appeared appropriate 

to Mr. Wayne with the associated complex of money market conditions 

and projections given in the blue book considered as the upper limits 

of acceptable conditions.  

Mr. Shepardson said that the detailed developments reviewed 

by those who had spoken thus far appeared to him to argue for a 

temporary cessation in the shift toward greater ease, and to indicate 

that the policy described in alternative A of the draft directives 

was entirely appropriate. He agreed with Mr. Wayne that some of the 

rates of increase in aggregates projected under such a policy posture 

were higher than the Committee could reasonably expect to sustain.  

Specifically, he had in mind the projected rate of bank credit 

expansion, which he felt should be considered as an upper limit for 

the time being.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that today's chart show projected two 

economies: six months of underheating, followed by six of overheating.  

He thought that the projection for the half-year immediately ahead had 

far greater credibility than that for the second half. The staff's



2/7/67 -63

recommendations might be said to suffer from a credibility gap; it 

was a mistake to give as much credence to expectations for the last 

six months of the year as to those for the first six months.  

It seemed to Mr. Mitchell that the major danger in the 

immediate future was of a real downturn in the economy. Inventory 

adjustments of the kind now under way frequently--in fact, usually-

triggered a downturn in over-all activity. The psychology of consumers 

had been deteriorating, as manifested by their recent spending rates.  

In immediate prospect were a flattening in business fixed investment 

and a decline in the index of industrial production. The index had 

not changed in the past three months and a slight decline was projected 

for the next six months, which would mean nine months of no increase.  

Those were matters of reasonable certainty rather than, like the 

projections for the second half, of conjecture.  

Accordingly, Mr. Mitchell thought that the best policy for 

the Committee would be to move somewhat further in the direction of 

ease than it had already. The economy was at a point of incipient 

recession and the System's posture would be stronger if it responded 

to that fact. He saw no immediate danger in a little further easing.  

The Administration's budget message called for some fiscal policy 

action in the second half of the year, a step the Committee had thought 

desirable. The Federal Reserve should take a courageous step toward 

easing now, just as it had acted courageously in moving to firm last



2/7/67 -64

year. He would strongly urge that the Committee adopt alternative B 

for the directive.  

Mr. Daane said that he subscribed to the policy prescriptions 

of Messrs. Hayes, Irons, and Brill, on the basis of much the same 

reasoning as theirs. A considerable degree of easing had already 

been achieved and was publicly recognized. The balance of payments 

problem was becoming increasingly serious. Also, the Committee 

technically was still in a period of even keel, although the market 

performance suggested that the current financing would not be a 

consideration for open market operations beyond the payment date.  

In the light of all of those circumstances, Mr. Daane 

continued, he thought a steady course was the right one, and he 

would accept the thrust of alternative A of the draft directives.  

But to indicate just how steady a course he favored, he would delete 

the word "about" from the staff's draft, so that the directive would 

call for maintaining "the prevailing conditions" in the money market 

rather than "about the prevailing conditions." He recognized that 

one could not expect all of the relevant variables to remain in the 

same relationship, but deleting "about" would indicate how steady 

a course was desired. Frankly, he did not like the proviso clause 

in alternative A; the reference to "current expectations" troubled 

him because one could never be sure of his expectations. The formu

lation of the corresponding clause in alternative B was better, but



2/7/67 -65

he would prefer a directive with no proviso clause at all. As to 

the discount rate, he would not favor a change at this time; in 

his judgment, such an action would be premature.  

Mr. Maisel said he did not see much difference between 

the two alternative directive drafts prepared for this meeting.  

He would like to see a greater amplitude of fluctuation in the 

Federal funds rate and other money market rates. Market participants 

should be prepared to take risks and should not be led to expect the 

System to bail them out regularly.  

Mr. Maisel shared Mr. Daane's view that neither version of 

the proviso clause in the staff's drafts would be appropriate. But 

rather than deleting the proviso entirely, he would recommend that it 

be formulated to meet the problem that was most important at present: 

the vulnerability of medium- and long-term interest rates to upward 

pressures. The recent rate declines had reflected expectational factors, 

and a small change in expectations could have important effects on rates 

in the period ahead. Accordingly, he would favor calling for maintenance 

of current money market conditions--although allowing for more movement 

in market rates--and for supplying more funds to the market if there 

were a sharp run-up in medium- and long-term rates. Specifically, he 

would suggest a proviso reading, "but operations shall be modified as 

necessary to attain somewhat easier conditions if expectational or 

seasonal factors appear to be causing a rise in medium- and long-term 

rates."



2/7/67 -66

Mr. Maisel thought that the Committee did not have to be 

concerned about a decline in rates, since such a development would 

reflect a weakening in demands for credit. But a rise in rates would 

primarily reflect a change in expectations, as well as a large need 

for funds in the first half of the year related, not to economic 

conditions, but to the pattern of tax payments and the desire for 

increased liquidity. With respect to the speed of the recent rate 

adjustment, he had been surprised to discover on checking that it was 

not as fast an adjustment as had occurred in the two preceding periods 

of shifts to greater ease, and so he was not concerned about it.  

Mr. Brimmer said that it would be helpful for the Committee 

to keep in mind the inherent conflict between the need to provide 

some additional stimulus to domestic activity on the one hand, and 

the requirements of the balance of payments situation on the other.  

Mr. Hayes had suggested that the Committee should buy coupon issues 

when supplying reserves and sell bills when absorbing reserves. That 

had become known as "operation twist." His own feeling was that while 

operations of that type obviously had been helpful earlier in the 

expansion that was now slowing down, it might be somewhat risky for 

the Committee to attempt to use them again. He was suggesting, not 

that "operation twist" would not work, but that it might not be the 

most appropriate instrument at present.



2/7/67

Like Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Brimmer was concerned about the 

longer-run domestic outlook. He did not agree that the staff's 

analysis suffered from a "credibility gap"; rather, that analysis 

had persuaded him that the outlook was not as strong as implied by 

the projections of the Council and of the New York Bank, and that 

a much reduced rate of growth in activity was in prospect. In that 

connection, the Committee should accept the role for monetary policy 

implied in the Council's report--that of providing the stimulus 

necessary to hold up private expenditures while inventory growth 

was slackening. He thought most Committee members shared that view 

and that their differences were concerned primarily with the pace 

of the shift toward ease.  

In Mr. Brimmer's judgment it would be desirable for the 

Committee to give particular attention to the structure of interest 

rates at this time. He was particularly concerned about the struggle 

going on in the banking community with respect to the prime rate; he 

had welcomed the reduction to 5-1/2 per cent by a few banks, and hoped 

that they would not decide to move back up to the 5-3/4 per cent rate 

established by most banks. For the time being he would want the Desk 

at least to keep market interest rates from rising. He favored a 

three-month bill rate not over 4-1/2 per cent and, if possible, the 

Federal funds rate might well be kept under 5 per cent. He could not 

say what level of free or net borrowed reserves would be consistent

-67-



2/7/67 -68

with those rate targets and therefore would leave open the question 

of the net reserve figure to be sought. In any case, the objective 

of insuring that the lower prime rate set by some banks remained in 

effect might imply somewhat more liberal provision of reserves than 

otherwise.  

In sum, Mr. Brimmer favored moving cautiously toward a little 

more ease. Such a policy struck him as particularly important in view 

of the strains that would be placed on financial markets by the large 

issues of participation certificates now planned. Alternative B was 

his choice for the directive.  

Mr. Hickman commented that further signs of leveling and 

weakness were apparent in the latest economic indicators. Production 

was declining and the increase in consumption had slowed. Because of 

a slowdown of inventory accumulation in some industries, the production 

index might decline by as much as two points in the first quarter of 

1967, according to the estimates of his staff. A reduced rate of 

inventory accumulation was confirmed by the Reserve Bank's most recent 

survey of Fourth District manufacturers. Retail sales apparently 

slipped further in January, following a decline in December to last 

summer's level; and the outlook was for further weakness in the months 

to come. One favorable consequence was that most recent price changes 

had been moderate; but the steady rise in unit labor costs had put 

serious pressure on profit margins.



2/7/67 -69

In the Fourth District, Mr. Hickman continued, the rate of 

insured unemployment rose slightly in January, the third successive 

monthly increase. In ten of the fourteen major labor market areas 

of the District, insured unemployment, on a seasonally adjusted 

basis, was higher at the end of January than in late December. Bank 

debits and manufacturing activity in most major industrial centers 

of the District (as measured by industrial consumption of electric 

power) had trended downward in recent months.  

Nevertheless, Mr. Hickman thought the Committee should not 

overreact to recent evidence of business slack. Thus far, the 

initial response to the shift in monetary policy had been largely 

confined to financial markets and flows of funds among financial 

intermediaries. Responses on the real side of the economy, to the 

extent they were identifiable, hopefully would occur later on.  

In Mr. Hickman's view, an even-keel policy was called for 

until the next meeting of the Committee, partly because of the 

Treasury refunding, and partly because of the progress that had 

already been made towards a less restrictive policy. A steady 

market tone for several weeks would have an additional advantage 

of discouraging speculative excesses, which fortunately seemed to 

have been minimal thus far.  

To be specific, Mr. Hickman said, he thought that until the 

next meeting the Committee should attempt to keep bond yields about



2/7/67 -70

where they were, and the 91-day bill rate and the Federal funds rate 

below the discount rate most of the time. Net reserves were perhaps 

almost too erratic in this transitional period to be useful, but the 

type of rate structure he envisaged might be compatible with an 

average level around zero over the next four weeks. A general 

acceptance of the 5-1/2 per cent prime rate would in his opinion be 

highly desirable, since it would narrow the differential between 

bank lending rates and open market rates, and thus stimulate business 

borrowing, the rate of growth of bank lending, and the money supply.  

Mr. Hickman would, however, not press for further monetary 

ease at this juncture, partly because a further elevation in prices 

of fixed-income securities might encourage speculation, with an 

eventual reaction of bond prices in the opposite direction. Also, 

an even-keel policy until the next meeting would give the real side 

of the economy time to respond to the current monetary and financial 

environment. He favored alternative A of the staff drafts, but would 

interpret it as calling for slightly more ease than the situation 

described in the blue book.  

Mr. Hilkert remarked that Presidential messages appearing 

since the last meeting had a distinct bearing on open market policy.  

To judge by those messages, the prescription for monetary policy was 

quite clear: namely, ease.



2/7/67 -71

Deciding the course of policy was not so simple as that for 

at least three reasons, Mr. Hilkert continued. First, the outlook 

for business might well follow the Council's pattern of first-half 

weakness and second-half strength; but it might not. That meant, 

among other things, that the appropriateness of a tax increase in 

mid-year remained to be seen. A second reason why formulating 

monetary policy was more complex than the recent messages suggested 

was the balance of payments. As he read the signs, there was little 

new action planned to deal with a worsening of the payments deficit.  

And a third reason was the outlook for cost-push inflation, While 

there was not much that monetary policy could do at this point to 

prevent it, undue ease could aggravate it. Consequently, policy 

could not simply follow a straight path toward ease. At times it 

might have to deviate from that course, depending on relatively 

near-term developments.  

Mr. Hilkert reported that the Philadelphia Reserve Bank had 

tried to supplement the customary indicators of such developments by 

contacts with businessmen and bankers at the local level. There was 

always a danger, of course, in limited samples. But, with that 

reservation, discussions with some twenty-five businessmen in a 

cross-section of industries shed some light on current policies, 

particularly with respect to inventories. He had been impressed 

with the generally optimistic attitude toward inventory accumulation.



2/7/67 -72

True, about half the companies covered believed inventories were 

above desired levels. But adjustments in many cases already had 

been made and would not require sharp cutbacks in production in 

early 1967. Accumulation in many cases had been in goods-in-process 

because of bottlenecks and shortages. The main area of involuntary 

accumulation had been in industries related to automobile production.  

Those findings were somewhat contrary to the tone of the 

green book, Mr. Hilkert noted. If they were at all valid for the 

nation as a whole, they suggested that an inventory adjustment early 

this year might be accomplished fairly smoothly and without substantial 

repercussions on production and investment.  

At the same time, Mr. Hilkert continued, bankers saw loan 

demand remaining fairly strong. They were not sure just how strong; 

in fact, projections that the large Philadelphia banks had been 

supplying to the Reserve Bank had been so erratic that little reliance 

could be placed on them. Nevertheless, bankers felt sufficiently 

confident about loan demand that they had reduced their prime rates 

only reluctantly and intended to grant loans at the prime rate very 

selectively.  

Mr. Hilkert commented that that information from businessmen 

and bankers served as a reminder that the economy was still strong.  

An adjustment in the rate of expansion was under way, but it might



2/7/67 -73

proceed more smoothly than believed a few weeks ago. Meanwhile, 

growth of credit had been impressive. The staff's projections 

for February were encouraging, and if his reading of the inventory 

situation was correct, they might even be exceeded. The shift in 

market rates had been sharp and rapid, and a slower rate of decline 

would seem more appropriate to the economic situation immediately 

ahead.  

Even apart from even-keel considerations, therefore, 

Mr. Hilkert was inclined to recommend no change. He would hope 

such a policy would maintain credit market conditions about where 

they were and would continue to promote substantial growth in credit.  

Alternative A of the draft directives would best accomplish that end.  

Mr. Patterson said that recent developments in the Sixth 

District were generally similar to those in other parts of the country 

that had already been described. Accordingly, in the interest of 

time he would not make the comments on District developments that 

he had prepared, but would submit them for inclusion in the record.  

Those remarks were as follows: 

The latest available business statistics for our 
District do not make very exciting reading. They are 
moving in about the same direction they have been moving 
for some time. Weakness is still confined to just a few 

sectors, such as lumber, textiles, and metals. Employment 
and income continue on an upward course. Retail spending



2/7/67

is sluggish. In short, the District is not experiencing 
a recession, but is sharing in the general moderation of 
activity.  

In the financial area, our region, too, is experiencing 
some of the same developments emerging elsewhere. Mortgage 
conditions have significantly improved. Our local mortgage 
bankers tell us that national lenders have returned more 
rapidly than anticipated. All in all, considerable optimism 
has developed that increased availability of mortgage money 
will revive housing rather quickly.  

Our large commercial banks recently experienced inflows 
of time deposits at one of the fastest paces we can recall.  
Already, they recouped nearly all of their previous losses 
in negotiable CD's. Being slow in lowering their CD rates 
helped them in this respect. In fact, our biggest bank 
continues to hold its CD rate slightly above New York's 
level in an attempt to draw in more time money. Our country 
banks also gained significant amounts of time deposits in 
December and January. All of this growth was in CD's.  
Passbook savings have declined. As far as we can tell, the 
bigger banks are using the new time money to repay borrowings, 
replenish liquidity, and add slightly to tax-exempt portfolios.  

Bank lending, on the other hand, is still anything but 
exuberant in our District. Business loans, in fact, are 
down much more this January than in early 1965 or 1966.  
Yet we get the distinct impression that some bankers wanted 
to relax lending standards before changing the prime rate.  
Competitive factors, however, left them no alternative.  
I infer from this that potential loan demand in our District 
is still pretty high.  

Although our banking fraternity may not be entirely 

typical in this respect, some bankers evidently believe 

that their customers will knock on doors as soon as they 

see that the welcome mat is back out. More than one banker 

has attributed his bank's weakness in loans to reluctance 
of former customers to borrow because of previous denial.  

Many of these people will undoubtedly be back for loans as 

soon as the banks make it clear that they again are willing 

to lend for construction, inventories, and land acquisitions.  
While I recognize that some of this potential loan demand 

will evaporate as inventory adjustments are speeded up, 

some potential loan demand exists and with proper stimulation 

should come to the surface. In the interim, it is our job to 
determine to what degree we should stimulate bank lending.

-74-



2/7/67

Mr. Patterson added that on glancing backward he found that 

the Committee had succeeded in restoring confidence in financial 

markets. It had reversed the decline in deposits and helped bring 

short-term rates down sufficiently to encourage a considerable 

expansion in time deposits. Those goals had been achieved far more 

quickly than he would have imagined. Looking ahead, there was every 

reason to believe the economy was not going to return to a boom 

course. The liquidity position of many banks remained unsatisfactory, 

and there were still many other lagging effects of past credit 

restrictions in evidence. All of that suggested that an increase in 

reserve availability was in order unless the Treasury calendar or 

foreign interest rate developments stood in the way. In other words, 

it seemed to him that, if the Committee wanted to be effective in 

encouraging bank loan expansion, policy had to move toward slightly 

further ease. In line with that position, he favored a slightly 

positive free reserve target and alternative B for the directive.  

He believed, however, that discount rate action at present would be 

premature.  

Mr. Francis commented that economic activity remained strong.  

The public sector had grown at an advanced rate while there had been 

some slowing in the growth rates of private spending and production 

in recent months. Some of the goods produced might have been going 

into involuntary inventory expansion, a potential drag on the economy 

in the near future.

-75-



2/7/67

In view of the excessive total demands and inflationary 

pressures of last summer and early fall, Mr. Francis thought the 

moderation in the growth of private demand had been desirable.  

The economy was still operating at virtual capacity. Demand-pull 

inflationary pressures seemed to be somewhat reduced although 

cost-push elements were increasing. Monetary restraint since early 

last summer had been a major factor in the slower expansion of total 

demand; fiscal actions had actually become more stimulative, according 

to the presentation in the Budget and the Economic Report. The 

budget plan indicated that fiscal action would continue to be 

extremely expansive over the next few months and, indeed, through 

fiscal 1968.  

In view of the slowing in total demand, Mr. Francis said, 

the Committee had been concerned since last November that monetary 

actions might become too restrictive, particularly if there was a 

lag between such actions and their effect on the economy. The 

Manager of the Account had been asked to attain easier conditions 

in the money market to promote a noninflationary growth in money 

and credit. The money market had eased, as evidenced by marked 

declines in interest rates and an accompanying smaller average 

borrowing from Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve had been supplying 

a substantial amount of reserves to member banks through open market 

operations. Bank credit had been expanding sharply, although much of

-76-



2/7/67 -77

the gain might reflect merely a reintermediation of funds that 

temporarily passed through other channels. The money supply 

appeared to have risen at an annual rate of about 1/2 of 1 per 

cent since November (adjusted for the quarterly patterns in that 

series) compared with a 1.5 per cent rate of decline in the 

previous six months.  

For the next month Mr. Francis suggested that the Manager 

attain a further gradual easing in money market conditions with a 

view to fostering a slightly faster monetary growth. The three-month 

Treasury bill rate might fluctuate around 4.25 per cent, Federal 

funds might trade at the discount rate or lower, and excess reserves 

might average about $100 million more than borrowings at the Federal 

Reserve. The Committee was walking a tightrope; too rapid monetary 

growth was likely to be inflationary, while no monetary expansion 

was apt to lead to a rise in idle resources. As an intermediate 

target, he preferred to have the money supply rise at a 2 or 3 per 

cent annual rate. He strongly favored alternative B of the draft 

directives.  

Mr. Francis concluded with the observation that he would 

not change the discount rate at this time. Holding the rate at 

4-1/2 per cent had not significantly deterred the rise in market 

interest rates last year and he did not think it was deterring rate 

declines at present.



2/7/67

Mr. Robertson presented the following statement: 

I am very appreciative of the timing as well as the 
content of the chart show we had this morning. This 
strikes me as a time when it is more than ordinarily 
appropriate for us to give attention to the longer-run 
as well as the immediate consequences of policy alterna
tives. With the Budget, the Economic Report, and now 
our own staff's projections before us, we are about as 
well equipped for that task as we can reasonably hope to 
be.  

In a nutshell, none of these presentations move me 
to call for a program of aggressive further monetary easing 
at this juncture. On the contrary, they lead me to expect 
that we may need to move into a gently stimulative money 
and credit environment for much of the first half of this 
year, with reasonable policy possibilities for the second 
half ranging from moderate further monetary stimulus to 
some mild turn toward restraint, depending upon a host of 
intervening developments. All this is highly conjectural, 
of course, and its relevance to today's decisions is 
complicated by the fact that we currently seem to be 
rewriting the record book on monetary lags--i.e., the 
speed of response to monetary policy. Nonetheless, I 
am inclined to regard the prospects for 1967 as arguing 
that we should be a little careful of going too far too 
fast in further monetary easing right now.  

I am impressed with how much we have already set in 
train in the way of relaxation of financial restraint.  

Interest rates have dropped sharply, the financial system 
has rebuilt a good deal of liquidity, and the rise in 
money supply, time deposits, and nonbank savings instruments 

suggests that the liquid asset holdings of the private sector 
as a whole must also be mounting more substantially. A less 
tangible but nonetheless significant influence is the sharp 

recovery in values of all kinds of capital assets that must 

have accompanied the recent drop in yields and climb in 

bond and stock prices.  
At the same time, it is worth emphasizing that these 

developments do not have the look of the kind of rush for 

liquidity that can accompany an economic contraction. Some 
corporations and municipalities are already stepping up 
their capital flotations, both to fund old debts and to 

finance current and future spending. What we cannot yet

-78-



2/7/67

judge with any real certainty is how many other borrowers 
will respond affirmatively as the effects of relaxation 
of restraint spread and the availability and cost of 
credit improve for consumers, businesses, and would-be 
home owners.  

That process takes time, and the reports to date 
suggest that it is still very much under way. I am prepared 
to go slow in pushing further reserve easing actions, however, 
until we can have a little more feedback of evidence as to 
whether or not the relaxation to date may have been enough 
to begin to bolster borrowing and spending plans over the 
longer run. Otherwise, by overreacting to short-run increases 
or the lack thereof, we could trap ourselves into a kind of 
abrupt "stop-go-stop" monetary policy--that I would prefer 
to avoid--that might damage confidence not only in financial 

institutions but in the efficacy of monetary policy itself.  
All things considered, I would be willing to settle 

for a general policy of no further deliberate change between 
now and the next meeting. I would, however, like at least 
to guard against any appreciable back-up in interest rates 
or money market pressures, because I would not want to risk 
reversing the easier and more confident credit expectations 
that have so recently emerged. Furthermore, I feel that it 
would be desirable if we could move progressively back 
towards a posture in which we (and I refer to the members 

of the Committee) were a little less solicitous of every 

money market wiggle. For practical purposes, this adds 

up to an instruction to the Manager not to worry about 

offsetting every temporary downward fluctuation in the 
money market, but to resist any sizable upward fluctuation.  

I would still expect the proviso clause to shade the 

over-all cast of operations in such a way as to moderate 

unexpectedly strong bank credit deviations, but I am not 

going to worry about a proviso-initiated firming of condi

tions, since in that circumstance credit demand should be 

proving sufficiently stronger than expected to withstand 

any accompanying minor adjustment in rate expectations.  
With this general policy view, I could vote for either 

alternative A or B of the staff directive drafts, so long 

as either was interpreted as encompassing a leaning toward 

easing about like "resolving doubts on the side of ease", 

and as meaning that the Committee would not be concerned 

if its implementation resulted in a showing of positive 

free reserves--even for successive weeks.

-79-



2/7/67 -80

Chairman Martin said he found himself in almost complete 

agreement with Mr. Robertson's position. After studying the question 

carefully in preparation for today's meeting, he had concluded that 

he could accept either alternative A or B of the draft directives.  

It was clear to him that the Committee's policy should be one of ease, 

but to overreact could be self-defeating in the sense that it might 

result in a need to reverse policy later. It also was clear to him 

that the discount rate should not be changed for the time being. He 

would favor leaning toward ease within the framework of a continuation 

of present policy. Although the Treasury financing did not call for 

a rigid even-keel posture at this juncture, it did provide some 

grounds for what might be called "semi-" even keel.  

The majority of members seemed to think alternative A was the 

more suitable for the directive, Chairman Martin continued. He had 

no objection to Mr. Daane's suggestion to delete the word "about" 

from the staff's draft. However, he did have some question about 

Mr. Maisel's suggestion to formulate the proviso clause in terms 

of movements in medium- and long-term interest rates. He preferred 

the type of proviso clause included in the staff's draft.  

Mr. Daane said he thought that deleting the word "about" 

would meet the problem Mr. Maisel had in mind, by indicating that 

steadiness was desired in interest rates. He would not favor 

introducing the type of proviso clause Mr. Maisel had suggested.



2/7/67 -81

In response to Mr. Brimmer's remarks about "operation twist," he 

(Mr. Daane) would certainly favor some shift toward operations in 

coupon issues. He saw no reason for rejecting a tool that the 

Committee had found useful in the past in reconciling conflicts 

in its domestic and balance of payments objectives.  

Mr. Hayes said he strongly supported retention of the 

staff's proviso clause, which was consistent with similar clauses 

the Committee had been using all along. It introduced a desirable 

reference to an intermediate objective in terms of bank credit 

developments, to supplement the more immediate objective in terms 

of money market conditions.  

Chairman Martin asked if other members cared to express 

views with respect to the proviso clause, and several indicated 

that they would prefer to retain the version in the staff's draft.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would like to suggest a modification of 

the language of alternative A which, if acceptable to the majority, 

would permit him to join them in voting favorably. His suggestion 

was to add the words "of ease" after the word "conditions," so that 

the directive would call for "maintaining the prevailing conditions 

of ease in the money market." The purpose of the change would be to 

indicate that the money market conditions sought were somewhat closer 

to those specified by alternative B than was indicated by the original 

language of alternative A. He thought that his suggested language was



2/7/67 -82

consistent with the proposals of Chairman Martin and Mr. Robertson 

for "leaning toward ease"; if that view was shared by a majority of 

the Committee it should be reflected more specifically in the 

directive.  

Chairman Martin and Messrs. Hickman, Robertson, and Wayne 

indicated that they would have no objection to the language 

Mr. Brimmer had proposed.  

Mr. Hayes said that he preferred the staff's original 

language because of the problems of defining the term "ease" in 

Mr. Brimmer's formulation, but he did not feel strongly on the 

matter.  

Mr. Mitchell said he thought the underlying issue should 

not be papered over by semantics. The virtue of alternative B 

was that it called specifically for somewhat easier conditions and 

he thought that the Committee would be in a better posture if it 

adopted that alternative for the directive.  

Mr. Hayes commented that it had appeared to him that a 

majority of the Committee favored the type of policy described in 

alternative A.  

Mr. Brimmer said that the language change he had suggested 

was not intended to paper over the issue, but rather to call for a 

policy intermediate to those of alternatives A and B--somewhat 

closer to A than to B but definitely beyond A.



2/7/67

Mr. Maisel observed that if Mr. Brimmer's language was 

interpreted as calling for "leaning toward ease" he was prepared 

to vote for it.  

Mr. Holmes said that he would interpret the proposed language 

to mean that the Desk should try to resist any sharp rises in rates 

but not declines in rates, while going along with small changes.  

Mr. Daane said he would accept that statement as reflecting 

the Committee's intent even if the original language of alternative A 

was not modified.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and with Mr. Mitchell 
dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York was authorized and directed, 
until otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate further moderation in various expansionary 
forces, with continued large inventory accumulation. The 
pace of advance of broad price measures has slowed, although 
upward price and cost pressures persist for many goods and 
services. Interest rates have declined markedly, financial 
conditions generally are considerably easier, and bank credit 
expansion recently has been vigorous. While interest rates 
abroad have also declined, trends in international trans
actions indicate a continuing serious balance of payments 

problem. In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market 
Committee's policy to foster money and credit conditions, 
including bank credit growth, conducive to noninflationary 
economic expansion and progress toward reasonable equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments.

-83-



2/7/67 -84

To implement this policy, and taking account of the 
current Treasury financing, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining the prevailing conditions of ease 
in the money market, but operations shall be modified as 
necessary to moderate any apparently significant deviations 
of bank credit from current expectations.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to report on the 

meetings of the Group of Ten Deputies which he had attended recently.  

Mr. Daane said that the Deputies had held a meeting in London 

on January 24 and then had met jointly with the Executive Directors 

of the IMF on January 25 and 26. At the Deputies' meeting Chairman 

Emminger had distributed a partial text of the communique that had 

been released by the Ministers and Governors of the Common Market 

following their meeting at The Hague in the preceding week, which 

read as follows: "The Ministers and Governors, anxious to confirm 

their solidarity on a question as important as the international 

monetary problem, have decided, while pursuing the examination of 

the plans discussed hitherto, to instruct their experts in the 

Monetary Committee of the E.E.C. to study the improvement of the 

methods of international credit without delay." As Dr. Emminger 

pointed out, that statement had been misinterpreted by the press 

to mean that the French had agreed to shelve the question of an 

increase in the price of gold in exchange for agreement to abandon 

contingency planning for a new reserve asset in favor of working 

toward improving the credit facilities of the IMF. That was not true.



2/7/67 -85

In clarifying the matter, Mr. Daane continued, Dr. Emminger 

made four points. First, he called attention to the phrase in the 

communique which read, "while pursuing the examination of the plans 

discussed hitherto," and indicated that that phrase referred to the 

work of the Group of Ten and to the joint meetings on contingency 

planning, and had been inserted to make it clear there was no intent 

on the part of the Common Market countries to impede or interrupt 

that work. Secondly, Dr. Emminger noted that the reference to "the 

improvement of the methods of international credit" (to be studied 

by the Monetary Committee of the E.E.C.) was to the new French 

suggestions introduced at the Hague meeting. He implied that the 

French had nothing really concrete to offer on the subject of 

international credit; and it was Mr. Daane's own impression that 

they had advanced the suggestions primarily as a diversionary tactic.  

Dr. Emminger's third point was that a decision as to whether the 

French suggestions should be inserted into the work of the Ten or 

of the joint meetings would depend on the outcome of the Monetary 

Committee's studies. The fourth point--and the one of perhaps 

greatest interest to the Open Market Committee--was that there had 

been an agreement at the Hague meeting that the question of the gold 

price should be shelved for the time being, and the Dutch Prime 

Minister was authorized to so state at the press conference following 

the Hague meeting.



2/7/67 -86

After those remarks by Dr. Emminger, Mr. Daane continued, 

the French took sharp exception to the statement that the gold price 

question had been shelved. Mr. Perouse said that the French had not 

asked for an immediate increase in the price of gold, and "one could 

not put back in the drawer what one had not taken out of the drawer." 

In effect, the French position was that it was appropriate to discuss 

the problems of gold, including that of price. They had, in fact, 

continued to discuss the subject at the subsequent sessions.  

The two most significant items on the agenda at the joint 

meeting, Mr. Daane said, dealt with the conditions and circumstances 

of activation of a contingency plan, and with decision-making. Perhaps 

the most significant development was the manner in which both groups 

approached the question of conditions for activation. As the Committee 

would recall, a statement issued by the Ministers and Governors of the 

Ten in August 1966 called for two preconditions for activation: 

improvement in the balance of payments position of members--a point 

directed particularly at the U.S. and the U.K.--and a better working 

out of the adjustment process. The consensus at this meeting was 

that such conditions could not be defined precisely or applied in a 

rigid manner. Surprisingly, that view was expressed by, among others, 

some members from Common Market countries, who pointed out that they 

could conceive of the need for reserve asset creation arising even



2/7/67 -87

with a continued moderate deficit in the U.S. balance of payments.  

Similarly, they viewed improvement in the adjustment process as a 

continuing process, not capable of clear-cut delineations. Thus, 

there definitely had been a softening of attitudes on the precon

ditions for activation.  

On the question of decision making, Mr. Daane said, a 

"bicameral approach," involving a separate vote outside the Fund for 

a limited group, was rejected. Mr. Van Lennep of the Netherlands 

made a strong case for a "double-majority" procedure in which a 

limited group would have special voting rights within the Fund.  

This approach too was criticized by representatives from outside 

the Ten. Instead, the approach taken was to lay greater stress on 

consultation prior to formal decision-making. Interestingly, there 

seemed to be a general consensus that reserve creation should be 

built into the IMF framework, with the scheme to be operated through 

an affiliate of the Fund. Although not all issues had been resolved, 

it was becoming increasingly clear that decision-making would be 

fully within the IMF or an affiliate. As Dr. Emminger had put it 

at the press conference, that was gratifying progress.  

Mr. Daane added that the French had tried to have the problem 

of gold placed on the agenda for the next joint meeting, to be held 

in Washington in late April. Mr. Schweitzer had firmly rejected that



2/7/67 -88

proposal, saying that the only purpose of the joint meetings was 

to develop a plan for reserve asset creation, and Dr. Emminger 

pointed out, in turn, that the Deputies' mandate from the Ministers 

and Governors of the Ten had specifically excluded the subject of 

the gold price. Mr. Deming, Mr. Hockin of Canada, and Mr. Van Lennep 

also had spoken against the French proposal.  

In sum, Mr. Daane said, from the entire set of meetings one 

got a clear sense of further progress with respect to contingency 

planning, which was favored by all of the Europeans except the French.  

The joint meeting was marked by a spirit of constructive advance 

similar to that at the first such meeting in Washington last November.  

One could take a generally optimistic view and say, as Dr. Emminger 

had in his press conference, that while the full plan might not be 

agreed upon by the time of the meetings in Rio de Janeiro this autumn, 

the main elements of a plan might be agreed upon by that time.  

In a concluding observation, Mr. Daane said that the other 

main item on the agenda at the Group of Ten meeting--which was 

carried over in part to the joint meeting--dealt with the question 

of holding and use of the new asset. A working group made a 

preliminary report at the London meetings in which three approaches 

were distinguished--a holding limit, a transfer ratio linking gold 

to the new asset, and a creditor ratio. There seemed to be less and 

less sentiment for the second of those approaches.



Following Mr. Daane's remarks, Chairman Martin said that 

he would report briefly on his visit last week to London, where 

he had spoken before the Overseas Bankers Club. He found that 

people at the Bank of England were very much encouraged by the 

progress Britain had made recently, on which Mr. Coombs had 

reported this morning. He had been interested to find a general 

feeling in London that France's decision to internationalize its 

gold market was taken deliberately in order to make it more 

difficult for Britain to join the Common Market. Some South 

Africans with whom he had talked were quite convinced that the 

move would have no effect on the practices of their country; they 

felt that the shipping arrangements between South Africa and 

London offered benefits to them that would offset the possibility 

of higher prices in the Paris gold market. The Chairman concluded 

by expressing the hope that the recent gains in British reserves 

would continue.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee, 

which would be the annual organizational meeting, would be held 

on Tuesday, March 7, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

2/7/67 -89-



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 6, 1967 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on February 7, 1967 

FIRST PARAGRAPH 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate further moderation in various expansionary forces, 
with continued large inventory accumulation. The pace of advance 
of broad price measures has slowed, although upward price and cost 
pressures persist for many goods and services. Interest rates have 
declined markedly, financial conditions generally are considerably 
easier, and bank credit expansion recently has been vigorous. While 
interest rates abroad have also declined, trends in international 
transactions indicate a continuing serious balance of payments 
problem. In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to foster money and credit conditions, including bank credit 
growth, conducive to noninflationary economic expansion and progress 
toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

SECOND PARAGRAPH 

Alternative A 

To implement this policy, and taking account of the current 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
about the prevailing conditions in the money market, but operations 
shall be modified as necessary to moderate any apparently significant 
deviations of bank credit from current expectations.  

Alternative B 

To implement this policy, and taking account of the current 

Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to attaining 

somewhat easier conditions in the money market than prevail at present, 
unless bank credit appears to be expanding significantly faster than 

currently anticipated.


