









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 2, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 

Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 

Swan 
Ellis, Alternate for Mr. Wayne 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Hickman and Galusha, Alternate Members 

of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp and Clay, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas City, 

respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Garvy, Hersey, Jones, 
Koch, Partee, Ratchford, and Solomon, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel, Legal 

Division, Board of Governors



5/2/67

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Economist, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Kimbrel and Coldwell, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Taylor, Tow, 
and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis 

Chairman Martin welcomed Mr. William W. Sherrill, recently 

appointed to the Board of Governors, to his first meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee. The Chairman noted that Mr. Sherrill 

had executed his oath of office as a member of the Committee prior 

to today's meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee held on April 4, 1967, were 
approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies



5/2/67 -3

for the period April 4 through April 26, 1967, and a supplemental 

report for April 27 through May 1, 1967. Copies of these reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged again 

this week. Since the Stabilization Fund had more than $100 million 

of gold on hand, he would assume that no reduction in the gold 

stock would be required for at least several weeks to come.  

Mr. Coombs commented that the London gold market had been 

very badly shaken by the publicity given to recent statements on 

U.S. gold policy contained in a publication of the Chase Manhattan 

Bank and in a speech by the president of the Bank of America. It 

was likely that those statements had brought about a permanent 

change in market thinking, and they had probably lifted the underly

ing demand for gold to a new high level. As a result of the 

statements, the gold pool lost about $25 million during April.  

Since the pool might well have been in surplus during April if the 

statements had not been made, their true cost probably was closer 

to $50 million, and that was likely to represent only the first 

instalment. The one factor that had kept the market from a major 

crisis had been the continued abnormally high flow of South African 

gold; the running down of South African gold reserves had increased 

the flow by nearly 40 per cent above normal in recent months. As



5/2/67 -4

soon as South Africa halted the present reserve drain and sought 

to rebuild its gold reserves, as it had after each previous period 

of drain, the supply of gold reaching London would drop sharply 

below current levels, perhaps by more than 50 per cent, and the 

gold pool would be exposed to the full brunt of speculative buying.  

As of the moment the pool's resources were only $85 million. The 

prospective deterioration in the U.S. balance of payments during 

1967, together with the escalation of the war in Vietnam, seemed 

likely to aggravate the gold market situation still further, and 

it was entirely possible that before the summer was out there could 

be a major crisis in the London market.  

On the foreign exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, 

sterling had had another good month during April. He expected 

that the British Government announcement, to be made this morning, 

would indicate that their reserve increase had been in excess of 

$100 million. At least part of the inflow to the U.K. probably 

reflected the comparative advantage which the British were contin

uing to maintain by keeping credit conditions in London relatively 

tight and rates relatively high compared to other centers. If the 

Bank of England had followed the discount rate cuts by the Federal 

Reserve and the German Federal Bank, it was likely that that would 

have triggered off sympathetic moves by central banks of the 

Netherlands, Belgium, and Sweden. The main justification for



5/2/67 -5

Britain's holding back in that way was that they had been most anxious 

to pull in enough money during April and early May to finance, as far 

as possible, a very large prepayment--roughly $400 million--to the 

International Monetary Fund, and a payment to Switzerland, both of 

which they hoped to make around the middle of May. They had made good 

progress in getting the money together, and that might open the way for 

an early reduction in the Bank rate.  

Mr. Coombs said that the dollar had weakened appreciably on the 

continental markets, and the continental central banks were again 

taking in dollars. As his written report indicated, the System had 

found it necessary last Friday to use $15 million equivalent of the 

fully-drawn portion of the swap line with the National Bank of Belgium 

to absorb some of that Bank's dollar purchases. In the case of the 

Swiss franc, the spring months were normally a period of weakness and 

in earlier years the System or the Treasury had been able to pick up as 

much as $150 million of Swiss francs during that period. It had not 

been possible to acquire Swiss francs this year; the same apprehension 

that was affectng the gold market, together with a liquidity squeeze 

in Zurich, was frustrating the normal pattern. The Swiss franc had 

moved close to its ceiling and there would probably be heavy flows of 

funds to Switzerland during the summer months. In fact, nearly all of 

the continental currencies might strengthen further over coming months,



5/2/67 -6

and it seemed quite possible the System might have to make very heavy 

drawings on its swap lines between now and next fall.  

Mr. Robertson asked whether Mr. Coombs knew of any basis for 

assessing the accuracy of recent reports to the effect that the 

production of gold in Russia had been accelerated.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the Central Intelligence Agency, which 

followed the Russian gold situation reasonably closely, had published 

a report a few years ago which tended to discount stories about 

important new gold discoveries in Russia. He did not know whether that 

agency had prepared a more up-to-date version of its report, which had 

suggested that Russia was producing no more than $150 to $200 million 

of gold per year.  

Mr. Brimmer inquired about the extent to which continental 

central banks might have benefited from the recent reflow of funds to 

the Euro-dollar market through foreign branches of U.S. banks.  

Mr. Coombs said he thought that the main beneficiary thus far 

had been the Bank of England, but clearly some of the funds had gone to 

the continent. More generally, there had been a tendency for dollars 

to shift from private to foreign official hands--an important and 

dangerous development which was likely to have implications for the 

System's use of its swap arrangements. In part, perhaps, that develop

ment was a consequence of the continued relative tightness of the 

continental money markets, but in part it was attributable to the



5/2/67 -7

alarms of recent months about the outlook for the international mone

tary system.  

By unanimous vote, the System 
open market transactions in foreign 
currencies during the period April 4 
through May 1, 1967, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the System's standby swap arrangement 

with the Bank of England in the amount of $1,350 million would reach 

the end of its twelve-month term on May 31, 1967. He recommended its 

renewal for another full year.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a 
further period of twelve months of the 
$1,350 million standby swap arrangement 
with the Bank of England, scheduled to 
mature on May 31, 1967, was approved.  

Mr. Coombs then reported that he had had discussions with the 

Governor and Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico regarding a possible 

standby swap arrangement with that Bank, and they had indicated that 

they would be prepared to join in an arrangement in the amount of $130 

million. They had apparently chosen that figure to round out to an 

even $500 million the total of their swap line with the System, their 

$100 million swap line with the Treasury, and their International 

Monetary Fund quota of $270 million. Although $130 million was an 

unusual figure for a swap arrangement he did not think it raised any 

substantive question and would recommend its acceptance. From his 

conversations with the Mexicans it seemed quite clear that they understood



5/2/67

the rules of the game as they had been developed in connection with the 

swap network and could be relied upon to adhere to them. He understood 

that the Bank of Mexico had accomplished all of the necessary clearance 

within their Government and that they would be prepared to make the 

agreement final within the coming week. Mr. Lang of the New York 

Reserve Bank staff would be going to Venezuela this week in order to 

discuss the swap network with the Governor of the Bank of Venezuela and 

to brief him on the progress of the negotiations with Mexico. The Bank 

of Mexico had been advised that the Venezuelans would be kept informed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that he had also been in touch with officials 

of the National Bank of Denmark. They told him that Denmark had 

qualified for Article VIII status in the International Monetary Fund 

yesterday and that they would be prepared to join in a swap agreement 

with the System, in the amount of $100 million, at almost any time.  

They still felt, however, that it would be useful for the announcement 

of a swap arrangement between their Bank and the System to be timed to 

coincide with an announcement of a similar arrangement between the Bank 

of Norway and the System. There was a problem in this connection, 

however, since the Norwegians were still negotiating with the IMF about 

one remaining technical obstacle to their qualification for Article VIII 

status. Even after they reached agreement in substance with the Fund, 

it might take a little while for all of the formalities to be cleared 

up. He could see some possible advantage in anticipating the completion



5/2/67 -9

of such formalities by proceeding with the swap arrangement with the 

Bank of Norway once they had reached agreement in principle with the 

Fund. In his judgment there would be advantages in announcing all of 

the new agreements simultaneously rather than sequentially; the latter 

procedure might lead to some speculation as to how far the System might 

be intending to go in broadening the network to include other countries.  

Mr. Coombs said he would, therefore, recommend Committee 

approval of new standby swap arrangements in the amount of $130 million 

with the Bank of Mexico and $100 million with the National Bank of 

Denmark. He would also recommend approval of a $100 million arrange

ment with the Bank of Norway, contingent on their indicating that they 

had reached an agreement in principle with the International Monetary 

Fund which would enable them to qualify for Article VIII status as 

soon as the necessary papers were executed. He believed that all three 

central banks would be prepared to join in standby swap arrangements 

with a maturity of a full year.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that the System would be placing 

Venezuela in a difficult position if it declined to make a swap 

arrangement with them because they had not attained Article VIII status, 

and at the same time entered into an arrangement with Norway before 

that country had met the requirements of Article VIII. He thought it 

would be preferable to give Venezuela the same opportunity that



5/2/67 -10

Mr. Coombs was suggesting should be given Norway; if they could achieve 

Article VIII status, it would be appropriate to include a swap line 

with them in the package.  

Mr. Coombs said he suspected that Venezuela's qualifying under 

Article VIII would involve a rather lengthy process. In the case of 

Norway, on the other hand, only a few weeks were likely to be required 

to complete the negotiations and to process the necessary papers.  

Mr. Mitchell replied that he still believed the Venezuelans 

would be put at a disadvantage in the Carribean if they were not given 

a chance to achieve Article VIII status before the System announced new 

swap arrangements with Mexico and the two European countries. He 

thought it would be better to defer action on the other arrangements 

until discussions were held with the Venezuelans. If Mr. Coombs 

was correct in his judgment that they could not achieve Article VIII 

status relatively soon, they would at least be informed for the present, 

and a swap arrangement with them could be made at some future date. It 

was important to avoid any suggestion of discriminatory action.  

Mr. Brimmer recalled that at its previous meeting the Committee 

had agreed on the desirability of holding informal discussions with the 

Venezuelans.  

Mr. Coombs noted that he had been authorized to negotiate with 

Mexico with respect to a possible swap arrangement, and to keep the 

Venezuelans informed. It was not until yesterday that the Mexicans had



5/2/67 -11

advised him that they were prepared to join in the arrangement. The 

Venezuelans would be informed about the discussions with Mexico in the 

course of Mr. Lang's forthcoming visit.  

Mr. Solomon commented that when this matter was discussed at 

the previous meeting the judgment of the Committee had been that it 

was rather unlikely that Venezuela would attain Article VIII status 

soon enough to be included in the present package, but that it was 

important that they be informed of the standards for admission to the 

network before an arrangement with Mexico was announced.  

Mr. Robertson said that he could see the justification for 

announcing the new swap arrangements with Mexico, Denmark, and Norway 

simultaneously but he did not understand the need for moving ahead on 

them before Norway had attained Article VIII status.  

Mr. Coombs replied there was a potential reason for acting 

within ten days or so, which was related to the forthcoming maturity 

of the System's swap line with the Bank of France. He had intended 

to raise that subject next.  

Mr. Robertson suggested that the Committee defer action on the 

three proposed swap arrangements until after Mr. Coombs had discussed 

the situation with respect to the Bank of France.  

Mr. Coombs remarked that he had some rather unpleasant develop

ments to report. It appeared that some of the System's swap network 

partners in the European Economic Community were trying to subject the



5/2/67 -12-

network to a new dimension of surveillance by arranging to have the

swap lines with the central banks of Common Market countries mature on

the same date. He felt that they were planning eventually to go even

further to seek also some sort of Common Market control over the actual

drawings under the lines. This movement had begun in the Netherlands

Bank, with considerable backing from the National Bank of Belgium.

The attitude of the central banks of Germany and Italy had been

relatively neutral; indeed, the Italians had made some effort to

achieve a compromise that would be satisfactory from the point of view

of the United States.

The Netherlands Bank official primarily concerned originally

had been one of the strongest supporters of the swap network,

Mr. Coombs continued, and it was not entirely clear why he was now

engaged in an effort of this kind. Part of the explanation, perhaps,

was that he had become increasingly pessimistic about the U.S. balance

of payments problem and about the damage he thought the United States

had done by "exporting inflation" to Europe in the process of running

persistent payments deficits. Secondly, his views had shifted from an

acceptance of the kind of exchange guarantee involved in the swap

drawings to a preference for a gold guarantee. Third, he and others in

the Netherlands had been consistently pessimistic with respect to

sterling and had strenuously opposed some of the sterling rescue

operations of the past three years. The fact that those rescue



5/2/67 -13-

operations had been successful had not lessened his opposition, but had

served only to increase his disaffection.

That disaffection had been particularly whetted by the increases

in the swap lines negotiated last September, Mr. Coombs said. The first

reaction of the Netherlands Bank official at that time had been to try

to persuade all the Common Market countries to treat such increases as

temporary and separate from the previous swap lines. His effort to

develop a solid Common Market front on that point had been spoiled when

the Germans and Italians agreed to consolidate their enlargements into

new over-all swap lines. Having failed in that effort, he had shifted

his objective to that of achieving a common maturity date for the

various Federal Reserve swap lines--with all lines maturing at the end

of each quarter--so as to facilitate surveillance by the Common Market

central banks at renewal dates.

Those efforts to subject the Federal Reserve network to special

surveillance, Mr. Coombs observed, had been pursued through private

conversations with other Common Market central bankers. Although some

of the latter had suggested open discussions with Federal Reserve

representatives, thus far no direct approach had been made to the

System. He (Mr. Coombs) had heard of the plan indirectly through the

Germans and Italians, and had urged those central banks not to partici-

pate in it.



5/2/67 -14

Mr. Coombs noted that the Italians had attempted a compromise 

by suggesting that their swap line with the System, which was already 

on an annual basis, might be scheduled to mature at the end of each 

year. He thought that had been a constructive suggestion, The swap 

line with the German Federal Bank was on a six-month basis, and when 

it had approached maturity in February the Germans had agreed to its 

renewal for another six months, through August. The swap lines with 

the National Bank of Belgium and the Netherlands Bank had been 

scheduled to mature around the middle of March, and ten days in advance 

a telex had been sent to both banks proposing renewal for another three 

months. The Dutch had not replied at all. The Belgians' reply 

indicated that they were agreeable to renewal, but would like to place 

the next maturity date at June 30 rather than at the normal maturity 

date of June 13. In reply they had been told that unless they had a 

strong preference for June 30 the Federal Reserve would prefer to employ 

the normal date, and if they did have a strong preference for June 30 

the System would like to know the reason. There had been no response 

to that message. At the Basle meeting held a few days later, he had 

approached the Belgians directly with a request for an explanation of 

their preference for a June 30 maturity date. They had replied that 

that preference was based on "purely internal reasons." He had then 

agreed to a June 30 maturity date, and the renewal was executed on that 

basis.



5/2/67 -15

He had also approached the Dutch at the Basle meeting, 

Mr. Coombs continued, but their only response was that they wanted to 

hold further discussions within their own group. There was no word 

from them until the day before the arrangement matured, when they 

called the New York Bank and proposed June 30 as the new maturity date.  

He had been in Copenhagen at the time, and had instructed the New York 

Bank staff to inquire about the significance of the June 30 date. The 

response from the Netherlands Bank was that it was suggested "to 

facilitate consultation." At that late hour it was impossible to get 

in touch with the Committee. Accordingly, he had told the Trading Desk 

to agree to that date for purposes of the present renewal, but to 

indicate that the Federal Reserve would want to discuss the matter of 

future maturity dates before the June 30 maturity was reached.  

The following weekend, Mr. Coombs said, he had met with a 

representative of the Netherlands Bank and had received the impression 

that the consultations contemplated by the latter might involve no more 

than the central banks of Belgium and the Netherlands. If that was the 

case, such consultations were likely to be relatively harmless; but the 

question remained as to whether they might be broadened to include all 

Common Market countries. As he had indicated, the German Federal Bank 

had not gone along with the approach in February and the Bank of Italy 

was removed from the issue by the fact that their swap line with the 

System had a one-year term. The key to future developments was the



5/2/67 -16-

attitude of the French, whose swap line with the System would mature

on May 10.

Recently, Mr. Coombs said, he had been approached by a

representative of the Bank of France who said he simply wanted to give

advance notice that if a three-month renewal was requested the French

would be unable to agree; they were prepared to renew only to June 30.

He (Mr. Coombs) had indicated in reply that such a proposal would

raise significant questions of principle. Subsequently, Mr. Hayes and

he had talked with officials of the Bank of France, and had urged them

not to press for a June 30 maturity date. Mr. Hayes also had been in

touch with the German Federal Bank and would be visiting that Bank

again on Friday. And, of course, there would be discussions at the

Basle meeting next weekend.

Superficially, Mr. Coombs observed, the question of coordinated

maturity dates for swap lines with Common Market countries might not

be considered a matter of great concern to the Committee. The under-

lying danger, however, was that the proposal reflected an intention of

ultimately subjecting the System's network of swap arrangements with

the Common Market countries to tight control by those countries

acting in concert. That would give a disproportionate degree of power

to small nations such as Belgium and the Netherlands.

In general, Mr. Coombs said, the events he had reported had a

number of unfortunate aspects. First was the failure of the countries



5/2/67 -17-

involved to consult the Federal Reserve directly. More importantly,

the approach seemed to reflect an unwarranted attitude of distrust of

U.S. motives and actions. The only justification that he could see

for the intended consultations was the risk of some abuse of the swap

network, while in fact there had been no abuse. The nature of the

whole approach to the matter of uniform maturity dates suggested that

it was a testing operation. His own strong inclination would be to

have the issue thrashed out now, when the swap lines were virtually

clear, rather than to let matters drift on and possibly come to a head

during the summer months when there might well be heavy drawings

outstanding under the swap lines.

At the previous meeting, Mr. Coombs noted, the Committee had

approved his recommendation that the swap line with the Bank of France

be renewed for three months when it matured on May 10. The French had

now advised that they would not accept a renewal for three months, but

only one through June 30. In effect, they had taken the initiative in

trying to dictate terms to the Federal Reserve. His own view was that

the System should not acquiesce. He would recommend that the French

be told that the Committee would let the arrangement lapse if they

were willing to renew it only until June 30. In the weekend dis-

cussions at Basle Mr. Hayes and he would be talking with the Germans

and Italians on the matter, and it would be helpful to have the views

of the Committee in this respect.



5/2/67 -18

In response to the Chairman's request for comment, Mr. Daane 

said that he had mixed feelings. To a large extent he shared 

Mr. Coombs' views; in his judgment the effort to coordinate maturity 

dates of swap lines ran counter to the spirit of international 

cooperation that was reflected in past practice of undertaking bilateral 

arrangements to deal with disruptive swings in payments flows between 

countries. But while he sympathized with Mr. Coombs' view he found 

the underlying issue a difficult one to resolve.  

Mr. Daane noted that he had discussed the matter with Under 

Secretary Deming who, like Mr. Coombs and himself, was disturbed about 

the implications of the recent developments in light of the purpose of 

the swap arrangements. Mr. Deming had suggested making a maximum effort 

at Basle this weekend to persuade the French to renew their swap line 

on the customary three-month basis. Whatever the French reaction, 

Mr. Deming would favor having the usual telex sent out, proposing a 

three-month renewal; and if the French rejected that proposal he would 

favor letting the arrangement lapse.  

Mr. Daane said there was much merit in the case Mr. Coombs had 

made for following such a course, but he was not sure that he could go 

along with it. There had been considerable pressure recently to extend 

the degree of multilateral surveillance a step further. He did not 

know whether this was the point at which the Federal Reserve should try



5/2/67 -19

to resist that pressure, and he did not know whether System efforts at 

resistance would be successful.  

Mr. Daane's own recommendation would be to postpone any 

decision with respect to the French swap line until it was learned 

what course the Germans and Italians were likely to follow. If they 

were willing to retain the present maturity dates he was not sure that 

it would make a great deal of difference whether or not the arrangement 

with the French was permitted to lapse. On the other hand, if it was 

clear that the Germans and Italians were going to join in the move

ment to common maturity dates he did not think there was anything to 

be gained by dropping the French swap line. In short, he thought the 

Committee needed more information before it could reach an appropriate 

decision. He favored one more effort this weekend to persuade the 

French to stay with the 90-day maturity date, and he thought Mr. Coombs 

should be authorized to report that it was the Committee's view that the 

arrangement should be renewed, and for 90 days. He would also favor 

talks on the subject with the Germans and Italians this weekend. If 

they were prepared to join with the French he was not sure the 

Committee could stave off a common maturity date. If they were not, it 

would be very useful to have their counsel.  

Mr. Coombs observed that the attitude of the Italians posed no 

problem, since they had already indicated they were fully prepared to 

retain a one-year period for their swap line, with maturity at the end



5/2/67 -20-

of the year. The Germans at the moment were not on a quarterly basis;

as he had indicated, they had agreed in February to a six-month

renewal, and their swap line would mature on August 9. He was hopeful

that they could be persuaded to renew the line for another six-month

period at that time. However, if the System agreed to a June 30

maturity for the line with the Bank of France, the Germans would be

put under very heavy pressure. Perhaps the best hope was to try to

persuade the French to defer the question, if only to extend to the

System the courtesy of having an opportunity for thorough discussion.

Central bank relations were based on a spirit of mutual trust and

confidence, and unilateral actions were contrary to that spirit.

Mr. Coombs added that the costs of permitting the swap line

with the Bank of France to lapse could easily be exaggerated. That

line had been useless for some time, and market participants were aware

of that fact. Indeed, there would be an advantage in discontinuing

the French swap line; if France was no longer a member of the network,

any plan for coordinated surveillance of swap line activity by all the

Common Market countries would fall through.

Mr. Daane said he had two additional comments. First, he

thought further consideration had to be given to the question of

whether agreement on coordinated renewal dates for the swap lines with

Common Market countries would necessarily mean that those countries

subsequently would move toward control of the conditions of use of the



5/2/67 -21

lines. Secondly, an official of the Bank for International Settlements 

had suggested that part of the present ferment about the swap lines 

might reflect the enlargements that had been made last fall. Accord

ingly, while the enlargements had been useful and necessary at that 

time, he (Mr. Daane) wondered whether it might not be helpful in the 

present situation to suggest some over-all cutback in the sizes of the 

swap lines.  

Mr. Coombs replied that if the Dutch or Belgians were to 

suggest a cutback in the size of their lines he would propose simply 

to repeat what he had said in the past--namely, that the System wanted 

no reluctant partners in the network, and if any partner thought a line 

of the present size was not to its benefit the System would agree to 

reduce it. On the other hand, a general scaling down of the network 

was likely to have unfortunate effects on market confidence.  

Mr. Brimmer said that he would favor following the course 

Mr. Coombs had recommended with respect to the swap line with the 

Bank of France. To agree to a renewal only for the period until 

June 30 would appear to him as going a long way toward accepting 

multilateral surveillance by the Common Market. The Committee had 

resisted such surveillance in the past and he thought it should continue 

to do so.  

Chairman Martin commented that he thought Mr. Coombs had taken 

the right approach in his negotiations on maturity dates. He agreed



5/2/67 -22

that it would make little difference from the point of view of monetary 

affairs whether or not the swap line with the Bank of France was 

renewed, since it had not been used for several years. However, that 

decision might have important international political implications, 

affecting the foreign relations of the United States. He would be 

reluctant to see the Federal Reserve take any action that could be 

construed--whatever the facts of the matter--as a System initiative to 

discontinue the swap line with the French. Accordingly, he would favor 

deferring a decision until after the System's associates in the net

work could be consulted at the Basle meeting this weekend.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether it was the Chairman's feeling that 

the Committee should run the risk of having its swap arrangements 

brought under the surveillance of the Common Market. The Chairman 

replied that it was not yet clear to him how serious that risk was, 

since much depended on the attitudes of the Germans and Italians.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed that Mr. Coombs had taken the right 

approach in his discussions about renewal dates with the Belgians and 

Dutch, as well as with the French. He also agreed that the swap line 

with the Bank of France had been of no value for a number of years.  

However, there were likely to be political repercussions to any 

announcement that that line had been discontinued. He did not know 

what the political consequences of that step would be, and he questioned 

whether the Committee was in a position to assess them accurately.



tell the French that it was unlikely that the Committee would agree to 

renew their swap line only until June 30.  

Mr. Treiber noted that both Mr. Coombs and Mr. Hayes would be 

in Basle this weekend and would be holding full discussions with the 

French, Germans, and Italians. It would be helpful to them if the 

Committee today reaffirmed the action it had taken at the previous 

meeting of authorizing an extension for three months in the swap line 

with the Bank of France. If the French proved to be adamant, there 

would still be time before May 10 for the Committee to hold a telephone 

conference meeting for the purpose of reviewing the developments at 

Basle and considering the best course of action.  

Mr. Daane concurred in Mr. Trieber's suggestion.  

Mr. Maisel commented that before reaching a final decision it 

would be desirable to consult with the Treasury and the State 

Departments on the political implications of various courses of action.  

Chairman Martin agreed that the Committee should reaffirm the 

action it had already taken with regard to the French swap line if that 

was likely to be helpful to Messrs. Hayes and Coombs in their discus

sions at Basle. But he would not cross the bridge of deciding to 

discontinue that swap line until there was a better opportunity to 

assess all of the implications of that action. It would be unfortunate,



5/2/67 -24

he thought, if the French were in a position to say that they had 

been prepared to renew the line but the Federal Reserve had refused 

to go along.  

Mr. Coombs commented that he also had been concerned about 

political effects. He had assumed that the current international 

liquidity discussions were one important area of possible repercus

sion. He gathered from Mr. Daane's remarks, however, that the 

Treasury would have no objection to discontinuing the line if the 

French insisted on the June 30 maturity date.  

Mr. Daane said he understood it was the Treasury's impres

sion that France's position in the liquidity discussions would not 

be affected by actions with respect to their swap line with the 

System. On the other hand, that was an initial reaction, and he 

was not sure that the Treasury had fully reviewed all of the 

political implications of the situation. It probably would be 

desirable for them, as well as for the System, to give further 

thought to possible consequences not only for the liquidity 

discussions but on a wider basis.  

Mr. Coombs said it would be helpful if the Committee 

reaffirmed its action approving a three-month renewal of the 

French swap line. It would also be helpful if Mr. Hayes and he 

were able to report that it was the sense of the Committee that



5/2/67 -25

the proposals under discussion were contrary to the spirit of 

cooperation underlying the swap network.  

Mr. Daane remarked that he thought it would be appropriate 

for Messrs. Hayes and Coombs to point out that the proposals were 

viewed by the System and the Treasury as inimical to the spirit 

of the network.  

Mr. Hickman said that in his judgment the approach 

Mr. Coombs had suggested was exactly right. However, in view of 

the fact that the Committee had been working to extend the network 

and to increase its usefulness, he was concerned about the 

possibility that some other present members might follow if the 

French dropped out. Accordingly, he hoped it would be possible 

to continue the swap line with the French.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that if a special meeting was found 

to be needed the Committee might consider convening in Washington 

rather than holding a telephone conference, which was a rather 

unsatisfactory way to conduct a discussion. In his judgment the 

French were not likely to yield on the matter at issue.  

Mr. Robertson said he thought the procedures that had been 

outlined were good. If the French proved to be adamant he would 

not favor having the System back down.  

Mr. Brimmer commented that he assumed the Committee would 

not only reaffirm its previous decision regarding a three-month



5/2/67 -26

renewal of the French swap line today, but that it would also 

authorize Mr. Coombs to indicate that it was disturbed by the 

recent developments.  

Chariman Martin agreed. As he had indicated, however, 

he thought that the Committee should not reach a decision today 

regarding the French swap line if the Bank of France was not 

agreeable to a three-month renewal. Such a decision should be 

held in abeyance until more information was available.  

No disagreement was expressed with the Chairman's statement.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee 
reaffirmed its action of April 4, 1967, 
approving renewal of the $100 million 
standby swap arrangement with the Bank 
of France for a further period of three 
months.  

Mr. Coombs then noted that he had requested Committee 

approval of new standby swap arrangements with the Banks of 

Denmark and Mexico, in the amounts of $100 million and $130 mil

lion, respectively, with terms preferably up to a full year. He 

had also requested approval of a $100 million arrangement with 

Norway, preferably for one year, if they indicated that they had 

reached agreement in principle with the Fund as to their achiev

ing Article VIII status within the very near future, and that 

only final arrangements remained to be completed. It would be 

his hope that all three new arrangements could be announced at 

the same time.



5/2/67 -27

Mr. Robertson asked whether it might not be better to 

wait until Norway had actually achieved Article VIII status before 

acting on any of the new swap arrangements.  

Mr. Coombs replied that if the swap line with the Bank of 

France were to be discontinued there would be some advantage in 

announcing all four actions simultaneously. He would not expect 

any particular market effects from dropping the French swap line, 

but a simultaneous announcement of three new lines would lessen 

whatever effects might occur.  

Mr. Solomon suggested that the Committee might want to 

weigh two other considerations. First was the general question 

of the desirability of admitting a country to the swap network 

before it had achieved Article VIII status. Secondly, the three 

central banks with whom the new arrangements were to be made might 

have questions about the System's motives in making a simultaneous 

announcement of all four actions. That consideration might out

weigh the advantages of a simultaneous announcement since, as 

Mr. Coombs had indicated, the market effects of dropping the swap 

line with the Bank of France were not likely to be great in any 

case.  

Mr. Swan concurred in Mr. Solomon's comments.  

Mr. Treiber remarked that if the French agreed to a three

month renewal, there would not be any important reason for approving



5/2/67 -28

the swap line with Norway before they achieved Article VIII status.  

On the other hand, if the French did not agree, the Committee 

planned to hold a special meeting in the course of which it could 

reach a decision on Norway. Accordingly, he thought no action 

with respect to the Norwegian swap line was necessary today.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee defer 

action with respect to the proposed new swap arrangements with 

the central banks of Norway, Denmark, and Mexico until May 23, or 

until the special meeting of the Committee if one was held before 

that date.  

There was no disagreement with the Chairman's suggestion.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to report on the 

recent joint meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten and the 

Executive Directors of the IMF.  

Mr. Daane noted that the Deputies had met with the Executive 

Directors of the Fund on April 24 and 25, and for part of the day 

on April 26. At a press conference held on April 26, Mr. Schweitzer 

had summarized the developments in the following words: "I think 

that once more these meetings have proved very useful and very 

successful and I think we can state with confidence that great 

progress is being made. I think it is now unanimously agreed that 

we should proceed with work toward the establishment of a plan for 

the deliberate creation of supplementary reserves. I think also



5/2/67 -29

that everybody is willing to make the maximum effort to make it 

possible that at the Rio de Janeiro meeting, where our Governors 

will convene in September, they will already have before them, 

let's say, the broad outlines of a plan." 

What lay behind Mr. Schweitzer's words, Mr. Daane contin

ued, were two and a half days of discussion of the need for new 

reserves and of the illustrative schemes for reserve asset creation 

prepared by the Fund staff. In the course of that discussion the 

U.S. representatives had made a forthright and persuasive case 

for the proposition that the need for new reserves might be closer 

rather than further away. As Chairman Emminger himself had said, 

it appeared that the time for activating a contingency plan was 

nearer than had been thought a year ago. On the basis of the 

discussion at the meeting, and at the Munich meeting of the Common 

Market Finance Ministers on April 17-18, it appeared that there 

was now unanimous agreement on going forward with respect to a 

plan; the French had moved that much. The French also had moved 

to the extent of accepting an unconditional reserve asset in the 

form of drawing rights without specific credit-like repayment 

provisions. There was considerable discussion of the alternatives 

of reserve units and drawing rights. The representatives of the 

U.S. and other non-EEC countries had insisted that the new asset



5/2/67 -30

be money-like rather than credit-like, in order to be a true 

supplement to gold and dollars.  

On the technical side, Mr. Daane continued, the issues 

still remained of whether, whatever the label, the new asset 

should be transferable directly or indirectly; whether it should 

involve pooled resources within the Fund, or separate resources 

in the Fund or in a Fund affiliate; and whether or not repayment 

provisions should be attached to the asset. The most important 

unresolved issue, however, was that of decision-making. The 

Common Market countries wanted a requirement for a majority of 

85 per cent of votes in the Fund, plus a majority of creditor 

countries. Such requirements would give veto power to the Common 

Market, and were strongly resisted by other countries, including 

the United States. Probably that major issue could not be decided 

at the technical level by the Deputies and Directors, but would 

have to go to the Ministers and Governors.  

Mr. Daane noted that the Deputies would meet again on 

May 18-19, and that a final joint meeting with the IMF Directors 

would be held shortly after mid-June. He thought it was fair to 

say that solutions could be found to the technical issues, and 

that the elements of a plan, if not a full-blown plan itself, 

could be available by the time of the meeting in Rio in September.



Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.  

Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period 

April 4 through April 26, 1967, and a supplemental report cover

ing the period April 27 through May 1, 1967. Copies of both 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

Since the Committee last met, short-term interest 
rates have moved sharply lower, but, despite the 
reduction of the discount rate, long-term rates have 
moved significantly higher. The reasons for these 
disparate developments are not hard to find. Short
term rates have of course been influenced by the 
comfortable money market and by seasonal demands for 
Treasury bills from corporations and public funds as 
well as from net System purchases. Long-term interest 
rates on the other hand have been under sustained 

upward pressure from the heavy weight of corporate 
and municipal demand for capital. In addition there 
has been a sharp turnaround from pessimism to optimism 

in the market's expectations about the future performance 

of the economy, and, more recently, an adjustment for 
the current Treasury refunding. Changed market 

expectations about the economic outlook have also 

led to the belief that not much more in the way of 

ease can be expected from monetary policy. With the 

refunding, market participants have begun to focus 

on the heavy cash needs of the Treasury and of Government 

agencies in the second half of the year. The current 

$12 billion estimated Treasury cash need is generally 

regarded by the market as a minimal estimate. Against 

the backdrop of the 1966 experience these recent and 

prospective economic and financial developments have

5/2/67 -31-



5/2/67

combined to produce growing uneasiness in long-term 
markets. Late last week this heaviness spilled over 
into the intermediate- and short-term market as well.  

As the blue book 1/ states, the outlook for yields 
in the capital markets is quite uncertain. The 
fundamental question is how strong the economy is 
going to get and how soon. Given the recent rise in 
yields--as much as 35 basis points for intermediate 
Government securities and about 20 to 40 basis points 
on long-term corporate and municipal securities--there 
are a number of market participants who feel that the 
pendulum has swung a bit too far and that present 
yields could provide a trading range for some time 
to come. The technical position of the Government 
bond market, where dealers had worked down their 
holdings of coupon issues substantially before the 
refunding announcement, is relatively good, and a 
moderate price rally could be in the cards. The posi
tion of the corporate and municipal market, on the 
other hand, is not so good and little relief seems 
in sight from the demand side until mid-year at least.  
Underwriters are quite disheartened by the state of 
demand and by the rapidity with which inventory profits 
have turned into losses. All of this, of course, is a 
commentary on the recent volatile state of expectations.  

Yield developments may rest heavily on the strength 
of private demands for bank loans. If they are relatively 
weak over the next few weeks--a distinct possibility in 
the light of the volume of long-term funds being raised-
banks might be tempted to stretch out their average 
maturities of municipals and Governments. Bank demand 
for liquidity is still strong, but the rate developments 
of the past few weeks now exact a significant penalty 
for staying short. Looking further ahead, there are 

some who anticipate a slackening of private demand for 
capital in the second half of the year. But there are 
others who see strong private demand continuing, and 
in light of the heavy Government demand, including 
participation certificate sales, a few are going so 
far as to wonder whether August will be early or late 
this year.  

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-32-



5/2/67

As far as short-term rates are concerned, the 
outlook is still for some further downward drift in 
the weeks ahead unless expectations of a booming 
economy and an end to easy money are such as to 
outweigh the normal demand-supply factors. In yes
terday's Treasury bill auction, issuing rates of 
3.77 per cent and 3.91 per cent were set respectively 
for 3- and 6-month bills, 21 and 9 basis points below 
the levels established in the auction preceding the 
last Committee meeting.  

System operations supplied a fairly large volume 
of reserves on a day-to-day basis since the last 
meeting, as the written reports have spelled out. We 
bought some coupon issues early in the period, purchased 
Treasury bills outright on several occasions when the 
over-hanging market supply seemed rather heavy, and 
made temporary reserve injections through repurchase 
agreements. We encountered no real problems in keeping 
the money market comfortable although, as the written 
reports note, there were unusually wide fluctuations in 
free reserves from week to week. The bank credit proxy 
came out about as expected in April, and as the blue 
book notes a sharp slowdown is expected in May. It 
would be helpful in interpreting the proviso clause of 
the directive 1/ if the Committee members would comment 
on the general acceptability of such a slowdown.  

As you know, the books will be open through tomor
row on the Treasury refunding of May maturities and the 
prerefunding of June and August maturities. Initially, 
market participants considered both issues attractively 
priced. Prices of the refunding issues have held up 
fairly well in the generally soggy market atmosphere 
since Friday, although many investors have tended to 
become cautious. There was some recovery in the 
intermediate area of the market yesterday after a weak 
opening, but the market's performance today and tomorrow 
will have an important bearing on the outcome. There 
seems to be a very good interest in the shorter of the 
two options on the part of large commercial banks. Banks 
outside the money centers hold a substantial part of the 
rights issues and may find the 4-3/4 per cent coupon on 
the five-year note attractive, but it is still too early 
for the market to have even a fair idea of what the 

1/ A draft directive submitted by the staff for Committee 
consideration is appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-33-



ultimate exchange will be. Expectations are for a less 
than average interest from holders of August rights, 
but even a modest exchange of about 20 per cent would 
reduce the Treasury's August refunding job by about 
$1 billion and would give some additional debt extension.  
There seems to be little danger that dealers will wind 
up with an overextended position in the new issues.  

The System holds close to $6.4 billion or about 
two-thirds of the maturing May 4-1/4 per cent Treasury 
notes and I would plan, unless the Committee has other 
views, to place $2 billion of that amount in the new 
5-year note, with the remainder going into the 15-month 
note. This would seem a reasonable distribution in the 
light of the very ample short-term holdings in our port
folio and the fact that the average maturity of our 
holdings has been shortening over time.  

The System also holds about $107 million of the 
2-1/2 per cent Treasury bonds maturing June 15, and 
I would plan to place this amount also in the new 
five-year note. In view of the uncertainties of the 
past few days the market has been singularly unwilling 
to estimate the likely size of the two new issues. As 
a wild guess we could end up with about half of the 
longer issue and a somewhat higher percentage of the 
shorter issue. I would not plan to prerefund any of 
our holdings of August maturities.  

By unanimous vote, the open 
market transactions in Government 
securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period April 4 through 
May 1, 1967, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement on economic

conditions:

5/2/67 -34-



One of the editorials in the Washington press 
last weekend was entitled "Spring is for Optimists." 
That is certainly true so far as views on the business 
outlook are concerned. As everyone in this room is 
well aware, there has been a very marked improvement 
in expectations for the economy since the Committee's 
last meeting. The stock market has reacted buoyantly, 
rising in virtually all trading sessions--and on 
substantial volume--over the past three weeks. And 
bond markets have been correspondingly weak, reflecting 
both the change in investor sentiment and the continuing 
heavy volume of new offerings. Most people are now 
looking through the current period of flatness to 
renewed vigorous economic expansion later in the year 
and extending into 1968.  

To be sure, the aggregate business measures cur
rently are not a great deal better than was anticipated 
a month or two ago. The preliminary estimate for 
first-quarter GNP shows a rise of only $5 billion in 
current dollars and no net gain in real terms. And the 
staff projection in the green book,.1/ with which I am 
in general agreement, forecasts a second quarter rise 
of only $8 billion in current dollars and less than 
2 per cent, annual rate, in real terms--well below the 
economy's growth potential.  

Moreover, there may well be some less favorable 
economic news items in coming weeks--perhaps enough 
even to shake the current ebullient sentiment. The 
substantial rise in insured unemployment over the past 
two months, for example, suggests weakness in some labor 
markets; unemployment could rise further, particularly 
in manufacturing, though we have just learned confiden
tially that there was very little rise in the over-all 
unemployment rate in April. Housing starts over the next 
month or two may not be able to keep up with the very 
large increases assumed on seasonal grounds alone. The 
exceptional strength in retail trade indicated in the 
March advance report may have been exaggerated, though 
I should note that the weekly figures through the third 
week of April continued favorable. New car sales, 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

5/2/67 -35-



5/2/67

though improved, are not so strong as the year-to-year 
changes suggest, since the comparison is with a declin
ing trend last spring. With the widely varying timing 
impacts of sales contests, a bad 10-day report or two 
is always possible. And the possibility of disruptive 
strikes and labor difficulties in coming weeks and months 
of collective bargaining is of course very real.  

Nevertheless, it seems to me that the confidence in 
the underlying strength of the economy is well founded.  
Within the aggregates, final demands have been considerably 
stronger--and the reduction in inventory accumulation 
correspondingly larger--than we had anticipated a month 
or two ago. Even if revised figures should reduce the 
dimensions of this shift in the mix of demand, the 
underlying increase in final demand still seems certain 
to remain substantial. Stock-sales ratios are still very 
high, and we think that the inventory adjustment still 
has some distance to go. Further progress has to be 
made in cutting back inventories in those areas where 
they seemed clearly excessive, such as consumer durables 
and industrial materials. But if the strengthening in 
final demand persists, as seems likely, this means that 
needed inventory adjustments will be smaller and can 
probably be accomplished with only moderate further 
output curtailments.  

Another aspect of the underlying strength of the 
economy is the failure of recessionary forces to spread 
and intensify. Thus, the declines to date in employment 
and hours have been confined mainly to the more volatile 

manufacturing sector, which in itself has been shrinking 

secularly relative to the total economy. Aggregate per

sonal incomes have continued to show good--though somewhat 
diminished--gains, which supports the expectation of 

further expansion in consumption outlays. The counterpart 
of a larger rise in personal incomes than in GNP, of course, 

must be a shrinkage in net business incomes and/or an 

increased Governmental deficit. Corporate profits are 

down, but judging from our weighted compilation of first

quarter earnings reports, the year-to-year decline was 

surprisingly small--5 per cent or a little more. The 

more important adjustment, quantitatively, was an apparent 

sharp increase in the Federal deficit (on a national 
income basis), which reflected both a rise in expenditures

-36-



5/2/67

and an indicated shortfall in tax accruals. This shift 
has done much to blunt what otherwise might have been 
a potentially serious inventory recession.  

A third factor of strength in the economy is that 
several of the major areas of spending that are less 
dependent on current income flow--construction, business 
equipment, and military outlays--look somewhat stronger 
than seemed probable a month or two ago. The most 
recent McGraw-Hill survey of business capital spending 
plans showed no tendency toward downward revision 
compared with earlier surveys; with improved business 
confidence and greater credit availability, and assuming 
reinstatement of the investment tax credit as proposed, 
it now seems to me quite possible that there will be 
little or no decline in capital spending as the year 
progresses. In the construction area, where credit 
availability is also very important, a substantial 
expansion looks increasingly likely. Not only have 
savings flows to the specialized mortgage lending 

institutions been larger than expected, but sizable 
amounts of Federal funds impounded earlier have been 
released for public works projects. Finally, defense 
expenditures appear to be running moderately above the 
January Budget projections, and the recent news seems 
increasingly to point toward further near-term escala
tion of the military effort in Vietnam.  

On the whole, therefore, there are good grounds 
supporting the expectation of significant strengthening 
in the economy. Our initial third-quarter projection 

calls for a sizable increase in GNP, and the implication 

is that there will be a still bigger increase when the 

inventory adjustment is largely completed--probably by 

the fourth quarter.  
Meanwhile, we have been enjoying some welcome 

relief on the price front; substantial recent declines 

in agricultural and sensitive industrial materials 

prices, and a leveling off in industrial product prices, 

have pushed average wholesale prices down and moderated 

the rise in the consumer price index. But inflationary 

pressures may be building for the future. Unit labor 

costs in manufacturing have increased markedly--4-1/2 

per cent since last summer--as productivity has ceased 

to grow with the leveling off and decline in output, 

and wages have continued to rise rapidly. Given this 

development, the associated squeeze on profit margins,

-37-



5/2/67

and the larger increases in wage rates anticipated from 
labor contract negotiations, it seems clear that the 
pressures will be intensifying for price increases 
whenever market conditions permit. Thus, resumption 
of rapid economic expansion could be followed rather 
quickly by renewed inflationary problems.  

Under these circumstances, I would not advise the 
Committee to push toward further monetary ease. Such 
a course would seem to offer little benefit in terms 
of short-run stimulation for the still lagging economy, 
and could risk contributing to a possible overheating 
later on. But neither do I feel that excessively rapid 
expansion is sufficiently certain, or the development 
of possible overheating sufficiently near, to warrant 
any move toward increased restraint as of now. There
fore, my policy recommendation would be for "even keel" 
in terms of market rates, flows, and conditions, even 
in the absence of the Treasury financing constraint.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Treasury financings, and the even-keel constraints 
they impose, often come at awkward times for the 
implementation of monetary policy. This is not the 
case today. Indeed, we should be grateful for the 
breather the current financing affords, for we need the 
opportunity to sit back a bit and assess how the 
economy has responded to what we've done since last 
fall, and what this implies for the course of policy 
once even-keel constraints are lifted.  

I certainly concur with Mr. Partee that economic 
prospects for the balance of the year have brightened 
considerably. We're not entirely out of the woods yet, 
and the near-term situation will continue to bear some 
marks of the recent economic slowdown. But the rapidity 
of the inventory adjustment and the strengthening in 
private final sales, along with the apparent likelihood 
of continued large defense spending, lend credence to 
projections of more rapid economic growth this summer 
and further acceleration in the fall. Given these 
improved economic prospects, the critical question to 
ponder between today and the end of even-keel restrictions 
is whether we've done all the economy requires or, indeed,

-38-



5/2/67

whether it would be appropriate soon to begin backing-off 
from aggressive easing.  

One test is whether we've restored the liquidity 
wrung out of the economy during 1966. Concepts and 
measures of liquidity are slippery; the traditional loan
deposit ratio cited as a measure of banking liquidity, 
for example, fails to capture significant shifts in the 
forms in which banks may decide to hold liquidity.  
According to this traditional measure, banks have improved 

their liquidity positions somewhat since December, but are 

still less liquid than before the beginning of monetary 
restraint, particularly so at New York and Chicago banks.  

It is more revealing, however, to examine each side 
of the banking balance sheet separately. Thus, we estimate 
that bank holdings of short- and intermediate-term securities 
have rebounded substantially as a percentage of total earning 
assets. For all banks combined, this ratio has been restored 

to mid-1965 levels, and at New York City banks it is almost 
back to these levels.  

On the liability side of bank balance sheets, there 

has been some restructuring of the maturity profile of time 

deposits. Large negotiable CD's came back strongly after 

monetary easing developed; between November and early March, 
banks restored the volume outstanding to the peak levels of 
1966. And average maturity of CD's, which had worked down 

significantly over the summer of 1966 as banks fought to 
retain CD funds, jumped early this year to pre-restraint 

levels. But since the early bulge, the volume of CD's has 

drifted up further only slowly, while average maturities 

have stayed about at January levels. Rather than continue 

to seek large CD money aggressively, banks more recently 

have been content to enjoy an accelerated rise in consumer 

type CD's. They have reduced offering rates on large CD's 
sharply in all maturities, but have made only scattered 

efforts to reduce the rates paid for consumer funds, which 

proved less volatile last year than corporate money. As a 

result, time deposits other than large CD's now bulk larger 

among bank liabilities. Thus, in addition to increasing 

the liquidity of their portfolios, banks have restored some 

liquidity to the deposit side of the balance sheet, and 

over-all, appear more liquid than a comparison of loan

deposit ratios alone would suggest.

-39-



5/2/67

The green book details the improvement in liquidity 
of nonbank institutions, particularly S&L's, and I won't 
dwell on it here other than to note that S&L's also have 
improved the liquidity of both sides of their balance 
sheets, by increasing their holdings of liquid assets 
and also by rebuilding their credit lines at the Home 
Loan Bank System.  

Liquidity developments among nonfinancial sectors 
are more difficult to trace, particularly because the 
information available is scattered and late. Preliminary 
Flow-of-Funds estimates for the first quarter indicate a 
marked shift in consumer portfolio behavior, back to saving 
through intermediaries instead of direct acquisition of 
market securities, while consumer borrowing for both short
term credit and mortgage money remained low.  

Corporations, too, appear to have restored liquid 
asset holdings, early in the year in CD's but more recently 
in open market paper, The most important improvement in 
corporate liquidity, however, has been the stretch-out of 
debt maturities; growth in long-term security debt has 
been much larger than the increase in indebtedness to banks.  
To date, there is little evidence that corporations have 
actually funded much shorter-term bank debt--the proceeds 
of recent capital market financing appeared to have been 
used in large measure to meet heavy April tax payments--but 
the continuing large volume of long-term financing in the 
face of reduced financing requirements suggests that bank 
loan repayment may accelerate in the months ahead.  

While monetary policy thus appears to have encouraged 
a substantial rebuilding of liquidity among the major 
lending and spending sectors of the economy, it hasn't 
been quite so successful in restoring pre-1966 interest 
rate levels, at least not at the long end of the market.  
Short rates are down almost 2 percentage points from 
last fall's peak, and are back to mid-1965 levels. However, 
long rates--particularly on private debt--are still substan
tially above pre-restraint levels.  

Smaller cyclical movement in long than in short rates 
is to be expected, but it is disturbing that the recent 
declines still leave long rates historically high. Such 
cyclical ratcheting in the cost of capital does not bode 
well for maintenance of longer-term growth. Moreover, the 
financial system now seems poised to respond to the first 
evidence of a shift in policy by pushing up long rates 
even further. Memories of 1966 are still fresh; both

-40-



5/2/67

corporate investors and banks are wary of an imminent 
return to restraint, and particularly wary of playing 
the CD game. Banks are not bidding aggressively for 
short-term funds, nor are they channeling funds to 
long-term markets. Rather, they are looking principally 
to more stable savings flows and investing primarily in 
short- and intermediate-term assets. Borrowers, meanwhile, 
are anxious to fund short-term liabilities into long-term 
debts, and are apparently more interested in holding 
short-term market securities than bank deposits.  

Perhaps this is the price of success for having--in 
rapid order and brief compass of time--cut short an 
inflation and then aborted a recession. Perhaps, also, 
it's a price we have to pay for having used ceiling rates 
so effectively as a tool of monetary restraint. Markets 
learn from painful experience, and the next time around 
we may have to fight on different battlegrounds and with 
different tactics.  

But it's not yet the time to start this fight.  
Despite the improved economic outlook, it would seem 
premature now to enhance or justify market fears of a 
return to restraint. The recovery in housing is still 
too fragile to permit a diversion of funds away from 
intermediaries. And it's much too early to abandon hope 
of help from fiscal restraint. Our projections indicate 
some subsidence in bank credit demands this month, and 
the reserves to meet these reduced demands should be 

provided generously.  

But it would not seem advisable, either, to flood 
the banks with reserves in an attempt to bring down long 
rates, or to concentrate reserve injections on pulling 
long rates down. For one, it's not likely that we could 
accomplish much, given the buoyancy of economic expecta
tions. Nor is it at all clear that we want to stimulate 
a faster rate of investment than is now projected for 
six or nine months hence. Therefore, like Mr. Partee, 
I come out today for even-keeling, not only because of 
the Treasury financing, but also because it seems appro
priate to the economic situation and prospects.  

Mr. Solomon then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments and related matters: 

There is little to add this morning to the green 
book analysis of balance of payments developments. The 

payments balance was in substantial deficit in the first

-41-



5/2/67

quarter, and this has apparently continued in April.  
We are not yet in a position fully to explain the 
over-all first quarter outcome. The components we 
do know about--merchandise trade and bank loans 
abroad--improved in the first quarter. What we 
don't know yet is what went the other way.  

I thought the Committee might find it useful to 
have some commentary today about the hullabaloo over 
U.S. gold policy that was stimulated by the statements 
last month from the Chase Manhattan Bank and Mr. Rudolph 
Peterson of the Bank of America. Mr. Coombs has reported 
on the market effects of those statements.  

As you know, an article in Chase Manhattan's 
bi-monthly bulletin, "Business in Brief," published at 
the beginning of April, suggested that the United States 
should decide--and make the decision known now--that in 
the event of a gold crisis this country would terminate 
its practice of selling gold freely to foreign central 

banks. Just two days after the first press reports of 
the Chase Manhattan article, Rudolph Peterson made a 
similar proposal regarding the action to be taken by 

this country if a gold drain of crisis proportions were 

to develop. Many people immediately assumed a connection 

between the two statements and Secretary Fowler's Pebble 

Beach speech of mid-March. You will remember that that 
speech had hinted that unless other countries accept a 

larger share of the task of adjusting payments imbalances, 
the United States may be forced to take undesirable 

actions, of an unspecified nature.  
What were the two bank statements saying to the 

world? They were saying that if the United States were 

to stop selling gold, foreign central banks would be 

faced with a "disagreeable choice." Countries in surplus, 
which almost invariably realize those surpluses in the 

form of acquisitions of dollars through their exchange 

markets, would have the choice of holding these additional 

dollars or, if they refuse to acquire and hold them, 

seeing their exchange rates appreciate in relation to the 

dollar--that is, seeing the dollar depreciate in relation 

to their currencies. In other words, foreign countries 

would either have to accept dollars freely or allow their 

competitive positions to deteriorate in relation to the 

United States.

-42-



5/2/67

Although both the Chase and the Peterson statements 
proposed that such a cessation of gold sales would be 
appropriate only in the event of a crisis, what seems to 
have motivated these statements is a deep concern that 
the United States will attempt to correct its balance of 
payments problem by strengthening and extending restraints 
on private capital outflows. This concern is expressed 
quite explicitly in both statements. The two banks seem 
to be saying that the United States should refrain from 
tightening restraints on private capital outflows. If 
this means a continued U.S. deficit, if European surplus 
countries do not take measures to reduce their surpluses, 
and if they continue to convert their surpluses into gold, 
we should in due course stop selling gold and confront 
them with the disagreeable choice.  

This proposition raises a number of questions. The 
first question is, how would foreign countries react to 

a cessation of U.S. gold sales? The "either-or" choice 

envisaged by the Chase-Peterson statements is, in my view, 
a great oversimplification. It seems highly unlikely that 
European countries would simply accumulate dollars freely 
if they did not wish to see their currencies appreciate 

in relation to the dollar. Their desire to avoid an 

appreciation of their currencies stems from a wish to 

protect their trade balances--to avoid seeing their exports 

suffer or their imports increase markedly. But, insofar 

as capital transactions are concerned, they would have no 

wish to prevent an appreciation of their currencies and 

a depreciation of the dollar. Thus, European governments 

would very likely place restrictions on purchases of 

dollars that come to them as a result of capital inflows.  

In other words, they would establish at least two categories 

of dollars and in this way would restrict the inflow of 

U.S. capital. It is ironical that while the Chase-Peterson 

prescription is designed to prevent U.S. Government restric

tions on capital outflows, it would result in European 

restrictions on these same flows. Meanwhile, the interna

tional monetary system would have been thrown into turmoil, 

with a highly unpredictable outcome. It seems likely that 

the world might very well end up dividing itself into 

currency blocs reminiscent of the 1930's.  

We may also ask what effect this hullabaloo over gold 

has had. Has it had any beneficial effects? What harm 

does it do?

-43-



5/2/67

Perhaps one useful result is that the world is 
being reminded that an increase in the official price of 
gold is not an inevitable outcome of an international 
monetary crisis. Other options are available to the 
United States, and we are not completely at the mercy 
of the gold hoarders. While this is not news to 
responsible foreign officials, it may not have been 
clear to private gold buyers.  

A second useful aspect of this affair is that it 
may serve to emphasize that the restoration of balance 
of payments equilibrium requires action by surplus 
countries too.  

Now, I turn to the harmful effects of these 
statements. First, the United States is a bank to 
the rest of the world and it is unwise for a bank to 
threaten to close its doors unless it wants to go out 
of business. If a bank threatens to close its doors, 
and if the threat is taken seriously, the bank must 
expect depositors to withdraw in anticipation of such 
a closing. In our case, this means anticipatory gold 
purchases.  

The major disadvantage of the Chase-Peterson thesis 
lies in the impression it gives of U.S. attitudes. In 
its rawest form, this thesis proclaims that the rest of 
the world is on a dollar standard and it has to accept 
that fact. The rest of the world does indeed use the 
dollar as a transaction currency and as a reserve 
currency. What the rest of the world, and Europe in 
particular, is not prepared to accept is the idea that 
this gives the United States full freedom to spend and 
invest abroad and, in the process to create foreign 
dollar reserves in whatever amounts its balance of 
payments happens to provide. One need not be a defender 
of short-sighted European policies to believe that the 
threatening nature of the two statements is bound to be 
distasteful to other countries and they are bound to 
react adversely.  

If the gold hullabaloo had sharpened awareness of 
the need for creating an effective new reserve asset as 
a supplement to gold, that would have been helpful. But 
instead of focusing on the gold shortage, the statements 
appeared to wish to perpetuate the U.S. balance of payments 
deficit and thereby hardly helped to further the international 
liquidity negotiations.  

I leave to the Committee a weighing of these advantages 
and disadvantages of the gold hullabaloo.

-44-



5/2/67 -45

Mr. Treiber asked whether Mr. Coombs had had any direct 

contacts with foreign central bankers regarding the subject 

Mr. Solomon had discussed.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he had had such contacts with a 

few central bankers, and had found them very much upset. Their 

concern was not allayed by the subsequent Treasury statement 

indicating that U.S. gold policy had not changed.  

Mr. Coombs added that he doubted that the course Chase 

Manhattan had proposed was an alternative to an increase in the 

price of gold, as Mr. Solomon had suggested. If the United 

States were to stop selling gold the price on the London market 

would rise sharply, and the European central banks undoubtedly 

would immediately enter into a defensive arrangement, establishing 

a new official price for transactions among themselves. In due 

course the U.S. would have to settle deficits in its payments 

to those countries by sales of gold, and it presumably would 

accept the price they had established. That was the course of 

events in the 1930's. Accordingly, he thought that a cessation 

of gold sales by the U.S. would lead directly to an increase in 

the price of gold.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement:



5/2/67

In the period since the last meeting of the Committee, 
economic indicators have strengthened significantly, and 
business sentiment has turned from apprehension to confi
dence. Retail sales have risen sharply according to 
preliminary estimates, and a good start has been made 
toward reduction of the inventory overhang. Housing 
indicators have continued to be quite strong, and capital 
spending appears to be on a high, and probably rising, 
plateau. Defense spending now seems likely to exceed 
earlier projections by a wide margin. The fiscal stimulus 
in the second half of 1967 appears to be headed for a 
record level, and cost-push pressures are apparent. The 
tentative nature of some of the figures and the fact that 
the figures cover only a short period counsel caution.  
But it does seem probable that there will be renewed 
economic growth at a fast and potentially inflationary 
rate as the year progresses.  

The international balance of payments situation is 
highly unfavorable. The position of the dollar in the 
exchange markets is weaker, and the London gold market 
is more active at higher prices.  

In the first quarter of 1967 the liquidity deficit, 
before adjustment for special transactions, was almost 
$5 billion on a seasonally adjusted annual rate. But a 
number of special transactions arranged by the Treasury 
have reduced the deficit to about a $2 billion rate.  
Bank-reported capital movements and the merchandise 
account improved, but there was deterioration with 
respect to U.S. resident transactions involving both 
new and outstanding foreign securities. There are 
indications that U.S. corporations may be hoarding 
balances abroad in anticipation of tighter investment 
controls. And military expenditures abroad appear to be 
increasing.  

There have been substantial shifts of dollars from 
foreign private holders to official holders, and a 
reduction in our monetary reserves. In the first quarter 
the official reserve transactions deficit appears to have 
risen to about $6-1/2 billion on a seasonally adjusted 
annual rate compared with $1 billion in the fourth quarter 
of 1966, and a surplus for the year 1966.  

Bank credit, money supply, and related liquidity 
indicators have been very strong in 1967, reflecting the 
expansive Federal Reserve policy and the efforts of most 
sectors of the economy to bolster their liquidity positions.

-46-



A longer perspective including the second half of 1966 
seems more appropriate. On this basis the rates of bank 
credit expansion and nonbank liquid asset growth appear 
more moderate and are somewhat below the growth rates 
of the 1961-64 period. While preliminary projections 
indicate little growth in bank credit in May, such a 
development should not be disturbing in view of the 
sizable expansion over the last nine or ten months and 
the large corporate tax payments due in June which should 
stimulate bank credit growth at that time. Nor should it 
be disturbing if there is a somewhat greater expansion in 
May than now appears indicated.  

It seems to us that economic and financial developments 
counsel maintenance of about the prevailing conditions in 
the money market. This conclusion is reinforced by the 
need for an even keel in the light of the Treasury's current 
financing operation, which should last throughout most of 
the period until our next meeting.  

The latter part of the second sentence of the draft 
directive contains the words "and industrial output reduced 
moderately." In view of the small increase in the industrial 
production index reported for March, and the inability to 
make a precise estimate at this time of industrial production 
in April, it seems to me that it would be preferable to 
replace those words with the words "and apparently little 
change in industrial production." With this modest change, 
I think the draft is satisfactory.  

The following comments are offered in response to the 
Secretary's telegram of last week.1/ 

The volume of small consumer-type certificates of 
deposit has continued to grow rapidly in the Second Federal 
Reserve District, and the banks are finding the money they 
obtain this way to be very expensive. Three New York City 
banks have recently reduced their rates on consumer CD's: 
two from 5 per cent to 4-3/4 per cent, and one from 5 per 
cent to 4.8 per cent. Some banks have lessened the 

attractiveness of their certificates by shortening available 

1/ On April 27 Mr. Holland had sent the following telegram to 
Reserve Bank Presidents: "Board members indicate they would 
appreciate any comments the Presidents might make at the FOMC 
meeting May 2 concerning recent and prospective changes in rates 
on consumer CD's and savings deposits within their respective 
Districts."

5/2/67 -47-



5/2/67

maturities, reducing maximum amounts, and restricting 
eligible purchasers. A number of banks have cut down 
their advertising efforts. It is likely that other 
banks will reduce their rates before long. The rates 
could easily go below 4-3/4 per cent if the mutual 
savings banks cut their rates on savings deposits.  

The mutual savings banks have generally been 
paying 5 per cent on savings deposits since mid-1966 
when rates were generally increased by 1/2 of a 
percentage point. Savings bankers appear eager to 
lower their rates but are worried about deposit losses 
should the move to lower rates not be universal. To 
date only one savings bank, a small one in upstate 
New York, has reduced its rate from 5 per cent to 
4-1/2 per cent, effective May 1. Some savings banks 
seem to be looking to the regulatory agencies to impose 
a lower maximum rate. Others are anxious to avoid 
such a development. In any event, it seems likely that 
the savings banks will wait as long as they can prior 
to midyear before taking action. If there is no change 
in the regulatory ceiling, it is possible, but by no 
means certain, that one of the large savings banks 
will announce a cut to 4-1/2 per cent beginning July 1.  
Presumably other savings banks will follow the leader 
with great relief.  

Mr. Francis remarked that in response to Mr. Holland's 

telegram fifteen bankers scattered throughout the St. Louis 

District had been contacted with respect to recent and prospec

tive changes in rates on consumer CD's and savings deposits.  

Those bankers, in turn, were able to report on recent activities 

of at least seventy other banks in their immediate areas. Generally, 

rates had not been changed in the past two or three months, and 

most bankers expected no change in the next month or two.  

Rates on savings deposits were generally in the 3 to 4 

per cent range, Mr. Francis said. No changes in those rates had

-48-



5/2/67 -49

occurred in the past two or three months, and none were con

templated for the near future. Banks in Memphis began compounding 

savings accounts daily about a month ago, increasing somewhat the 

effective rate. Interest rates on consumer CD's were generally 

in the 4 to 5 per cent range. About 90 per cent of the banks had 

not changed rates recently, and none of those banks said that it 

was expecting to change rates in the near future. A few banks 

which paid relatively high rates on small CD's stated that they 

had recently reduced their advertising for them. At least six 

suburban banks in the St. Louis metropolitan area reduced their 

rates on small CD's from 5 per cent to either 4-3/4 per cent or 

4-1/2 per cent recently. Also, several rural banks in northern 

Missouri had reduced rates on CD's from 5 per cent to 4-1/2 per 

cent.  

Mr. Francis commented that the pause in spending and pro

duction last fall and winter was of moderate proportions and was 

probably a healthy development in view of the inflationary 

pressures and other excesses of last year. The pause now showed 

signs of ending. Businessmen in the Eighth District with whom 

he had talked recently were generally optimistic about the sales 

outlook for their products. The most recent national data--though 

they had to be used with caution--showed gains in retail sales, 

personal incomes, industrial production, and construction, and an



5/2/67 -50

improvement in the inventory situation. The large corporate and 

municipal financing of the past two months indicated that invest

ment spending was likely to rise. Such spending was consistent 

with management's desire to offset increasing labor costs by 

accelerating the introduction of labor saving devices. The staff's 

projections of total spending, contained in the green book, had 

been revised upward, and the Administration remained firm in the 

belief that a tax increase would be needed to avoid excessive 

demands for goods and services later this year. Economic activity 

remained near capacity. The weakening seemed to have been halted 

and might already have been reversed.  

Mr. Francis thought the marked shift in monetary develop

ments from contraction last summer and fall to rapid expansion in 

the early months of this year had probably been a major factor in 

the reversal of economic trends. Since monetary developments were 

generally believed to have their chief impact on spending after 

some time lag, significant growth of total demand might reasonably 

be expected over the next few months as a result of recent monetary 

expansion.  

Despite the hesitation of recent months in total demand, 

Mr. Francis remarked, industrial prices continued under pressure 

from rising unit labor costs. A rapid increase in spending, 

combined with the cost-push pressures that were expected as major



5/2/67 -51

labor contracts were settled, could quickly cause an acceleration 

of inflation.  

Although short-term interest rates had declined in recent 

months, Mr. Francis continued, long-term rates remained relatively 

high, and some believed they were a restraining force on business 

decisions. The reverse reasoning might be nearer the truth-

namely, that the strength in business was bolstering rates.  

Relatively high rates in the face of rapid expansion of bank 

reserves, bank credit, and money generally indicated that credit 

demands were vigorous. Net borrowing by the Federal Government 

had been a strong upward force on rates, but private demands for 

credit had also been sizable.  

The yield curve had shifted markedly as short-term rates 

had declined and long-term rates had stabilized or increased, 

Mr. Francis observed. There were at least two explanations of 

why such a yield curve shift might indicate forthcoming strength 

in the economy. First, a large volume of long-term financing 

frequently preceded a rise in investment, raising long-term rates 

and lowering short-term rates as funds were temporarily invested.  

Secondly, a rise in long-term rates relative to short rates 

indicated that both lenders and borrowers expected a general rate 

increase. That was probably because of expected increased economic 

activity and demands for credit.



5/2/67 -52

As to policy for the next several months, Mr. Francis 

preferred to see a more moderate rate of expansion of bank 

reserves, bank credit, and money than had been achieved over 

the past three months. The major thrust of actions taken now 

would probably not strike until late summer or early fall, given 

the usual lags of effect. Continuing the recent rapid monetary 

expansion might add to an inflation that had not yet been brought 

fully under control. On the other hand, contracting the monetary 

aggregates might foster recession.  

Mr. Francis believed that for the next few weeks continua

tion of current money market conditions was probably the Committee's 

best proximate objective and might be desirable during the Treasury's 

refunding. However, as insurance against undesired movements in 

proximate measures of monetary action between meetings, he 

suggested that a double-edged proviso clause be used in the 

Committee's instructions to the Desk. For example, if money rose 

at a faster than 10 per cent annual rate from April to May, the 

money market should be permitted to tighten; if money did not 

expand at as much as a 6 per cent rate, market conditions should 

be eased. Those relatively high rates were in recognition of an 

expected more-than-seasonal decline in Government demand deposits, 

as pointed out in the blue book, and should be consistent with a 

growth of money at about a 3 per cent rate over a three-month



5/2/67 -53

period. Money seemed preferable to bank credit in the proviso 

clause because much of bank credit was intermediated funds.  

However, if the Committee decided to use bank credit expansion 

as an objective, a range of 1 to 4 per cent rate as projected in 

the blue book might be appropriate from April to May. That range 

appeared consistent with a growth in bank credit at a 7 to 10 per 

cent rate over a three-month period.  

Mr. Kimbrel reported that credit availability was improv

ing at both banks and nonbanking financial institutions in the 

Sixth District. District banks, like banks elsewhere, had been 

enjoying substantial gains in deposits, especially in time deposits 

of the nonpassbook variety. In mid-April, total time deposits 

were up 25 per cent at an annual rate from the first of the year.  

Flows into the savings and loan associations had been substantial.  

Florida associations saw an all-time record net savings inflow 

during the first quarter. A spot check made last week of the 

principal farm lenders also revealed a larger supply of loanable 

funds than a year ago.  

Although the District's banks had used the inflow of funds 

chiefly to build up their liquidity, Mr. Kimbrel continued, recently 

a greater share had been going into loans. In March, loans at the 

District's member banks rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate 

of 8.4 per cent. In the four-week period ending April 19, business



5/2/67 -54

loans at the District's large banks apparently rose more than 

seasonally, and gains were well distributed among most types of 

industrial borrowers. Although the demand for mortgages apparently 

was not strong, mortgage lenders were making more loans, and 

construction loans at the large banks were up in April. Extensions 

of consumer credit rose sharply in March.  

An easing of rates was slowly developing, Mr. Kimbrel 

noted. Most District banks, after the lowering of the prime rate 

by the money market banks, went along with the reduction in their 

prime rates. In Atlanta, savings and loan associations were 

making mortgage loans at 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 per cent, with more being 

made at 6-L/2 per cent than a few months ago. Mortgage bankers 

were discounting 6 per cent FHA's between 1-1/2 to 2 points with 

a few prime loans at 1 per cent, compared with discounts of 7 

points not so long ago.  

Mr. Kimbrel said that District commercial bankers were 

increasingly concerned about the rates they were paying on their 

time certificates, especially those that had issued a large 

volume with the guaranteed feature. Right now, however, reductions 

seemed to be more in the state of wishful thinking than in actuality, 

presumably because of a fear of a run-off to competitive savings 

institutions. There had been isolated reductions such as that in 

one Florida city where the rate on one-year certificates of deposit



5/2/67 -55

was cut from 5 to 4-1/2 per cent. In Birmingham one large bank 

cut its rate on CD's of over a year to 4-3/4 per cent, while 

another withdrew its 5 per cent CD and now offered only a 5-year 

4-1/2 per cent savings certificate. In other areas of the 

District some banks were de-emphasizing advertising for small 

CD's.  

Mr. Kimbrel observed that the quicker lending activity 

seemed to be paralleled by a little more vigor in the District 

economy generally. Retail sales had picked up in March, and 

there was a sharp upsurge in residential construction contract 

awards. However, although total nonfarm employment expanded in 

March, there were further declines in manufacturing employment 

and the average length of the workweek. Nevertheless, the 

unemployment rate continued at 3.5 per cent.  

Perhaps more slowly than one might like, but rather 

surely, Mr. Kimbrel said, the easier policy the System had been 

following seemed to be taking effect, judging from the somewhat 

limited observation of what was happening in the Sixth District.  

A lack of time rather than any stringency in reserve availability 

seemed to be the limiting factor. Much the same developments 

seemed to be occurring throughout the country. Consequently, he 

believed it would be on the side of prudence to wait a little 

before making a decision toward increasing reserve availability



5/2/67 -56

even further. On the other hand, the Committee should not allow 

conditions to tighten merely because it had observed some improve

ment. As a matter of fact, the System might be limited as to 

what it could do by the Treasury refunding program.  

Mr. Bopp reported that a telephone survey of 17 Third 

District bankers revealed virtually no changes in rates on consumer 

time and savings deposits in the recent past. Furthermore, there 

was little or no prospect for any changes in the near future. As 

one banker put it, the situation might turn around so fast that a 

banker might regret lowering rates a small fraction at the present 

time. Philadelphia banks had been the only group to lower consumer 

CD rates in the recent past, roughly one month ago. Still, their 

rates were at the upper end of the structure in the Third District.  

No prospect for change in the near future appeared.  

More noticeable had been a de-emphasis in promoting consumer 

CD's, Mr. Bopp said. Those that had promoted such CD's rather 

aggressively in the past noted a marked slowdown in external promotion 

at the present time. About half the bankers surveyed indicated that 

CD's continued to grow at past rates; another half noted a leveling 

off. Perhaps significantly, those who had slowed down promotion 

and those who did not advertise had not experienced any more leveling 

off than those who continued to promote such certificates actively.  

It appeared, as he had already noted, that uncertainty over interest



5/2/67 -57

rates in the near future was responsible for the hesitation to 

drop rates from their peak levels.  

Mr. Bopp commented that it was tempting to seize on the 

rash of relatively good news as a sign that the economic adjustment 

was already over. On the other hand, there was danger in dismissing 

it too easily on the ground that one swallow did not make a summer.  

His interpretation of national indicators was that something 

different was happening. He had seen more than one swallow. Surveys 

at the local level confirmed that. But neither national nor local 

developments suggested that the Committee's concern about the state 

of the domestic economy should in any way be relaxed. The Committee 

could feel more confident that a serious recession did not lie ahead, 

but the pace of expansion seemed likely to be rather slow.  

Retailers in the Philadelphia area expected no significant 

improvement in sales in the next couple of months, Mr. Bopp said, 

but they looked for a pickup later in the year. Automobile dealers 

seemed cautiously optimistic. So far in the second quarter, sales 

apparently were experiencing a normal seasonal upturn. He was 

unable to detect concern about the fact that car inventories were 

at a high level. A survey of housing and mortgage conditions con

firmed the finding of over a month ago that housing was picking up 

slowly. Although traffic through sample houses was heavier, there 

was little evidence of brisk sales activity. Potential buyers were



5/2/67 -58

deterred by a shortage of listings, higher prices of houses, and-

despite significant change in recent months--persistently rather 

tight mortgage terms.  

Having restored their liquidity, Mr. Bopp continued, lenders 

were now gearing up to extend credit. High rates for savings 

prevented them from cutting rates on mortgages. Although a few banks 

in large cities had cut their rates on consumer CD's and had 

reduced advertising for savings, their CD rates remained generally 

high and bankers expected them to continue high. There were some 

elements of a vicious circle here. Demand for houses was picking 

up, but until there was an increased volume of new houses available, 

many families would hold off from selling; they now had no place to 

move. Demand for mortgage credit was heavier, but until institutions 

could cut their savings rates, they were unlikely to cut their 

mortgage rates. Time would solve both of those problems, but time 

would delay the favorable impact on the economy.  

Probably the most encouraging development of all, Mr. Bopp 

said, was that employment had not been affected more drastically 

by the adjustment in production. If, as the staff suggested in the 

green book, the unemployment rate rose in the next several months 

to 4 per cent or above, the more optimistic observers might change 

their tunes. But to the extent that the increase came about 

because new entrants to the labor force were unable to find jobs,



5/2/67 -59

rather than because of layoffs, the real impact on psychology, 

incomes, and spending might not be so great.  

So far as the real part of the economy was concerned, there

fore, evidence suggested to Mr. Bopp that the "even keel" posture 

required by Treasury operations would be appropriate. His only 

concern was for the possible movement of interest rates, given the 

expected continued heavy borrowing in capital markets. He would 

be inclined to focus a no-change policy primarily on rates, with a 

particularly sharp eye on longer-term rates. If it was necessary 

to increase free reserves to the upper end of the range projected 

by the staff in order to hold rates where they were, he would urge 

that that be done.  

Mr. Hickman felt that it was more difficult than usual at 

this time to make a correct policy decision, even with the best 

information available in the green book and in documents prepared 

by his staff. Almost all of the information on key sectors of 

the economy seemed woefully incomplete, inaccurate, or untimely.  

The GNP data for the first quarter would evidently be subject to 

considerable revision, and there was almost no information beyond 

March. Moreover, February-March changes were suspect because of 

special factors such as weather, labor stoppages, and the Easter 

holiday. He was convinced that the Federal Government simply did 

not spend enough money to obtain appropriate informational guides 

for policymaking.



5/2/67 -60

Serious structural imbalances apparently remained in the 

economy, Mr. Hickman continued, although the danger of a cumulative 

decline had perhaps been eliminated, if one could take the data 

seriously. The ratio of inventories to sales was apparently still 

rising, and order backlogs were declining. The inventory adjustment 

was probably not over, although it would not be known what had 

happened in that area for many weeks.  

InEormation available for April indicated that the rate of 

insured unemployment was unchanged in the nation and in the Fourth 

District in the four weeks through April 22, Mr. Hickman said. In 

the District, only one major market area had a rate of insured 

unemployment below a year earlier, with rates in many areas con

siderably higher, due mainly to layoffs in autos and steel. Steel 

output declined generally in April, and to a greater extent in the 

Fourth District than in the nation. Currently, expectations were 

that steel output would rise slightly in May, on a seasonally 

adjusted basis, but would remain below the first-quarter level.  

Auto sales had strengthened recently, but preliminary estimates 

indicated that, even with stepped-up schedules, production 

(seasonally adjusted) would decline in May.  

In view of the major Treasury refunding now under way, 

Mr. Hickman observed, the Committee had no choice but to maintain 

an "even keel" policy over the next few weeks, and to foster a



5/2/67 -61

receptive tone in the market. Nevertheless, he would like to see 

the Committee do what it could to hold long-term bond yields at or 

below present levels so as to encourage plant and equipment spending, 

and promote a good flow of funds through the mortgage market. That 

called for at least as much monetary ease as had prevailed since 

the Committee's last meeting, with the major reserve and credit 

measures rising at about the same pace as in April.  

Mr. Hickman reported that an informal survey of savings 

deposits at 21 banks in the Fourth District revealed that ten banks 

had lowered interest rates on consumer-type CD's between 1/4 and 

1/2 per cent since the beginning of the year, with most of the 

reductions occurring in April. Of the 11 banks that had not changed 

rates, seven had never paid more than 4-1/2 per cent, and four were 

still offering 5 per cent--although three of the latter group were 

considering a reduction. All banks were paying the maximum 4 per 

cent rate on passbook savings except one, and no bank expected to 

reduce rates in the near term. Several banks indicated a shortening 

of maximum maturities, greater selectivity in offering CD's to other 

than established customers, and reduced advertising efforts to 

attract new consumer-type CD's.  

Mr. Sherrill said that he would not make a statement today.  

Mr. Brimmer remarked that he was finding the Reserve Bank 

Presidents' reports regarding rates on time deposits in their



5/2/67 -62

respective Districts to be highly interesting. The question of time 

deposit rates was likely to be arising frequently over coming months, 

and he hoped that the System would be able to resist pressures to 

reduce the Regulation Q ceilings in order to lower those rates. He 

would prefer to avoid frequent changes in the ceiling rates; for the 

present it would be desirable to wait to see what banks would do on 

their own.  

With respect to open market policy, Mr. Brimmer continued, 

he was concerned about the level of long-term interest rates. The 

Committee might be moving toward restraint later this year, and it 

would be better not to enter a period of restraint with the level 

and structure of rates that now existed. The current Treasury 

financing would, of course, inhibit efforts to lower long-term rates 

at this time, but he would hope that efforts would be made to resist 

increases, insofar as that was consistent with the need to maintain 

an even keel. Given the volume of security issues coming to market, 

he thought that maintenance of an even keel might require free 

reserves near the upper end of the $150 - $300 million range men

tioned in the blue book, although he would be reluctant to specify 

a $300 million figure as appropriate.  

Mr. Maisel commented that the System seemed to be doing a 

good job of rebuilding the liquidity of the economy, and at the rate 

things were going the Committee probably should be prepared to move



5/2/67 -63

toward more normal expansion rates in reserves and bank credit some 

time after the June 15 tax date. He agreed that in the interim the 

Committee should not act in a way that would encourage a shift in 

expectations. At the moment, the market's expectations for bond 

prices probably were more pessimistic than the underlying situation 

warranted. However, if those expectations were resulting in 

unusually large demands for long-term funds, it should be the posture 

of the System to help out by directing as large a part as possible 

of its purchases into longer-term securities.  

Mr. Daane remarked that the primary consideration for policy 

at the moment was that a large-scale Treasury refunding was in process, 

to which the market reaction was still uncertain. Mr. Treiber had 

said that current economic conditions warranted maintaining pre

vailing money market conditions and that the Treasury financing 

reinforced that conclusion; he (Mr. Daane) would put the main emphasis 

on the financing in concluding that an even keel policy was necessary.  

He suspected, Mr. Daane continued, that the recent increases 

in long-term rates despite the shift of policy toward greater ease 

reflected the reaction of market participants to the developments 

of last year. Those rate increases served as a useful reminder to 

the Committee that it could not always expect to be able to offset 

the effects of market forces on the level and structure of rates.



5/2/67 -64

Mr. Daane said that he supported Mr. Brimmer's suggestion 

that the System should not attempt to move time deposit rates up 

and down by changing the Regulation Q ceilings. As to the directive, 

he was troubled by the proviso clause, particularly if it were to 

be interpreted in terms of the blue book projection for May of bank 

credit growth at an annual rate in the range of only 1 to 4 per 

cent. While the proviso probably would not do any real harm, in 

view of the difficulties of formulating it in an appropriate way 

at this juncture he would prefer to eliminate it entirely.  

Mr. Mitchell said he agreed with the staff analysis today 

and had little to add to the subsequent comments. He had no strong 

feelings about the proviso clause, and was agreeable to retaining 

it as drafted, making it a two-way clause, or deleting it. He agreed 

with Mr. Treiber that there was a flaw in the language of the phrase 

in the draft directive relating to industrial production. As he 

understood the matter, the decline in output was continuing.  

Accordingly, he would suggest replacing the phrase, "with . .  

industrial output reduced moderately" by the phrase, "with . .  

industrial output still being reduced moderately." 

Mr. Maisel commented that the phrase in the staff's draft 

was appropriate if the reference was to the first quarter.  

Mr. Brill remarked that the staff had in mind the fact that 

industrial production in the first quarter had declined at an annual



5/2/67 -65

rate of 5 per cent from the fourth quarter, and also that the best 

current estimate for April was for some further decline. He empha

sized, however, that the April figure was an estimate, and that the 

decline expected in that month was slight.  

Messrs. Treiber, Mitchell, and Daane all indicated that it 

was not clear from the draft language that the reference intended 

was primarily to first-quarter developments. Mr. Daane added that 

it seemed preferable to him to refer to more current developments, 

as Mr. Mitchell had suggested, in a directive that was updated at 

each meeting.  

Mr. Ratchford said that he would first report briefly on 

changes in rates paid on small CD's and savings deposits in the 

Fifth District. No changes in rates paid on savings deposits, nor 

any intentions to change, had been found. At least four fairly 

large banks had reduced their rates on small CD's from 5 to 4-1/2 

per cent within the past month, of which one was in Baltimore, one 

in Washington, and two in Virginia, but none in Richmond. A large 

North Carolina bank had reduced its rate from 5 to 4-3/4 per cent.  

A small bank in West Virginia had raised its rate from 4 to 4-1/2 

per cent for selected customers. One of the reductions was in 

Roanoke and was followed by a considerable number of smaller banks 

in the area, but elsewhere the reductions apparently were not 

followed by other banks. Some of the banks which had not reduced



5/2/67 -66

rates were either encouraging or requiring shorter maturities and 

one had imposed a maximum of $50,000 on amounts accepted.  

Mr. Ratchford then noted that the slowing trend in business 

activity which had prevailed in the Fifth District for some time 

had become less distinct. The picture now was more spotty, with 

small gains reported in several areas. That was accompanied by 

slightly more optimistic expectations on the part of both business

men and bankers. Inventories were still heavy, especially in the 

textile and furniture industries, and manufacturers continued to 

report considerable weakness in new and unfilled orders, but the 

number reporting slight gains had risen. Almost all textile 

manufacturers reported lower prices received for finished goods.  

Nonagricultural employment declined slightly in March but at the 

same time the rate of insured unemployment declined in every District 

State except one. There was also a small decline in man-hours in 

manufacturing but it was much smaller than the large drop which had 

occurred in February. Inadequate moisture in many parts of the 

District had delayed the growth of some crops and the seeding of 

others.  

Mr. Ratchford observed that the Richmond Bank's analysis of 

national economic conditions was quite similar to that in the staff 

materials and in the comments around the table today, so he would 

make only two points. First, it was remarkable that such great



5/2/67 -67

strides had been made in bringing the growth of inventories under 

control with only a modest slowing of industrial production. The 

March figures on manufacturers' inventories reported in this 

morning's newspapers indicated that the inventory adjustment was 

continuing. A second outstanding feature of the adjustment was 

that it was not proving to be cumulative. It might well be that 

the massive supplies of reserves provided by the System in recent 

months had averted the chain reactions in the financial areas which 

often caused declines to feed on themselves.  

As for monetary policy, Mr. Ratchford said, he shared the 

views that had already been expressed. In light of the very large 

amounts of reserves already supplied and the indications of a 

turnaround in expectations of the economic outlook, he thought that 

the time had arrived for a breathing spell, even apart from the 

Treasury financing. Accordingly, he favored no change in policy 

and considered the draft directive appropriate.  

Mr. Clay reported that a check in major cities of the Tenth 

District indicated that most city commercial banks paying 5 percent 

on consumer time deposits in recent months had reduced the interest 

rates they now paid for such deposits. He noted that most of the 

city banks had been at the 5 per cent rate. No change had been made 

in the rates paid on savings deposits.



5/2/67 -68

However, Mr. Clay continued, the changes in time deposit 

terms were not universal, and the types of changes made varied 

considerably. In some instances, the change made was in the maximum 

amount for which 5 per cent would be paid, such as $15,000, with the 

rate limited to 4 or 4-1/2 per cent for larger amounts. In other 

cases, the maximum rate paid on any amount had been reduced to 

4-1/2 or 4-3/4 per cent, with individual accounts limited in size 

or larger amounts subject to negotiation as to terms. In a number 

of cases, the maximum maturity had been reduced, but that was by no 

means universal. Only a few banks specified that they contemplated 

future reductions in time deposit interest rates, and those were 

invariably contingent upon reduction in rates paid by competing 

savings and loan associations or other commercial banks.  

Mr. Clay noted that adequate information was not available 

for generalizing about Tenth District commercial banks in smaller 

cities and towns. Information had become available, however, 

indicating reductions or contemplated reductions in interest rates 

paid on time deposits by a number of such banks. That had been a 

subject of intense discussion among bankers in recent weeks, and it 

was reasonable to assume that such actions by country banks were in 

excess of those known by the Reserve Bank.  

Mr. Clay pointed out that since last fall the Federal Reserve 

System had taken stimulative action on a major scale. While monetary



5/2/67 -69

policy should continue expansive, it seemed logical to proceed 

somewhat less aggressively for the present. Business prospects 

looked stronger than earlier in the year, even though the situation 

was not altogether clear. Moreover, possible larger military demands 

upon the economy, arising out of the war in southeast Asia, had to 

be accorded careful evaluation.  

For the period immediately ahead, the current Treasury 

financing program appeared to Mr. Clay to call for the maintenance 

of essentially the prevailing money market conditions. He thought 

it would be desirable to have moderately greater expansion in bank 

credit than that indicated in the blue book as probable under 

even-keel money market conditions, but at a somewhat lesser rate 

than in recent months. Accordingly, it would be desirable to aim 

toward such a goal insofar as that could be accomplished within 

essentially prevailing money market conditions.  

Mr. Clay proposed revising the proviso clause of the draft 

economic policy directive to read "and to attaining somewhat greater 

bank credit expansion than currently anticipated, if Treasury 

financing permits." 

Mr. Scanlon remarked that April saw a pronounced improve

ment in views of the economic outlook for the remainder of 1967.  

Seventh District bankers and businessmen increasingly were confident 

that the decline in activity registered in the first quarter of the



5/2/67 -70

year would not cumulate in the second quarter, and that the second 

half would see renewed growth. Those attitudes were based in part 

on recent indications of an uptrend in retail trade, the rapidity 

of inventory adjustments, the highly expansive posture of monetary 

policy, and the probability that defense spending would accelerate.  

Loan demand at major banks in the Seventh District continued 

strong relative to the country as a whole, Mr. Scanlon said. That 

strength seemed to be concentrated in the commercial and industrial 

area. To accommodate that demand, the major Chicago banks had been 

heavy purchasers of Federal funds. They had not made aggressive 

efforts to get CD money, which might suggest that no strong upward 

surge in loan demand was expected or, more likely, that they would 

not be back in that market until absolutely necessary.  

With regard to rates on consumer CD's and savings deposits, 

Mr. Scanlon continued, there was much discussion of possible rate 

changes among both banks and savings and loan associations but 

relatively little action. Conversations indicated that literally 

everyone would like to see someone announce a forthright reduction.  

But the demand for bank loans had been strong enough to forestall 

such a move. Most of the banks and savings and loan associations 

had stopped advertising for 5 per cent CD money, and some had 

reduced the amounts they would accept and shortened the maturity.



5/2/67

Mr. Scanlon noted that there had been a meeting yesterday 

of the National Agricultural Credit Committee at the Chicago Reserve 

Bank. Participants included the major lenders to agriculture-

mortgage and nonreal estate. To summarize the discussion, it appeared 

that mortgage loans made in recent months and commitments were both 

down sharply from a year ago. A few lenders had recently sought to 

increase commitments but had found that farmers were holding back 

in the hope that interest rates would decline. Policy loans of 

insurance companies were down from the high volume of last fall but 

still ran two to three times the normal monthly volume, Delinquencies 

on principal and interest payments and foreclosures of outstanding 

loans were at very low levels, as were rates of repayment of out

standing loans. Banks and other lenders were generally expected to 

be able to accommodate the prospective demand for farm loans--both 

short-term and long-term--in 1967 at about current interest rates.  

Many farmers had had losses of $20 to $30 per head on fed-cattle 

marketed in recent weeks; a few had reported even larger losses.  

Farm land prices had risen rapidly in recent months but were thought 

to be rising much less rapidly now. The Farm Credit Administration 

had sought Congressional action to raise or eliminate the 6 per cent 

ceiling on interest rates they could charge farmers on mortgage 

loans and on the rates they could pay on debentures. The first was 

rejected--no Congressman would introduce the measure--and the second

-71-



5/2/67 -72

was approved with the greatest reluctance by both the Congress and 

the President. One FCA official responding to criticism from the 

insurance company representatives stated, "Apparently we will 

make mortgage loans within a 6 per cent ceiling or not at all." 

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon concluded, he favored maintaining 

the prevailing conditions in the money market, and his interpreta

tion of that was the one given in the blue book. He found the 

draft directive acceptable, although he would be just as happy 

without the proviso for this period and he believed that Mr. Mitchell's 

point regarding the language of the first paragraph had merit.  

Mr. Galusha observed that reports of the April storms which 

had crossed the great plains were disturbing. The climax, the 

blizzard of the last five days--which stretched over eastern Idaho, 

Wyoming, the Dakotas, Montana, and into Alberta--was truly severe.  

It was being called the worst in history, at least in its economic 

impact. Coming as it had right at the height of lambing and calving, 

the storm would likely have far-reaching consequences, although 

principally within the District. District retailers were going to 

know that there had been a storm, and so were the country banks.  

The storm should relieve some of the present pressure on their 

swollen coffers. For of late, loan demand had not been strong at 

country banks. They seemed to be relatively liquid and probably



5/2/67 -73

would be able to meet emergency loan demands without great 

difficulty. The loan demand at District city banks had, however, 

been very strong.  

It was possibly the imbalance in District loan demands 

which explained differences of opinion about the financial out

look, Mr. Galusha said. Some bankers were talking about declines 

in deposit and share rates and further declines in loan rates. It 

was difficult to know, however, whether that was prophecy or hope.  

Anyway, there were others predicting that fall would see a return 

to higher loan rates. It seemed to him that that was the dominant 

expectation, and, as such, he believed it explained why consumer 

rates had not yet been moved lower. In the Minneapolis Bank's 

sampling, it had found changes only in Minnesota, where two banks 

had lowered their rates on savings certificates from 5 to 4-1/2 

per cent, several banks indicated they were not accepting new large 

CD's at a 5 per cent rate, and one bank had reduced its passbook 

rate from 3 per cent to 2 per cent, which he doubted would be a 

pace setter.  

In a way, then, Mr. Galusha remarked, it was too bad that so 

many of those engaged in finance were doubtful--indeed, understand

ably doubtful--about the chances of getting a tax increase early in 

1968. That, it seemed to him, was ultimately why consumer and 

long-term rates had proved so sticky.



5/2/67

Mr. Galusha thought it also was too bad that the Committee 

could not be surer about a tax increase. Were it more certain, it 

could confidently press further in the direction of monetary ease, 

and so ease the members' minds about once again having to start off 

a period of more rapid economic growth from a historically very high 

level of long-term rates. But without greater assurance about an 

increase in tax rates, there must be some little doubt about how 

much further the Committee could prudently press. There was much 

for the Committee to be uncomfortable about as it contemplated the 

economic and political environment that would be confronting it 

next fall or winter. The battle might have been won, but hardly 

the war--literally or figuratively. The economy was still badly 

dislocated by Vietnam and there was little reason to believe normal 

forces of market allocation would be restored very soon.  

However, Mr. Galsuah concluded, all of those remarks were 

distinctly academic this morning, since an even keel was certainly 

appropriate in light of the Treasury refunding.  

Mr. Swan reported that manufacturing employment in the 

Twelfth District had remained virtually unchanged in March for 

the third consecutive month, and the over-all rate of unemployment 

rose by only 0.1 to 4.6 per cent. Although construction employment 

declined, housing starts had risen. However, starts remained well 

below their year-ago level.

-74-



Mr. Swan noted that the larger banks in the District were 

still net buyers of Federal funds, but in somewhat smaller amounts 

than in earlier weeks. The Reserve Bank's check with commercial 

banks in the larger centers indicated that no changes were antic

ipated in the 4 per cent rate paid on passbook savings accounts.  

With respect to rates on consumer CD's, the 5 per cent rate 

remained general in San Francisco and Los Angeles, but there had 

been a few reductions below that level in other major cities. A 

few reports of somewhat less active advertising for funds had been 

received, and one bank indicated that special approval was now 

required before larger amounts would be accepted. However, a 

Los Angeles bank had recently announced a new one-year, 5 per 

cent "savings bond" which was a certificate issued in amounts from 

$100 to $100,000. In general, rates offered by banks in the area 

were related to the 5-1/4 per cent rate paid by California savings 

and loan associations. There was a feeling among both types of 

institutions that it would be desirable for rates to come down but 

they all seemed to be waiting for someone else to act. The hope 

was that the regulatory authorities would lower ceiling rates.  

With respect to policy, Mr. Swan thought that the Treasury 

financing, the general shift toward a more optimistic attitude on 

the economic outlook, the Committee's success in achieving declines 

in short-term rates, and the substantial expansion in bank credit

5/2/67 -75-



5/2/67 -76

all argued for no change at this point, despite recent increases 

in long-term rates. He could accept the staff's draft directive, 

with the change in the phrase relating to industrial production 

that Mr. Mitchell had suggested. He would be willing to include 

the proviso clause as drafted or have it eliminated entirely, but 

he would not favor a two-way proviso clause at this point. The 

slight increase in bank credit projected by the staff for May was 

acceptable to him but he would hope that the phrase, "if bank credit 

appears to be expanding significantly less than currently antic

ipated" would be interpreted to mean that an actual decline in 

bank credit over the next three weeks would be avoided, if that 

was possible within the constraints imposed by an even keel policy.  

Avoiding a bank credit decline should be one of the Committee's 

objectives at present whether or not a proviso clause was included 

in the directive.  

Mr. Coldwell remarked that the economy of the Eleventh 

District was heavily reliant upon a few diverse and widely 

differing sectors which currently were moving moderately in 

divergent directions. Strength was continuing from the large defense 

manufacturing plants and the extensive military installations. New 

support was developing in construction activities, including 

residential, highway, and municipal facilities. Oil and gas 

production had weakened but chemical and petrochemical industries



5/2/67 -77

were still expanding. Agriculture had declined sharply under the 

onslaught of reduced cotton acreage, near drought conditions, and 

poor cattle grazing. The April 1 wheat estimates might prove 

optimistic at 24 per cent under last year's crop. Declining prices 

were reducing income, and cash receipts were 28 per cent below 1966.  

District financial conditions reflected April tax borrowing, 

increased investments in non-Government securities, and a sizable 

decline in large CD's offset by demand deposit growth, Mr. Coldwell 

said. Uncertainty in deposit-loan trends, aggressive competition 

for funds--even of two-year maturity--at large banks, and uneven 

loan demands characterized District banking today. Bankers were 

worrying about rapid advances in interest costs and loss of deposits 

to aggressive banks. Prudence argued against their being panicked 

into a rate or maturity war, but deposit declines, customer losses, 

and higher than normal loan-deposit ratios counseled differently.  

As usual, the smaller banks in outlying areas looked to the Federal 

Reserve to protect them. They wondered if Regulation Q ceilings 

moved only upward.  

Mr. Coldwell noted that the Reserve Bank had made a survey 

of time deposit interest rates at 22 banks--half reserve city and 

half country banks. There had been no change in the 4 per cent 

pattern on savings deposit rates and there was no prospect of 

change, but the pattern with respect to changes in consumer CD



5/2/67 -78

rates was mixed. In 1966 and early 1967 such rates had moved to 

5 per cent in and near metropolitan areas. In April there had 

been some scattered reductions to 4-3/4 and 4-1/4 per cent in 

areas of largely conservative bankers, involving ten of the 22 

banks surveyed. Dollar limits per customer were coming down and 

maturities also were being reduced. As to the future, the 

observation made for other Districts held true in the Eleventh 

District also--nobody wanted to lead, but they would be delighted 

if someone would act for them in reducing rates. In selected 

areas strong loan demand was limiting bank willingness to slow 

time deposit inflow. Savings and loan associations in many cities 

reportedly were ready to cut their rates on July 1.  

In concluding comments, Mr. Coldwell noted that a director 

of the Reserve Bank, whose bank was located 60 miles from Dallas, 

wanted his view brought to Washington that the Board should lower 

the ceilings on consumer CD's to cut big-city competition for his 

deposits. Aggressive bankers were still willing to pay the top 

rate even for two-year maturities to obtain funds for further 

growth and loan expansion.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that spring had been more of a calendar 

notation than a change of seasons in New England. With full sympathy 

for those who were snowed in on Sunday in the Dakotas, he could 

report that New England had had snowstorms, freezing cold, and work



5/2/67 -79

interruptions up to just last Monday. That had meaning for District 

economic statistics, such as those covering hours worked and retail 

sales, especially of autos, and accordingly it flavored some of the 

business performance in the period under review.  

Mr. Ellis noted that the Boston Bank's latest regional 

index of manufacturing production derived from an employment survey 

made during the week including March 15 in which there had been 10 

inches of snow and temperatures had fallen as much as 21 degrees 

below normal. In some ways it was good news to learn that the 

index had dropped only two points in the month, holding one point 

above its March 1966 level. He found the projection surveys so 

heavily influenced by one or a few very large defense producers 

that it became difficult to appraise their meaning for the whole 

District. Reports from 193 firms showed that first-quarter sales 

rose 2 per cent from the fourth quarter of 1966. If a single 

aircraft manufacturer was added, however, the sample total showed 

an increase of 15 per cent. It was quite clear, however, that the 

pressure on the labor market had not abated. Starting wages in 

Boston (including those at the Reserve Bank) were being raised 

this week and last from $60 to $65 a week. That also was largely 

a paper record since it was next to impossible to obtain and/or 

to hold employees at that wage level.



5/2/67 -80

In the financial picture, Mr. Ellis said, the most notable 

change in recent weeks had been a thawing in rates. Five of the 

10 Boston banks lowered their rates on mortgages from 6-1/4 per 

cent to 6 per cent (75 per cent mortgage basis). Also, brokers 

were being offered finder's fees to bring in customers, a practice 

that vanished about a year ago. Savings banks had been slow to 

lower rates on savings. Only one savings bank in the sample moved 

last month and that was down from 4-3/8 to 4-1/4 per cent. District 

commercial banks, however, had quite generally reduced rates paid 

on deposits. Within the past few weeks (as of April 24) seven of 

the eight largest New England banks had lowered the rates they 

paid on consumer-type CD's, the most common drop being from 5 per 

cent to 4 per cent.  

Mr. Ellis noted that new commitments by the large insurance 

companies in the District recovered in March to their average level 

for the first quarter of 1965, before the policy loan breakout had 

assumed epidemic proportions. Policy loans continued falling, 

although the March outflow was still more than double early-1965 

outflows.  

With respect to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that the 

desirability of maintaining prevailing money market conditions 

during the current Treasury financing could be safely acknowledged 

in view of improvement, documented in the background materials, in



business sentiment and outlook. Having been embarrassed at other 

recent meetings by his disagreements with the staff regarding the 

outlook, he took comfort today in agreeing with the analyses of 

Messrs. Brill and Partee. He would like to highlight the first

quarter strength of final demand; between the fourth quarter of 

1966 and the first quarter of 1967, final takings had expanded by 

$16 billion (annual rate), of which the Federal Government accounted 

for only $3.3 billion. Consumer spending expanded by $8.1 billion, 

and the saving rate in the first quarter was now calculated at 6.1 

per cent rather than 7 per cent as shown in the GNP projection of 

four weeks ago. Over-all GNP was presently recorded as rising by 

$5 billion in the first quarter, but since the preliminary estimates 

for the quarter depended heavily on data covering the weaker months 

of January and February, he anticipated that they would be revised 

upward, perhaps substantially.  

Mr. Ellis said he was frank to confess that that retrospec

tive view colored his attitude toward monetary policy appropriate 

for the next several months. Starting with a conviction that there 

was strong underlying demand from consumers, business, and government 

at all levels, it was quite natural to conclude that the Committee 

should avoid inflating that demand further by credit creation beyond 

the economy's basic growth needs. He was reminded of a recent 

comment by Mr. Shepardson to the effect that the Committee should

5/2/67 -81-



5,2/67 -82

feel committed to reshape policy toward lessened ease just as 

readily as it had moved to create ease last fall.  

In terms of the next three weeks, Mr. Ellis thought that 

the pattern described in the first paragraph on page 4 of the blue 

book was entirely appropriate.1 / However, if the projection of 

bank credit expansion in May at an annual rate in the range of 

1 to 4 per cent was fulfilled, it would be the first time that 

such a modest rate had prevailed since the Committee's policy 

change in November. His own expectation was for a higher rate of 

credit expansion.  

In that context, Mr. Ellis said, he would point out that 

the proviso clause in the draft directive was completely silent 

on what action the Manager should take in the event bank credit 

expansion during May substantially exceeded present expectations-

rising, say, at a rate twice as fast as projected, or continuing 

to expand at the 12.9 per cent average rate that had prevailed 

since November. The proposed clause would direct the Manager to 

1/ The paragraph mentioned read as follows: "Maintenance 
of prevailing money market conditions over the next three weeks 
would involve a Federal funds rate averaging 4 per cent or a 
shade below and a 3-month bill rate fluctuating generally in 
a 3.65 - 3.85 per cent range. Member bank borrowings are likely 
to be in the $100 - $200 million area. Free reserves could vary 
more widely, perhaps in a $150 to $300 million range, depending 
in part on bank reserve management policies, on dealer financing 
needs and reinvestment flows associated with the Treasury refund
ing, and the need to maintain an 'even keel' monetary posture."



ease if the rate of bank credit expansion fell below the expected 

1 to 4 per cent range. To be consistent, the clause should be 

amplified to include some expression about desired action if bank 

credit again surged, or it should be deleted entirely. He was 

inclined to agree that it would be difficult to frame an appro

priate symmetrical clause at this juncture, and accordingly he 

would urge the Committee to omit the proviso clause.  

Mr. Robertson then made the following statement: 

Like all the rest of you, I have been gratified 
by the signs of an improved business outlook that have 
appeared since we last met. While I recognize that 
our economic adjustment is not yet over, it seems to 
be proceeding constructively. Recession talk seems 
to have evaporated, and I have the impression that, 
barring major strikes, a fairly vigorous resumption 
of economic expansion can easily be under way by the 
end of the summer.  

That outlook has particular pertinence to our 
present deliberations, because, given the admitted 
lags in the influence of monetary policy, it is 
probably the trend of GNP beginning next fall--and 
running into next year--that we shall be influencing 
the most with what we vote to do, or not to do, today.  
To me, that trend looks so promising that further 
aggressive monetary stimulus at this time would be 
unwarranted. I think we have come a long way in our 
reversal of monetary policy since last fall, and it 
has done much to contribute to the brevity and relative 
painlessness of the current readjustment. Whether I 
look back or look ahead, therefore, what I see makes 
me reasonably satisfied to hold our policy right where 
it is--on "even keel"--whether or not we had a Treasury 
financing in process.  

Some observers, I realize, are much more concerned 
than I about the current state of the financial markets.  
The money market surely is comfortable, and reserve

5/2/67 -83-



availability is ample; but the long-term bond markets 
are undeniably very soggy. The basic reason is equally 
obvious. Those market participants are smart, too. They 
can read economic signals just as we can, and at least 
some of the time they are every bit as right. If a 
vigorous economic expansion is in the cards later this 
year, it makes good business sense for supplies and 
demands for funds in the bond markets to shift in such 
a way as to hold up bond rates, and that is just what 
has happened.  

What should we do about it? You all know how I feel 
about our dabbling in long-term bond markets. In the 
current situation, moreover, with economic sentiment so 
much stronger, it would undoubtedly take large and 
sustained operations by us to markedly lower bond rates-
and the resultant greatly increased reserve availability 
might finance a credit and spending bulge whose timing 
would prove to be very badly wrong in hindsight.  
Excessive ease now might well increase the chances of 
our reaping both an excessive rise in demands toward 

year-end and some nasty tightening consequences in the 

financial system as we tried to undo what we had done.  
I, for one, would much prefer to hold at something 

like our present posture for as long as we reasonably 

can, so long as the economic adjustment continues to 

show signs of proceeding satisfactorily and credit flows 

remain ample to all major sectors of the community.  

Mr. Robertson added that while he could accept the directive 

drafted by the staff, he would prefer to incorporate Mr. Mitchell's 

suggested change in the first paragraph and he would certainly 

prefer Mr. Clay's suggestion with respect to the proviso clause.  

He did not agree with Mr. Ellis that there was great danger that the 

projected growth rate in bank credit would be outrun in the weeks 

ahead, and accordingly he did not think a two-way proviso was neces-

sary at this time.

5/2/67 -84-



5/2/67

Chairman Martin commented that there was a high degree of 

agreement today with respect to policy, and the only problem seemed 

to be that of deciding on language for the directive.  

Mr. Maisel commented that he shared the view that the proviso 

clause should be deleted.  

Chairman Martin said that he also thought the proviso clause 

might be omitted for this period. The staff might attempt to 

formulate an appropriate version of the clause for Committee consid

eration at the next meeting.  

The Committee then resumed the earlier discussion of the 

second sentence of the first paragraph of the directive, and reached 

agreement on language.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 
and directed, until otherwise directed 
by the Committee, to execute transactions 
in the System Account in accordance with 
the following current economic policy 
directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting suggest that prospects for renewed economic 
expansion have improved. The adjustment of excessive 
inventories is proceeding, as a result of the reduced 
level of industrial output and with consumer buying 
strengthening. Average wholesale prices have declined 
recently, reflecting reductions in farm and food prices 
and stability in prices of industrial commodities; but 
unit labor costs in manufacturing have risen further.  
Bank credit expansion has moderated in recent weeks from 
its earlier rapid rate. Long-term interest rates have 
risen considerably under the influence of heavy securities 
market financing and more optimistic market appraisals of

-85-



5/2/67 -86

the business outlook, but short-term yields have declined 
further following the recent reduction in Reserve Bank 
discount rates. Interest rates abroad have continued 
to decline and some further reductions have been made in 
foreign central bank discount rates. The balance of 
payments deficit has remained substantial despite some 
improvement in the foreign trade surplus. In this 
situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to foster money and credit conditions, including 
bank credit growth, conducive to renewed economic expan
sion, while recognizing the need for progress toward 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the current Treasury financing, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining the prevailing conditions in 
the money market.  

Chairman Martin then observed that the Committee had planned 

to pursue its discussion today of the implications for its procedures 

of the "Freedom of Information Act." He noted that the earlier staff 

memoranda on this subject had been supplemented by a memorandum from 

Mr. Hackley dated April 26, 1967,1/ and he invited Mr. Hackley to 

open the discussion.  

Mr. Hackley said that he would confine his remarks to the 

principal points at issue, including several questions that had 

been raised by members of the Committee in the discussion of the 

Freedom of Information Act at the March 7 meeting. The first was 

whether the Act would require publication in the Federal Register 

1/ A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the Committee's 

files.



5/2/67 -87

of the current economic policy directives and the other authorizations 

and directives of the Committee. He had reviewed that question 

further and had decided that those instruments were clearly "state

ments of general policy" of the type for which publication was 

required, and that none of the exemptions listed in the Act applied 

to them. It had been suggested that the Committee might seek an 

Executive Order to have them exempted. However, the Act provided 

for such Executive Orders only where secrecy was required "in the 

interest of the national defense or foreign policy," and that would 

not seem to him to apply to the domestic operations of the Committee.  

On the other hand, it would appear appropriate to seek an Executive 

Order exempting Reserve Bank operations in the foreign currency area.  

He had learned only yesterday that the Treasury had referred to the 

Department of Justice a request for an exemptive Executive Order 

covering all of its foreign currency operations, including those of 

the Stabilization Fund. The Committee might wish to consider making 

a similar request.  

A second question discussed at the March 7 meeting, Mr. Hackley 

continued, concerned the time lag with which the Committee's 

directives might be published under the requirement that statements 

of general policy be published "currently." On that point he still 

felt that a 60-day lag would be more defensible than one of 90 days, 

but he did not mean to say that the 90-day lag would be indefensible.



5/2/67 -88

He had reason to believe that if the question were tested in court 

the Justice Department would support a lag of either 60 or 90 days.  

With respect to the Committee's minutes, Mr. Hackley said, 

the staff was agreed that it would be desirable to divide them into 

"action minutes" and "memoranda of discussion." The latter, which 

would be similar in form to the documents heretofore described as 

"minutes," would be exempt from disclosure as intra-agency memoranda.  

The action minutes would not be exempt, but he thought that would 

not present any great problem.  

Mr. Hackley observed that the Legal Division had drafted 

proposed new "Rules regarding availability of information" to 

replace the corresponding present Rules of the Committee. The 

proposed new Rules were framed in general language and did not appear 

to pose much of a problem. The principal question on which Committee 

guidance was needed related to the time-lag for publication of 

directives. More troublesome than the language of the Rules was 

the problem of identifying and characterizing records--particularly 

records held at the New York Bank. It was necessary to determine 

which were in fact records of the Committee subject to the Act, and 

of those which appeared clearly to fall within the statutory exemp

tions. That matter was now under study both at the New York Bank 

and the Board, and he would hope that by the time of the next meeting 

the staff would be able to make definite recommendations.



5/2/67 -89

In conclusion, Mr. Hackley noted that the Department of 

Justice Manual for the guidance of Government agencies in complying 

with the Act was expected to be issued some time in the latter part 

of May, so that additional guidelines might be available by the 

time of the next meeting. Also, the Legal Division wanted to explore 

some possible further changes in the proposed new Rules. He 

suggested that the Committee plan on considering new Rules for final 

adoption at either its May 23 or June 20 meeting.  

Mr. Daane said he disagreed completely with Mr. Hackley's 

conclusions on the first two questions. It seemed to him if the 

Treasury could ask for an exemptive Executive Order covering all 

of its foreign currency operations, including those of the 

Stabilization Fund, the Committee had a very strong case for such 

an Order relating to its currency policy directives and other 

records; the Committee's domestic open market operations had highly 

important implications for "national defense and foreign policy." 

He thought the Treasury's action was clearly illustrative of proper 

approach. Secondly, he did not understand why a 60-day time lag in 

publishing the directives was more defensible than a 90-day lag.  

If the directives were to be published, he would consider a 90-day 

lag to be the minimum.  

Mr. Hackley said he was suggesting that the Committee might 

consider following the Treasury's course in requesting an exemptive 

Executive Order with respect to its foreign currency operations.



5/2/67 -90

Mr. Daane replied that he would favor broadening the request 

to cover domestic as well as foreign operations. The domestic 

operations of the Committee influenced the position of the national 

economy relative to the rest of the world, and in his judgment they 

could not be separated from other forces affecting the value of 

the dollar.  

Mr. Mitchell asked Mr. Hackley whether he had the Committee's 

deliberations in mind when he referred to foreign currency operations.  

Mr. Hackley replied that he had meant to refer not to the 

Committee's deliberations but to information on foreign currency 

transactions and to the authorization and directive regarding such 

transactions. He added that even if an exemptive Executive Order 

was obtained the Committee could still publish those instruments, 

as it had in the past.  

Mr. Mitchell then said that he thought Mr. Daane's point 

had merit. The Committee's domestic policy decisions had important 

international implications, and at times they were strongly moti

vated by international considerations, such as concern over capital 

outflows. If an exemption for the current policy directives could 

be obtained by Executive Order, he thought the Committee should 

request such an Order.  

Mr. Hackley said that the possibility of getting an Executive 

Order covering both domestic and foreign currency operations certainly



5/2/67 -91

could be explored, although he had some reservations as to whether 

the effort would be successful.  

Mr. Maisel remarked that he saw no reason for even exploring 

the possibility of getting an Executive Order if a 90-day time lag 

in publishing the directives appeared defensible. In his judgment, 

publication with such a time lag would not pose problems.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that he had mentioned the possibility of 

getting an Executive Order in the Committee's earlier discussion, 

and Mr. Hackley had indicated some reluctance to pursue that 

possibility at that time. He (Mr. Brimmer) still felt that the 

Committee needed some indication of the probability that it could 

obtain a general exemption, within which it could work out appropriate 

procedures for release of materials. As to timing, he thought it 

would be unfortunate if important issues were left to be resolved 

until June 20, and he proposed that the Committee try to reach the 

necessary decisions at its May 23 meeting.  

Mr. Treiber remarked that he also would favor an exploration 

of the possibility of getting an Executive Order covering all of the 

Committee's operations.  

Mr. Hackley then said that if it was agreeable to the 

Committee the Legal Division would prepare a letter addressed to 

the Justice Department requesting an Executive Order of the broadest 

possible scope, exempting from publication in the Federal Register



5/2/67 -92

not only the foreign currency instruments but also the domestic 

directives.  

Mr. Daane suggested that the letter indicate that the Committee 

was reviewing its general policies on publication.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed, and added that it should be made clear 

that if the Order was issued the Committee would still try to work 

out the best possible procedures with respect to releasing informa

tion.  

Chairman Martin then proposed that in view of the lateness 

of the hour the Committee defer the planned discussion of its policy 

on publication of information on drawings under the swap network 

and on other System foreign currency operations, and no objections 

were heard.  

Chairman Martin then reported that the trilateral negotiations 

among the United Kingdom, the United States, and Germany with respect 

to the cost of maintaining troops in Germany had finally come to 

a conclusion which Mr. McCloy would be announcing today. One product 

of the negotiations was a letter that had been addressed to him 

(Chairman Martin) by President Blessing of the German Federal Bank, 

stating that that Bank did not intend to convert any of its dollar 

holdings to gold for the time being. That letter probably would be 

released today.



5/2/67 -93

Mr. Daane asked whether the letter did not simply reaffirm 

a policy the Germans had been following, and the Chairman replied 

affirmatively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 23, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 1, 1967 

Draft of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on May 2, 1967 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting suggest that prospects for renewed economic expansion have 
improved. The adjustment of excessive inventories is proceeding, 
with consumer buying strengthened and industrial output reduced 
moderately. Average wholesale prices have declined recently, re
flecting reductions in farm and food prices and stability in prices 
of industrial commodities; but unit labor costs in manufacturing have 
risen further. Bank credit expansion has moderated in recent weeks 
from its earlier rapid rate. Long-term interest rates have risen 
considerably under the influence of heavy securities market financing 
and more optimistic market appraisals of the business outlook, but 
short-term yields have declined further following the recent reduction 
in Reserve Bank discount rates. Interest rates abroad have continued 
to decline and some further reductions have been made in foreign 
central bank discount rates. The balance of payments deficit has 
remained substantial despite some improvement in the foreign trade 
surplus. In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to foster money and credit conditions, including bank credit 
growth, conducive to renewed economic expansion, while recognizing 
the need for progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of the current 
Treasury financing, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
the prevailing conditions in the money market, and to attaining 
somewhat easier conditions, insofar as the Treasury financing permits, 
if bank credit appears to be expanding significantly less than 
currently anticipated.


