









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 23, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Wayne 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Galusha, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Hersey, Jones, Koch, Partee, 

and Solomon, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel, Legal 

Division, Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors



5/23/67

Mr. Kimbrel, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, 
Parthemos, Brandt, Tow, and Green, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Richmond, Atlanta, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Fousek, MacLaury, and Olin, Assistant 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, New York, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of 
the meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee held on May 2, 1967, were 
approved.  

By unanimous vote, the action taken 
by members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee on May 12, 1967, amending 
paragraphs 1A and 2 of the authorization 
for System foreign currency operations, 
effective May 17, 1967, to read as follows, 
was ratified: 

1A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies 
in the form of cable transfers through spot or forward trans
actions on the open market at home and abroad, including 
transactions with the U.S. Stabilization Fund established by 
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary 

authorities, and with the Bank for International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire



5/23/67

Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 

Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System 
Open Market Account with the following foreign banks, 
which are among those designated by the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 

Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, 
and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of Maximum 
arrangement period of 

Foreign bank (millions of arrangement 
dollars equivalent) (months) 

Austrian National Bank 100 12 

National Bank of Belgium 150 12 
Bank of Canada 500 12 
National Bank of Denmark 100 12 
Bank of England 1,350 12 
Bank of France 100 3 
German Federal Bank 400 6 
Bank of Italy 600 12 
Bank of Japan 450 12 
Bank of Mexico 130 12 
Netherlands Bank 150 3 
Bank of Norway 100 12 
Bank of Sweden 100 12 
Swiss National Bank 200 6 
Bank for International Settlements 

System drawings in Swiss francs 200 6 

System drawings in authorized 

European currencies other than 
Swiss francs 200 6



5/23/67

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of 

the System Open Market Account on foreign exchange market condi

tions and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in 

foreign currencies for the period May 2 through May 17, 1967, 

and a supplemental report for May 18 through 22, 1967. Copies 

of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. MacLaury 

reported there had been no change in the Treasury gold stock this 

week nor had there been any change since February. As recently 

as yesterday it had appeared that no reduction would be required 

for the next few weeks, but that was no longer certain. Various 

developments had resulted in a sharp increase in gold market 

activity. Turnover in the London market, which normally averaged 

about $5 million a day, had risen to near-record levels in recent 

days: $20 million on Friday, roughly $20 million again yesterday, 

and $30 million today. The gold pool had suffered substantial 

losses in the last three days, totaling about $65 million. The 

heightened activity reflected a combination of factors. The 

political disturbances in Hong Kong, and more particularly the 

increased threat of war in the Middle East, were important. The 

U.S. Treasury's decision last Thursday to suspend sales of silver 

for export added a further element of uncertainty, especially



5/23/67 -5

since it followed on the heels of last month's discussion of U.S.  

gold policy. The European press had played up the possibility that 

what had been done with silver could also be done with gold, although 

on any reasoned basis it was clear that the two situations were not 

parallel.  

As the Committee knew, Mr. MacLaury continued, only the fact 

that South Africa had been running down its reserves (by $125 million 

in gold since the end of 1966) had kept the pool deficit in a manage

able range this year. At the moment there was only $40 million 

available to the pool without further discussion among the members, 

and an additional $50 million could become available after consulta

tion. How quickly that margin could disappear was indicated by the 

pool's losses in the last few days.  

In the exchange markets, Mr. MacLaury said, the most 

immediately troublesome development had been the weakening of sterling.  

The momentum of recovery that had been so evident during the first 

few months of the year ended rather abruptly this month, and for the 

past two weeks the Bank of England had had to extend intermittent--and 

at times sizable--support to hold the rate. Again, a combination of 

factors was responsible: first, the one-half point reduction in the 

British Bank rate on May 4 to 5-1/2 per cent, together with the rise 

in Euro-dollar rates, had reduced the relative pull of London rates 

on foreign funds; more important, the disappointing April trade



5/23/67 -6

figures, released May 11, triggered the first sharp sell-off of 

sterling in many months; and finally, of course de Gaulle's press 

conference a week ago, in which he painted in starkly negative 

terms the hurdles Britain would have to surmount to attain member

ship in the Common Market, added a further blow. Those develop

ments, together with the political disturbances just mentioned 

in connection with gold, put sterling under substantial pressure.  

For the month to date, the Bank of England had lost, net, well 

over $100 million in market support operations. At the beginning 

of the month the British had repaid the final $150 million of 

sterling balance credits, as required by the rise in such balances 

during the preceding month. In addition, the Chancellor announced 

in Parliament early this month--before the reserve losses--that 

the U.K. would prepay $485 million to the International Monetary 

Fund and Switzerland on May 25. It was still too early to forecast 

how the month as a whole would turn out; the British took in $22 

million yesterday and today the sterling market had been quiet.  

If the line were drawn now, however, British reserves would be 

down nearly $800 million from the end of last month as a result 

of its market support operations and debt repayments. Clearly, 

any such drop--even though more than half explained by the 

repayments to the International Monetary Fund and Switzerland--would 

have a seriously damaging impact on the market. Thus, the



5/23/67 -7

possibility of bringing into the reserves the remaining British 

portfolio was being actively discussed, as was the possible 

necessity of resorting once again to short-term assistance.  

On the continent, Mr. MacLaury observed, the dollar had 

generally remained weak. A number of central banks had been 

taking in dollars. Early in the period the System utilized some 

$30 million equivalent of its Belgian franc balances under the 

fully-drawn portion of its swap arrangement with the Belgian 

National Bank to absorb an equal amount of funds taken in by 

that Bank. More recently, there had been a particularly heavy 

movement of dollars into Switzerland where the relative tightness 

of the money market had added to the inflows generated by political 

uncertainties and more recently by the pressures on sterling.  

Since May 10, the Swiss National Bank had taken in from the market 

well over $100 million, and, of course, it would be receiving some 

$80 million on Thursday from the British prepayment. Thus, the 

U.S. faced the prospect of finding ways to absorb close to $200 

million from the Swiss. A gold sale undoubtedly would be part 

of the package, and it might well be that the System would have 

to reactivate its swap arrangement with them. Certainly, the out

look for the dollar over the summer months was not reassuring, 

and as Mr. Coombs had indicated at the last meeting, there was 

every likelihood that the System's swap network would have to be 

heavily relied upon.



5/23/67 -8

Mr. MacLaury went on to say that Mr. Coombs originally 

had expected to wait until today to ask for the Committee's 

formal approval of the addition of the central banks of Denmark, 

Mexico, and Norway to the swap network. However, the develop

1/ ments mentioned in his message of May 12 transmitted by wire 1/ 

to Committee members made it seem desirable to request approval 

at that time. As indicated in that message, Denmark particularly 

wished to be able to announce its new swap arrangement on May 18 

along with Norway, and Mexico preferred that its arrangement be 

announced at the same time. In Mr. Lang's conversations with the 

Venezuelans following the Committee's preceding meeting, they had 

indicated that they appreciated being kept informed on developments, 

but since there was no present prospect of Venezuela's moving 

toward Article VIII status in the near future they understood 

that the System would wish to proceed with the other countries 

involved With respect to the renewal of the swap arrangement 

with the Bank of France, the developments following the preceding 

meeting had been reported to the Committee in a memorandum from 

2/ 
Mr. Coombs dated May 9, 1967. He (Mr. MacLaury) had little to 

add to the information in the memorandum, except to say that 

1/ A copy of this telegram has been placed in the Committee's 
files.  

2/ A copy of this memorandum, entitled "Swap arrangements with 
Common Market countries; discussions at Basle, May 6-7," has been 
placed in the Committee's files.



5/23/67 -9-

Mr. Coombs felt that the frank discussions with the European

central bankers had done a lot to clear the air and to bring

home the importance of the swap network to them as well as to

the United States. The prospect that the System might be prepared

to drop one of its arrangements--that with the Bank of France--

was sobering to the Europeans. In that connection, Mr. Coombs

had asked him to say that the firm stand the Committee had taken

at its preceding meeting had been of great help to Messrs. Hayes

and Coombs in their discussions with the Europeans.

Mr. Brimmer asked whether the operation of bringing the

remaining British portfolio into their reserves would have any

effect on the U.S. balance of payments.

In reply, Mr. MacLaury commented that the British portfolio

no longer included any equities. They did hold a substantial

volume of debt securities with maturities of over one year, partic-

ularly U.S. agency issues. If they liquidated those holdings or

converted them into shorter-term issues the effect would be to

increase the U.S. deficit. However, the British appeared to have

adequate cash on hand, so even if they brought the portfolio into

reserves they would not necessarily convert it immediately. The

effects on the U.S. deficit might thus be spread over time.

Mr. Maisel asked whether there was any significance to the

fact that the U.S. Treasury recently had redeemed bonds denominated



5/23/67 -10

in Belgian francs held by the Belgians in an amount--$30 million-

equal to that involved in the System's current disbursements under 

the Belgian swap line.  

Mr. MacLaury responded that the Treasury had accumulated 

$30 million in Belgian francs last fall, and since the Belgians 

had asked to have the bonds paid off at maturity the Treasury had 

used the francs to redeem them. It was simply coincidence that 

the System's subsequent use of the swap line had involved the same 

figure. He added that there was no reason at this stage to believe 

that the Belgians would not consider taking on additional bonds 

at a later date if that seemed appropriate.  

Mr. Mitchell said he was disturbed by statements in Mr. Coombs' 

memorandum of May 9 to the effect, first, that there had been an 

agreement by the central bank governors of the Common Market that 

the Federal Reserve would have full opportunity to express its 

views before those central banks reached any new binding agreement, 

and secondly, that an agreement might be worked out under which 

all the swap agreements except that with the French would have a 

common maturity date at the end of the year. As he understood the 

matter, the Europeans had been interested in arranging common 

maturity dates to facilitate multilateral surveillance. Was it 

valid to infer that the System had given up its resistance to the 

efforts to put the network under surveillance by the Common Market



5/23/67 -11

countries, and was now willing to accept such surveillance at 

the end of each year? Or was that still a matter for negotiation? 

Mr. MacLaury replied that the question of the kind of 

agreement that would be negotiated between the Common Market 

central banks and the System remained completely open.  

Mr. Mitchell's point regarding common year-end maturity dates 

was well taken, but perhaps equally important was the agreement 

by the Common Market central banks to abandon their efforts to 

present the System with a fait accompli. Those central banks, 

of course, had every right to discuss their swap lines with the 

System among themselves, but the fact was brought home to them 

that the System was disturbed by their action in taking a firm 

decision regarding those arrangements without consulting the 

Federal Reserve.  

Secondly, Mr. MacLaury said, while it was probable that 

there would be a move toward a common maturity date--although the 

matter was still open--that move would involve not only the 

arrangements with the Common Market central banks but also those 

with the System's other partners in the network. If only the 

Common Market countries were involved, observers might conclude 

that the System had agreed to surveillance by them. But if the 

shift was more general such an impression was less likely to be 

created.



5/23/67 -12

Mr. Mitchell then said he thought the Committee should 

discuss the matter further before the negotiations proceeded.  

It was possible that the System might already have traded away 

much of its potential for resisting surveillance by agreeing to 

negotiate about a common year-end maturity date. In any case, 

a discussion would give the Special Manager a full understanding 

of what the Committee would like to accomplish.  

Mr. Daane agreed that such a discussion would be highly 

useful. He added that the Special Manager had been conscious of 

the problem Mr. Mitchell had noted. It was clear that avoiding a 

common maturity date would be preferable from the System's point 

of view, but it was important to recognize that the Common Market 

countries felt quite keenly on the matter of multilateral 

surveillance.  

Chairman Martin proposed that the discussion Mr. Mitchell 

had suggested be put on the agenda for the next meeting of the 

Committee.  

Mr. Wayne noted that he also had been disturbed by the 

suggestion that there be common maturity dates for the swap 

arrangements, although he would not necessarily question such a 

move. He thought it would be desirable to have a memorandum from 

Mr. Coombs in advance of the next meeting, commenting on the 

significance of common maturity dates and providing a fuller



5/23/67 -13

explanation of the implications of having the whole network on 

that basis rather than just the Common Market central banks.  

Mr. Hickman observed that the Committee's interest in 

avoiding a common maturity date had been evident in the dis

cussion at the preceding meeting.  

Mr. Robertson noted that the question at issue then had 

concerned quarterly, rather than annual, common maturity dates.  

Mr. Brimmer recalled a comment of Chairman Martin's at 

the preceding meeting, when he had been asked whether it was his 

feeling that the Committee should run the risk of having its 

swap arrangements brought under the surveillance of the Common 

Market. The Chairman had replied that it was not yet clear to 

him how serious that risk was, since much depended on the 

attitudes of the Germans and the Italians. In his (Mr. Brimmer's) 

judgment, it was understood at that time that the Committee would 

not automatically agree to negotiations with the Common Market on 

the basis of multilateral surveillance.  

Chairman Martin concurred. He felt that the System had not 

tied its hands, and that the Committee should keep the matter under 

consideration. In his judgment Messrs. Hayes and Coombs had con

ducted the recent negotiations in an excellent manner.



5/23/67

By unanimous vote, the System 
open market transactions in foreign 
currencies during the period May 2 
through 22, 1967, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. MacLaury then noted that the $50 million supplementary 

standby swap arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium, origi

nally negotiated in September 1966, would mature on June 30, 1967; 

and the full $150 million swap arrangement with the Netherlands 

Bank would mature on the same date. Both had terms of three months, 

and he recommended their renewals for additional terms of the same 

length. As noted in the preceding discussion, there might be a 

general move toward one-year terms in the System's swap arrangements 

but that, of course, had not yet been negotiated.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for 
further periods of three months of 
the $50 million supplementary standby 
swap arrangement with the National 
Bank of Belgium, and the $150 million 
standby swap arrangement with the 
Netherlands Bank, both scheduled to 
mature on June 30, 1967, was approved.  

Mr. MacLaury then noted that, as the Committee would recall, 

under the $100 million, twelve-month swap arrangement with the 

National Bank of Belgium that had been in effect before September 

1966, it had been the established practice for both parties to make 

a $50 million drawing with a maturity of six months. That drawing 

would mature on June 22, 1967, and he recommended its renewal for a



5/23/67 -15

further period of six months. As he had indicated, the System now 

held in balance $20 million in Belgian francs, having utilized $30 

million of the fully-drawn portion of the arrangement earlier this 

month.  

Renewal for a further period of 
six months of the $50 million drawing 
on the swap arrangement with the 
National Bank of Belgium, scheduled 
to mature June 22, 1967, was noted 
without objection.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to report on 

developments at the meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten 

which he had attended last week.  

Mr. Daane said that the Deputies had met in Paris for a 

day and a half on May 18 and 19. The sessions were largely devoted 

to further discussion of the unresolved technical issues relating 

to reserve asset creation that he had mentioned at the previous 

meeting of the Committee--namely, whether the new asset should be 

transferable directly or indirectly, whether it should involve 

pooled resources in the Fund or separate resources in the Fund or 

in a Fund affiliate, and whether repayment provisions should be 

attached to the asset. It was fair to say that some further progress 

had been made in narrowing the differences of view on those technical 

issues. His own judgment was that the remaining differences probably 

could be resolved on the issues of transferability and fund resources.



5/23/67 -16

The issue of repayment provisions was the most difficult of the 

three because it went to the heart of the question of whether the 

new asset should be credit-like--which was the French view--or 

money-like, which the U.S. favored. From what he had gleaned 

outside the formal sessions, it appeared that the French were 

prepared to take a fairly hard position on that issue, and might 

drop out of the whole exercise unless they won agreement with their 

position.  

The U.S. delegation had submitted two papers, Mr. Daane 

continued, of which one updated the illustrative Fund scheme for 

a new reserve unit. Realistically, however, the U.S. representatives 

did not see much chance for a new reserve unit to emerge from the 

discussions. The second U.S. paper not only updated the Fund's 

illustrative scheme for a drawing right but improved on the type 

of drawing right envisaged. That paper had been submitted during 

the course of the meeting and was not discussed.  

Mr. Daane went on to say that on the fourth unresolved 

issue--that of decision-making--the Deputies had made no progress.  

Quite clearly that was a political issue which, he felt sure, would 

have to be resolved at a higher level. The Common Market countries 

wanted requirements calling for a majority of 85 per cent of votes 

in the Fund and a majority of creditor countries; and they would 

like to see Fund votes adjusted to give greater weight to their



5/23/67 -17

countries. The U.S. proposal involved a two-stage voting plan, 

which had been labelled the "band" proposal. It called for a 

scheme to go into effect if it won 90 per cent of the votes, and 

for a second vote to be held if the proportion favoring the scheme 

fell in the band between 75 and 90 per cent. In the second vote 

a majority of at least 75 per cent would be required to carry.  

The U.S. response to the insistence of the Common Market countries 

on an 85 per cent requirement was to narrow the band involved in 

its own proposal. As he had indicated, however, the question of 

decision-making was not likely to be resolved by the Deputies of 

the Group of Ten. It would have to go at least to the Ministers 

and Governors.  

The technical issues would be considered further at a joint 

meeting of the Deputies with the Executive Directors of the Fund in 

Paris on June 19 - 21, Mr. Daane said. That presumably would be 

followed by a meeting of the Ministers and Governors of the Ten.  

Hopefully, at least the broad outlines of a plan would be presentable 

by the time of the meeting in Rio de Janiero in September.  

Mr. Galusha asked whether Mr. Daane now felt somewhat less 

confident about the probable outcome of the discussions than he had 

at the last meeting of the Committee.  

Mr. Daane replied that perhaps he was a little less confi

dent than he had been earlier. The position taken by the French



5/23/67

representatives seemed to be closely related to what their government 

was likely to be willing to accept, and there was no assurance that 

the other Common Market countries would be willing to go ahead 

without France. He supposed the key question concerned the attitude 

of Germany. But the matter lay in the political realm, where he 

could not offer an expert judgment.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period May 2 through 17, 1967, and 

a supplemental report for May 18 through 22, 1967. Copies of both 

reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

Even keel considerations were the paramount factors 
guiding open market operations over much of the period 
since the Committee last met. While there were substantial 
movements in interest rates in response to basic market 
factors and shifting expectations, there was a generally 
comfortable tone in the money market with reserve avail
ability a bit on the generous side.  

At the time of the last meeting the books were open 
on the Treasury's May refunding, and, amid uncertain market 
conditions, the outcome was still in doubt. A small amount 
of purchases for Treasury investment accounts was made and 
the atmosphere gradually improved before the books closed 
on May 3. Although attrition was relatively high on the 
May and June maturities, the Treasury was able to achieve 
a significant amount of debt extension. Most importantly, 
holders of $1.3 billion of Government securities maturing 
in August elected to prerefund--an exchange larger than

-18-



5/23/67

many market participants had expected. In view of the 
Treasury's heavy cash needs in the second half of the 
calendar year it was indeed useful to reduce the size 
of the August refunding to routine proportions.  

While dealers as a group did not take an exces
sively large position in the new issues, a few dealers 
had acquired sizable blocks of the five-year 4-3/4s.  
As a result, when prices of Government securities 
deteriorated again a few days after the books had 
closed, reflecting continuing pressures in the corporate 
and municipal markets, a booming stock market, and 
generally buoyant general business expectations, there 
were heavy professional offerings of intermediate-term 
Governments in the market. In this atmosphere Treasury 
investment accounts purchased about $240 million high
coupon issues maturing in 1971 to 1974. These purchases 
were helpful in reducing an overhang of securities in 
the market without interfering with basic market forces 
determining interest rates.  

System purchases of coupon issues were deferred 
until two days after payment date for the issues offered 
in the refunding, when, as the written reports indicate, 
$101.6 million were purchased on a market go-around.  
Given the downward pressure on Treasury bill rates and 
the availability of intermediate- and longer-term 
Government securities, these operations were generally 
taken by the market in stride, without creating any 
exaggerated expectations about System interest rate 
intentions.  

Over the next three weeks, as the blue book 1/ 

indicates, it looks as if the System will have to 
provide about $0.5 billion in reserves unless the 
Treasury should have to run its balance at the Reserve 
Banks down before mid-June. After mid-June the situation 
will be temporarily reversed. Market conditions at the 
moment would make it feasible to meet a significant pro

portion of these needs--perhaps half--through the purchase 

of coupon issues. The availability of coupon issues and 
the widespread demand for Treasury bills, noted earlier, 
are technical factors that tend to make such a pattern of 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-19-



5/23/67

operations feasible. From a policy point of view, 
operations in coupon issues would make some marginal 
contribution to the flow of funds in longer-term 
markets by relieving the overhang of Government 
securities now in the market. There are risks, 
however, that an overly aggressive approach to the 
purchase of coupon issues would lead the market to 
believe that the System was attempting to establish 
a pattern of long-term rates. Creation of such an 
impression would, in my view, be unfortunate since 
it could lead to an avalanche of offerings to the 
System and since our operations to supply reserves-
on current forecasts--would be, at least temporarily, 
reversed in mid-June. Thus a cautious approach 
appears called for. I would agree with the blue 
book that there might be only limited effects on 
market trends provided expectations do not get out 
of hand.  

Current rate trends have been described in 
detail in the various written reports to the Committee.  
While the downgrading of some recent economic statistics 
has dampened somewhat the exuberant view of the economy 
that prevailed a few weeks ago, expectations are for a 
strong second half of the year. The weight of corporate 
and municipal financing continues apace--the June corpo
rate calendar now appears likely to exceed the record 
March calendar, the demand for funds in the tax-exempt 
area continues to run high, and an announcement of $880 
million FNMA participation certificates is expected 
momentarily by the market. The corporate calendar has 
been building for July and August with a growing volume 
of convertible debentures in the works, and the debt 
limit hearings have done nothing to allay market 

apprehension of major Treasury and Government agency 
needs, including PC's, in the new fiscal year. In fact, 
the proposals for modification of the 4-1/4 per cent 
interest rate ceiling had quite a depressing influence, 
particularly on the market for 5-10 year Treasury issues.  

Long-term rates have, of course, moved significantly 
higher but further testing of the market is needed to see 
whether a trading range can be established. Short rates, 
in contrast, have generally moved lower with investors 
tending to hole up in the short maturities while market 
developments unfold. Banks have found it difficult to 

place CD's with maturities of a year or more, and rates

-20-



5/23/67 -21

in that area have moved close to 5 per cent. In yesterday's 
bill auction average rates of 3.49 and 3.69 per cent were 
established respectively on 3- and 6-month Treasury bills, 
down 28 and 22 basis points respectively from the auction 
preceding the last meeting.  

The impact of the massive corporate debt restructuring 
so far this year on the demand for bank credit is still not 
clear. Many banks report a continuous business loan demand, 
but it is hard to determine how much this reflects a precau
tionary firming up of commitments and how much an early need 
for cash on the barrel head. As you know, bank credit in 
May appears to be expanding only moderately on average, and 
despite the final round of tax acceleration, the June credit 
proxy forecast is for only a 5 per cent annual rate of growth.  
Perhaps the forecast is too conservative, but it appears to 
be a modest growth rate in light of the over-all demand for 
credit that is apparent in financial markets.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether the Manager foresaw a tapering off 

in corporate and municipal bond offerings over the summer months.  

Mr. Holmes replied that it was very hard to judge when 

offerings might taper off. Although some issues had been postponed 

recently, the corporate calendar appeared likely to be very heavy 

through July and August, and municipal offerings would probably 

continue in a steady stream.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that he had heard reports of investors 

who were encountering difficulties in disposing of fairly large 

blocks of Government securities. He asked whether that was a general 

phenomenon.  

Mr. Holmes replied that for tax reasons there was a tremendous 

amount of swapping going on now in the long-term market, as well as



5/23/67 -22

some outright selling. However, it was difficult to move large 

amounts of securities unless one happened to find a buyer with 

the right needs, because dealers were not willing to build up 

their positions.  

Mr. Daane asked whether his understanding was correct that 

the Manager saw positive advantages in supplying some reserves 

through operations in coupon issues--in relieving the market over

hang and countering downward pressure on bill rates--even though 

he might be moving against the trend of long-term rates.  

Mr. Holmes replied affirmatively. As he had indicated, 

any coupon operations would have to be handled cautiously. But 

operations on a fairly sizable scale need not be disturbing to 

the market, given the availability of coupon issues at present 

and the demand for bills. And, in themselves, they need not have 

a major impact on interest rates.  

Mr, Mitchell remarked that he was a little disturbed by 

the Manager's emphasis on the need for caution. It seemed to him 

that with the present state of market expectations the Desk would 

have to operate aggressively in coupon issues in order to have any 

significant effect.  

Mr, Holmes replied that the volume of coupon operations 

that he had suggested might be feasible in the coming period--on 

the order of $250 million--was sizable relative to past System



5/23/67

operations, although it was not large relative to the over-all 

volume of market transactions.  

By unanimous vote, the open 

market transactions in Government 
securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period May 2 through 22, 
1967, were approved, ratified, and 
confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had 

been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement on economic conditions: 

It may be a late spring this year, meteorologically
speaking, but it was an early spring, economically-speaking.  
The news for March and early April was most encouraging, 
with consumption, production, and housing up; the unemploy
ment rate steady at a low level; and the rate of inventory 
accumulation down sharply. But more recently, we have had 

a flurry of less favorable news again.  

First, we learned that the earlier estimated rise in 

consumption had been exaggerated. Then, that employment 

and industrial production had been weaker in April. More 

recently, the news has included the fact that the real GNP 

actually declined a little in the first quarter.  

To state my conclusion on the economic outlook before 

my evidence, let me say at the outset that I agree with 

the conclusion of the green book,1/ namely, that we had 

more or less anticipated the recent flurry of less favorable 

economic news and that our confidence in renewed, more 

normal economic expansion by the third quarter is not 

shaken. In buttressing this conclusion today, I should 
like to focus my remarks on two key areas of activity, 

namely, inventories and defense spending.  

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff,

-23-



5/23/67

There is little doubt that the increase in inventories 
in 1965-66 was excessive and that an adjustment began in 
the first quarter. The March data confirm the fact that 
inventory accumulation declined from the very sharp annual 
rate of $16.5 billion in the fourth quarter of last year 
to about $5.5 billion in the first quarter of this year.  

It also seems reasonably clear that more inventory 
adjustment remains. It is impossible, of course, to say 
what an appropriate level of inventories is at any given 
time. But if one assumes that the inventory-sales ratio 
of, say, mid-1965 was more or less normal, and if one 
assumes further that final sales this year will increase 
at about a 6 per cent annual rate, it would probably take 
a good part of the year for the inventories that are 
currently excessive to be absorbed. This conclusion also 
implies little further accumulation but no significant 
liquidation after March.  

This is, of course, a grossly oversimplified way of 
trying to measure excessive inventories. For one thing, 
it implies the excess stocks are more or less uniformly 
distributed among the various industries. In fact, that 
is not true, for they appear to be heavily concentrated 
in durable goods lines, although no longer in autos.  

A significant part is in the form of materials and 
supplies and work-in-process in defense industries.  
Another large portion is in the hands of manufacturers 
of construction and other materials and semifabricated 
products such as steel, nonferrous metals, and stampings.  
A third substantial amount is at wholesalers of consumer 
durables other than autos and various materials. This 
composition of the excess inventories may make the adjust
ment problem less difficult, at least as it applies to the 
eventual working down of the increase in materials and 
work-in-process associated with the defense production 
build-up.  

In a sense, one's whole assessment of the economic 
outlook can be summarized in one word, Vietnam. We of 
course have nothing definitive to say about the likely 
future course of defense spending. But certain recent 
developments suggest that such spending will be signif
icantly above the January Budget Document projections, 
both in the current fiscal year and next year.  

The first-quarter estimate of defense spending in 
the GNP accounts has been revised upward twice--first, 
from an implied increase of $2.5 billion in the Budget

-24-



5/23/67

to $3.3 billion in Commerce's first published figure, 
and now to $4.2 billion. Also, two independent sources 
suggest that spending in fiscal 1968 will exceed the 
figures given in the Budget Document.  

First, Senator Stennis has suggested that a supple
mental appropriation of from $4 to $6 billion will likely 
be needed next year. Secondly, a statistical calculation 
developed by our staff that relates GNP defense spending 
to current and lagged contract awards comes up with the 
conclusion that defense spending in fiscal 1968 could well 
exceed the estimates in the Budget by $5 billion or more.  
And to top it all off, the military and political news 
about Vietnam and now about the Middle East is certainly 
consistent with the judgment that defense spending is 
much more likely to be higher than earlier estimates.  

The only news which on its face was contradictory 
to the assumption of considerably higher defense spending 
was contained in last week's testimony of Secretary 
Fowler and Budget Director Schultze before the House 
Ways and Means Committee. They suggested that the 
Administrative Budget deficit in fiscal 1968 might be 
$3 billion more than estimated in January, assuming 
enactment of the 6 per cent tax surcharge with an 
effective date of July 1. This estimate apparently 
implies an increase in defense spending of only about 
a billion dollars over the January projections. Both 
men admitted, though, that this deficit estimate and 
its implied defense spending figure could be underesti
mated. This may prove to be the understatement of the 
year.  

In conclusion, some of the apparent contradiction 
between today's economic bears and bulls lies in the 
different time periods upon which they concentrate. The 
bears seem to be concentrating on the relatively near
term future and see at least a weak second quarter, the 
summer doldrums, and possibly a September auto strike 
ahead of us. The bulls, on the other hand, are looking 
beyond the summer and early fall and see a turnaround in 
the inventory situation coming at a time when total final 
private and Government sales in and of themselves may be 

absorbing more goods and services than the real resources 
of the economy can provide at stable prices--except for a 
relatively few months while the small volume of unutilized 
labor and plant capacity we now have are being put to work.

-25-



5/23/67 -26

If this is a correct interpretation of many of the 
bearish and bullish views one hears today, both may be 
right. Assuming that the effects of monetary policy on 
spending spread out over a substantial time period, then 
the possibility of a relatively sluggish economy for the 
next few months and a strong one thereafter poses a dif
ficult problem for monetary policy.  

From my own point of view, however, I feel the 
economic outlook over both the near term and the longer 
run is still cloudy enough to call for continuation of 
our current policy of cautious ease. Moreover, and 
perhaps most importantly, we already have had a signifi
cant rise in long-term market rates of interest that may 
well have some dampening effects on housing and perhaps 
on other forms of investment in the period ahead.  

Mr. Mitchell commented that Mr. Koch's remarks reinforced 

doubts he had had about the appropriateness of the second sentence 

in the staff's draft of the first paragraph of the directive.1/ 

The sentence in question read "Output is still being retarded by 

adjustments of excessive inventories, but growth in aggregate final 

demands continues strong." To his mind that language implied strong 

growth in various categories of final demand. But strong growth did 

not appear to be evident in retail sales, or plant and equipment 

expenditures, or housing starts; it was evident mainly in defense 

spending. While a large rise in GNP was projected for the third 

quarter, at the moment that was still a projection for the future.  

On the basis of the evidence in the green book and Mr. Koch's 

statement, he doubted that the proposed sentence was justified.  

1/ Alternative draft directives submitted by the staff for 

Committee consideration are appended to these minutes as 
Attachment A.



5/23/67 -27

Mr. Hickman said that he had reached the same conclusion 

on first reviewing the staff's draft directive.  

Mr. Koch remarked that the sentence in question seemed 

appropriate to him in light of first-quarter GNP developments, 

when total final sales rose about $15 billion. It was true that 

the rise in Government expenditures, at an annual rate of nearly 

20 per cent, was unusually rapid, but personal consumption expen

ditures also increased at a rate of about 5 per cent. Within 

consumer expenditures, the evidence of weakness was limited mainly 

to durable goods; both nondurables and services were advancing at 

usual rates relative to income. It was not unreasonable to expect 

expenditures in the latter two categories to rise at their projected 

rates in coming quarters, and a turnaround in durable goods spending 

seemed likely.  

More generally, Mr. Koch said, increases in real GNP at a 

4 or 5 per cent annual rate--the most that could be expected--would 

imply increases of about $10 billion per quarter in the GNP at its 

current level. With Government expenditures advancing at their 

current rates, much acceleration in the rates at which other kinds 

of outlays were advancing would put substantial upward pressure on 

prices.  

In response to Mr. Mitchell's question, Mr. Koch said he 

would agree that the main strength in the first quarter had been in



5/23/67

Government spending. Mr. Mitchell then observed that he thought 

it would be desirable to indicate that fact in the language of 

the directive.  

Chairman Martin commented that Mr. Mitchell's point could 

be accommodated by revising the second clause of the sentence in 

question to read, "but growth in final demands, particularly 

Government, continues strong." 

Mr. Daane said he was agreeable to pinpointing the Govern

ment sector in the manner the Chairman had suggested, without trying 

to specify the degree of strength in the rest of the economy. He 

personally was more sympathetic than Mr. Mitchell was to the view 

that there was evidence of strength elsewhere.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Expansion in the monetary aggregates has proceeded at 

very close to the projected rates since the last meeting of 
the Committee. Bank credit is increasing much less rapidly 

in May than in earlier months this year, as anticipated, 
and the outlook for June is for another moderate--though 
somewhat larger--rise. Business loan growth, in particular, 

has slowed markedly since mid-April. With continuing heavy 

capital market financing and some inventory liquidation 

projected, I would expect little strength in business loan 
demand over the summer, except for a temporary June tax 

date surge.  
Despite the recent slowing in bank credit expansion, 

average rates of growth over the first half still will be 

very high, reflecting our efforts to stimulate the economy 

and the associated resurgence in financial intermediation.  

But in a longer context this expansion can be viewed as a 

catching-up phase following the period of severely restricted

-28-



5/23/67

credit availability last summer and fall. Assuming that 
our June projections are about right, the rates of increase 
in the banking aggregates from mid-1966 to mid-1967 will 
have amounted to 6 per cent for the credit proxy, 11 per 
cent for total time deposits, and 2-1/2 per cent for the 
money supply. All of these increases are a good deal below 
the average rates of growth experienced in the two preceding 
years of high prosperity.  

Similarly, the first-quarter flow of funds estimates 
show a sharp increase in total credit expansion, featured by 
a massive shift towards financial intermediation. But the 

$70 billion annual rate for total credit raised is not much 
different from the figures for 1965 and 1964 and is well 
below the increases of late 1965 and the first half of 1966.  
Moreover, the ratio of private borrowing to net private 
investment outlays in the first quarter remained somewhat 
lower than it had been prior to mid-1966. Thus I can see 
no reason, either in the banking numbers or in total credit 
flows, for faulting the performance of policy over this 
period, nor for changing its stance at present. Renewed 
vigorous economic expansion later on may require increased 
restraint in time, of course, but I agree with Mr. Koch 
that the current situation remains rather spotty and that 
that decision need not be made now.  

Of immediate significance to the Committee, however, 
are the continuing disparate movements in interest rates.  
The Treasury bill market has continued very strong, with 
the 3-month rate down 25 basis points further since the 
last meeting of the Committee. But the capital markets 
have remained under exceptional pressure; yields on long 
Governments, municipals, and new issue corporates have 
increased by fully 40 basis points over the last 6 weeks 
and are again within hailing distance of the record highs 
reached late last summer.  

Both developments reflect in important degree the 

continuing deterioration in investor expectations for the 
future course of interest rates and bond prices. Most if 

not all market participants seem convinced that there will 
be a sharp economic upswing later in the year, are concerned 
about the possibility of a major intensification of the war 
in Vietnam, foresee the need for very large Federal deficit 

financing operations in the second half, and anticipate con

tinuing strong private credit demands, at least in long-term 
markets. Under these circumstances, there is a strong and 

pervasive desire for liquidity by investors, and a corres

pondingly weak interest in long-term fixed-dollar commitments.

-29-



5/23/67

There obviously is substance to these apprehensions, but 
the question is one of degree--has investor sentiment, 
and therefore the change in yield levels, been overdone 
for now? 

In short-term markets, constraints on the supply of 
instruments do appear to have played an important role in 
the yield decline. The supply of Treasury bills available 
to the public has dropped unusually sharply this year, 
reflecting retirements and official purchases by the 
System and by the Home Loan Banks, and banks have not 
seemed especially eager to push up their totals of short 
CD's. After mid-year this situation is likely to reverse, 
as the supply of short-term Government securities increases 
sharply with deficit financing and banks perhaps become 
more interested in issuing Cd's to finance fall loan expan
sion. In long-term markets, supply has also played an 
important role--in the opposite direction--as buyers have 
had to absorb record volumes of corporate and municipal 
bonds, as well as large amounts of participation certifi
cates. But here, unfortunately, the prospect of a reversal 
after mid-year is far less certain.  

The major congestion in long-term markets has been in 
the corporate area, where public bond offerings have been 
truly massive. In the first four months, such offerings 
amounted to $4.6 billion--nearly double the year-earlier 
total--and no respite is in store for May and June, when 
calendars continue very heavy. There are three possible 
grounds for expecting a decline in new issue volume later 

on. First is that corporations, having reduced liquid 

asset holdings much less than seasonally early this year, 
may soon reach desired liquidity ratios once the very 

heavy second-quarter tax payments are out of the way.  

The second is that private placement activity is on the 

rise, which may serve to shift financing from the more 
interest-sensitive public market. And the third consid

eration is that the spread by which corporate outlays for 

fixed investment and inventories has exceeded internal 

funds is declining sharply as the year progresses.  

Nevertheless, it would be extremely hazardous to 

predict a decline in future capital market financing, in 
view of the great influence that the decisions of a 

relatively few corporations can have on the totals. In 

the first four months of this year, for example, the surge 

in financing was mainly attributable to the fact that 30 

corporations chose to make public bond offerings of $50

-30-



5/23/67

million or more, as against only 13 in the same period 
last year. Most of this increase represented the issues 
of manufacturing corporations that seldom come to market.  
There is a large number of such potential borrowers, and 
more could decide to come to market because, for example, 
they wish to reduce their dependence on bank financing or 
squirrel up liquidity as a hedge against the future. And 
most such manufacturing firms would probably not be dis
suaded by historically high interest rates, particularly 
if they think rates may move higher in the year or two 
ahead.  

High interest rates can influence other borrowers, 
however, including smaller business enterprises, State 
and local governments, and home buyers. And many investors 
can be influenced in how they commit their funds by the 
differentials in yields available. It seems clear, for 
example, that the recent sharp rise in bond rates presents 
a threat to full recovery in the mortgage market. Institu
tions with flexible investment latitude already appear to 
be diverting important amounts of funds to the bond market, 
and are likely to become progressively less interested in 
pushing for mortgage commitments if the yield spread as 
against bonds narrows further from what already is an all
time low. Major support for the residential mortgage market 
is coming from the savings and loan associations, of course, 
but the record inflows to these and other intermediaries 
could be jeopardized too if savings rates are reduced at 
midyear or if the rise in market yields spreads into the 
intermediate-maturity instruments that provide a better 
substitute for deposits.  

It seems altogether too early in the recovery to curb 
the flow of mortgage and other non-business credit. More
over, a continuing uptrend in long rates could prove 
exceedingly dangerous, coming on the eve of heavy Treasury 
demands in the short and intermediate markets. There could 
be an escalation in the whole rate structure that would be 

at least premature, if not unwarranted, in terms of the 
economic outlook.  

If we are in the midst of a strong upward trend in 
long-term rates, there may be little that the System could 
or should do to stem the tide. But some of the current 

borrowing may be anticipatory, and investor sentiment may 
be too sour for prospective near-term economic developments.  

If so, the stage may be about set for a market rally, which 
the System could encourage and help set in motion by focusing

-31-



5/23/67 -32

its operations on coupon issues during the next few 
weeks, when a net of more than one-half billion dollars 
in additional bank reserves needs to be provided. The 
Committee's desire to aid long-term markets, to the 
extent feasible within the context of the System's 
normal reserve supplying operations, could be recognized 
explicitly by adoption of alternative B for the directive, 
which I would recommend.  

In reply to a question by Mr. Ellis, Mr. Holmes said that 

the Treasury probably would have to raise cash in the market shortly 

after mid-year.  

Mr. Hickman referred to the proposal that part of the reserve 

needs in the coming peroid might be met by buying coupon issues 

rather than bills. He asked whether any thought had been given to 

the possibility of also selling bills, which were in short supply, 

and concurrently buying intermediate- and long-term bonds.  

Mr. Holmes said that for the peroid immediately ahead the 

Desk had enough room to operate in coupon issues without engaging 

in the type of operation Mr. Hickman had mentioned. There were 

risks in over-doing coupon operations, although at present the 

technical position of the market was favorable to them. The Desk's 

action yesterday in bidding so as to let $100 million of its bill 

holdings run off might be viewed as a small step in the direction 

suggested.  

Mr. Hickman then remarked that concurrent sales of bills 

and purchases of coupon issues might be kept in mind as a possibility 

for the future, if the present market situation persisted.



5/23/67 -33

Mr. Partee observed that such swaps would be an important 

departure from past practice. In any case, they were not likely 

to be necessary in the coming period, when the Desk would have the 

latitude to buy as much as $500 million of coupon issues in the 

course of meeting reserve needs. After that, of course, the 

Committee might need to consider the bigger step of engaging in 

swaps, depending on market conditions at the time.  

Mr. Mitchell asked what was happening to the proceeds of 

the current heavy corporate bond offerings. In particular, were 

they being invested in short-term market instruments? Did corporate 

buying account for much of the recent demand for bills? 

Mr. Partee said that the available data indicated that the 

first-quarter decline in corporate liquidity was much less than 

seasonal. In that period corporations may have bought CD's and 

bills, although the supply of bills available to the public had 

declined sharply this year, and CD's outstanding had not been 

rising recently. Commercial paper, however, had been expanding 

rapidly. Bank loan figures suggested heavy business loan repayments 

in the last few weeks, probably reflecting in part the use of bond 

financing proceeds.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether there were any indications that 

the recent tendency for borrowers to bypass the banking system was



5/23/67

putting pressure on the prime rate. In his judgment the current 

prime rate was too high by at least 1/2 point.  

Mr. Partee said he had heard relatively little discussion 

of the prime rate recently.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments and related matters: 

I want to speak this morning about the long-run 
problem of the balance of payments. But four points 
about recent developments are worth recalling first.  
One is that during the seven months just past, the 
liquidity deficit before special transactions has 
been running at a rate near $1 billion a quarter, 
having been swollen by heavy imports, by increased 
military expenditures abroad, and perhaps also by 
unidentified movements of U.S. business funds into 
sterling. The second point is that within this 
recent period, the merchandise trade balance has 
improved: imports have passed their peak and exports 
seem to be still rising. Third, identified flows of 

private investment funds largely offset the trade 
improvement in the first quarter of 1967 and kept the 

adjusted liquidity balance from improving much.  

Finally, the deficit on the basis of official reserve 

transactions has been very large this year because of 

the repayments to the Euro-dollar market by U.S. banks; 

but very recently the outflow of these repayments has 

stopped and given place for the moment to some inflow, 

paralleling the renewed efforts of some banks to get 

domestic CD money.  
The international economy, like our own, has been 

standing almost still the last few months. This is 

going to be a testing time for U.S. exports. It may 

also be a good time to take a look at the long-run 

problem of the balance of payments.  

There are really only three kinds of paths to 
international exchange equilibrium for the United 

States to take. Some day the country might simply 

give up, in a desperate gambler's mood, and resign

-34-



5/23/67

to other countries the fixing of exchange values for 
the dollar. The consequences would be unpredictable, 
but probably chaotic; as Mr. Solomon suggested three 
weeks ago, we might end up with an undepreciated trade 
dollar and a depreciated capital dollar. Or, the country 
might take the path of isolationism, raising tariffs to 
keep imports out and building up administrative restric
tions to keep capital in. Or, thirdly, we can still 
aim to make headway along the path we think the country 
prefers and should prefer--that is, the path symbolized 
by IMF, GATT, and OECD, a path of rational international 
cooperation.  

When I use words like those, the first questions 
you must be asking are what kind of cooperation do we 
want and how are we to get it. Within the government, 
questions like these receive attention, but it is a 
pity that in the public mind the question of cooperation 
to get balance restored has not taken root; it has been 
squeezed out by the questions of cooperation to finance 
the U.S. deficit and avoid speculative disturbances, as 
well as by the separate question of cooperation to 
invent a supplementary reserve asset.  

Any cooperative solution for restoring equilibrium 
will have to include elements relating to trade, to 
investment and aid for the nonindustrialized world, to 
capital movements among the industrial countries, and to 
military expenditures. The Europeans do not see eye to 
eye with us on the various elements of a solution, but 
it is much too soon to give up hope.  

We cannot expect the Europeans to inflate their 
price levels deliberately so as to bring about a 
realignment of prices and costs within the present 
exchange rate structure--a realignment that I for one 
think is very much needed to help restore equilibrium.  
French and Italian policies in 1964 and British and 
German policies in 1965 and 1966 are proof enough that 
they will all resist inflation at one stage or another.  
Nevertheless, it is open to us to outdo them in maintain

ing price stability--and if we can do that, they can 
hardly disapprove. They may not always like U.S.  
competition, but there is universal acceptance that 

price stability in the United States is an essential 
element for a cooperative solution.  

With respect to capital and aid, the United States, 
as you know, puts much emphasis on the need for development

-35-



5/23/67

of European institutional structures and fiscal policies 
for a more effective mobilization of savings and for 
its channeling into foreign lending and aid. The 
Europeans, for their part, have urged us over the years 
to let U.S. interest rates rise and to put administrative 
restraints on U.S. capital outflows. By last year we 
had gone quite a distance along these lines, and many 
Europeans are not so sure now of what they want us to do.  

I must turn to what this Committee is directly 
concerned with: the relation of U.S. monetary policy to 
any cooperative cure of the imbalance in international 
payments. Two principles define the relation adequately, 
I think. First, because the balance of payments cure is 
a slow matter, changes in U.S. monetary policy should 
usually be determined only by domestic needs and objec
tives. But, secondly, because an essential ingredient of 
any cooperative solution for the balance of payments is 
U.S. price stability, the general slant of U.S. monetary 
policy should be biased toward the price stability objec
tive--more so than if we had no external deficit to get 
rid of.  

During the past six or seven months the Committee 
has deliberately disregarded the second of these 
principles. Last autumn the three largest economies of 
the western world, those of the United States, Germany, 
and Britain, were either on the edge of recession or in 
it. From every point of view, the top priority then was 
to prevent a world recession. The Federal Reserve acted 
rightly in its role of international leadership, by 
temporarily giving low weight to the balance of payments 
and future price stability.  

We should now be asking ourselves some hard questions 
about ways and means of preventing price inflation. Such 
as: by what means should the United States maintain 
growth and stability without allowing industrial capacity 
utilization to rise so much as to provoke an inflationary 
boom? And, for example: is it necessary or desirable 
that total non-Federal debt in the U.S. economy go on 
rising from year to year at an average rate as high as 

8 per cent, as it did in the decade through 1965? Or, 
more generally: are low long-term interest rates really 

necessary for growth? 
Long before questions such as these are resolved, 

we shall have to face a question of timing. Even today 
we must ask whether the danger of world recession is now 

past, and whether Federal Reserve policy should now again

-36-



5/23/67

give special weight to price stability for balance of 
payments reasons. I cannot give an unequivocal answer 
of "yes" today. In Germany,the key country in Europe 
in this regard, we do not yet have evidence that an 
upturn has started. Information just received on 
British industrial production suggests that the cyclical 
recovery there around the year-end was tending to peter 
out in February and March. You have heard what Mr. Koch 
and Mr. Partee have said about the U.S. economy.  

Whatever the timing may be, it seems clear that 
once a new advance does get strongly under way the 
problem of maintaining price stability will force itself 
on us.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Treiber, who made the following statement: 

Recent statistics show the economy in a sideways 

movement. Reduced inventory spending appears to be 

offsetting a substantial increase in final demand. The 
business atmosphere has become less buoyant and perhaps 
more realistic than it was only a few weeks ago. The 

economic situation, however, has strengthened in several 

fundamental respects. The inventory adjustment is 

apparently proceeding in a rapid but orderly fashion, 
while the housing indicators have continued to strengthen 

slowly. These developments are consistent with an out
look for renewed and strong economic growth in the latter 

part of the year. The continued sluggishness of consumer 

buying remains a major source of uncertainty in the 

private sector of the economy, but the recent rapid 
build-up of consumer liquid savings, as well as the 

continued growth in personal income, suggests that some 

strengthening in this sector is the most likely prospect.  

At the same time, the Federal budget is highly 

stimulative. It is apparent that there will be no 

increase in income taxes at midyear. The fiscal stimulus 
in the second half of 1967 is likely to be of record or 
near-record proportions. The prospect for a simultaneous 

push later in the year, from both a highly stimulative 

fiscal policy and renewed strong total private demand,

-37-



5/23/67

is reminiscent of the situation that occurred in late 
1965 and early 1966 when economic over-heating became 
all too apparent.  

The dangers of a reemergence of excessive demand 
pressure are heightened by the cost pressures that are 
now being created by generous wage settlements. I get 
the impression that 6 per cent annual wage increases, 
combined more often than not with cost-of-living 
escalator clauses, are now viewed as attainable targets 
in wage negotiations. With food prices likely to move 
higher in coming months, new wage demands may be even 
greater, while the escalator clauses under existing 
contracts will provide a further push in wage costs.  
All of this suggests that if excessive demand pressures 
develop on the scale of late 1965 and early 1966, there 
are Likely to be even more serious price consequences 
than at that time.  

The prospect for a renewal of rapid price increases 
and tight supply conditions in domestic markets becomes 
especially disturbing against the backdrop of recent 
balance of payments developments. The situation here 
is clearly deteriorating despite substantial recent 
improvement in the trade surplus. The reported liquidity 
deficit in the first quarter of the year was at a 
seasonally adjusted annual rate of $2.2 billion, but 
after the elimination of special transactions the under
lying deficit was over $4 billion. Both of these deficit 
measures were about unchanged from their high fourth
quarter rates despite a $1 billion rise in our trade 
surplus rate. Moreover, the deficit on an official 
settlements basis was at a $7.3 billion seasonally 
adjusted annual rate in the first quarter, up from 
$100 million in the fourth quarter of 1966. The large 
official settlements deficit reflects a shift of foreign 
private dollar holdings into central banks. Some of 
these shifts resulted from easier conditions in the 
United States money markets, and were reflected in the 
decline of U.S. bank borrowings in the Euro-dollar market.  
The disturbing over-all balance of payments situation 
in the first quarter of the year appears, moreover, to 
have continued in April, judging by the results of the 

flash report on the liquidity deficit for that month.  

Turning to the banking and general financial 
situation, it seems clear that liquidity rebuilding and

-38-



5/23/67

the corporate tax speedups have been the dominant 
factors in the large increases this year in bank 
credit and total credit flows. In May, however, bank 
credit is apparently rising little if at all, and the 
June forecast is for growth on a comparatively modest 
scale despite another surge in corporate tax payments.  
Such slowdowns are not disturbing in view of the sharp 
increases earlier this year, although a somewhat higher 
May-June average than is currently forecast would not 
be inappropriate.  

There is a large flow of funds into the savings 
banks and savings and loan associations. Mortgage 
credit is readily available. But current corporate 
issues are attractive to savings banks, and a number 
of savings banks are acquiring modest amounts of such 
issues. Interest rates on conventional and insured 
mortgages have been declining since last winter, but 
very recently we have seen at least one sign of a 
reversal in the direction of rates on conventional 
mortgages and scattered reports of increases in rates 
in the secondary market for FHA mortgages.  

The most striking current financial developments 
are in the long-term securities markets. Here rates 
have been under increased pressure since immediately 
after the recent discount rate reduction. Corporate 
and municipal borrowings have been at record high 
levels, and the markets are facing the prospect of 
very heavy borrowing through the remainder of the year 
by the U.S. Treasury and some of the Federal agencies.  
Although some long-term borrowing rates are approaching 
the peak levels of 1966, this seemingly is having little 
effect on willingness to borrow.  

The heavy corporate credit demands partly reflect 
the need to rebuild depleted liquidity positions and 
the heavy tax payments resulting from corporate tax 
speedups. Two other factors are probably also at 
work. First, the credit squeeze of last year may have 
led to a desire to increase liquidity as a hedge against 
a possible recurrence of the 1966 experience. Such a 
change in liquidity preference does not imply any 
definite planning by corporations to use such funds to 
finance spending on goods and services; rather it would 
be a precautionary measure. Second, a part of the 
heavy demands may reflect a decision to accumulate funds

-39-



5/23/67

now that will be needed for spending later this year 
or early next year. These two factors obviously have 
differing implications for the prospective strength of 
private demands for goods and services in the months 
ahead. But, with respect to interest rates, it seems 
to me on balance that as the second half of the year 
progresses, forces will be working toward higher, 
rather than lower, rates. Presumably the greatest 
effect will be on short- and intermediate-term rates, 
but there could also be some further rise in long-term 
rates.  

In summary, while the aggregative statistics 
remain on a plateau, the domestic economic outlook has 
strengthened. It will probably be at least a few more 
months before a clear uptrend in the economic indicators 
is firmly established. At the same time, market forces 
have resulted in a substantial and sustained rise in 
long-term interest rates despite continued ease in the 
short-term areas of the market. The rise in long-term 
rates carries with it the possibility of slowing the 
prospective economic upturn, especially in the housing 
sector, 

Against this background and the poor international 
balance of payments situation, it seems to me that monetary 
policy should remain essentially unchanged over the 
coming four weeks, and that open market operations 
should be conducted with a view to maintaining about 
the prevailing conditions in the money market.  

During the coming weeks the routine or market 

factors presumably will be absorbing reserves, and thus 
the System will need to supply reserves in order to 

maintain prevailing money market conditions. In such 
circumstances the purchase of coupon issues would seem 

desirable. Such purchases in moderate amounts in the 

light of availability should tend to relieve some of the 

pressures on the long-term markets generally. Aggressive 

buying could generate undesirable and even perverse 

shifts in market expectations, especially if the markets 
were to conclude that the System had a specific interest 

rate objective in mind. Caution toward buying in the 

longer-term markets for the purpose of relieving pressures 

in those markets is also reinforced by the strong economic 

outlook for the months ahead.  

As for the directive, I prefer alternative A. I 

assume, with respect to the two-way proviso clause which

-40-



5/23/67 -41

is included in alternative A, that it is the current 
expectation that total bank credit will rise at a rate 
of about 5 per cent. I would expect the Manager to 
act under the proviso clause if the growth rate of the 
credit proxy were to fall much below that level or to 
rise substantially to, say, a 10 per cent level.  

Mr. Ellis commented that perhaps the best way to highlight 

what was occurring in New England was to contrast what the statis

tics were saying about employment, production, and construction 

with the attitude of buoyancy and optimistic outlook that prevailed.  

For example, initial claims for unemployment compensation had been 

more numerous than a year ago for thirteen consecutive weeks 

through May 6. And yet the papers were crowded with advertisements 

of job offerings, labor turnover was extremely high, and there was 

no evident concern about difficulty in securing jobs. Workweeks 

of manufacturing production workers had continued to contract 

slightly and overtime had been reduced at some nondefense plants, 

and yet workers were confidently seeking, expecting, and in many 

cases winning wage increases even though their contracts did not 

provide formally for wage negotiations this year.  

In contrast to the U.S. pattern, Mr. Ellis continued, 

residential construction contracts had been declining in the last 

several months, but the increased availability of mortgages had 

accelerated the amount of planning for new construction and the 

market reflected that optimistic sense of moving ahead.



5/23/67 -42

Mr. Ellis regarded the consumer spending pattern as a 

confusing mixture of gains and losses. The Boston Reserve 

Bank's seasonally adjusted April index for department store 

sales was down from its March level but held a few points above 

its year-ago level. Department store sales in the reporting 

sample for the four weeks ending May 13 were 8 per cent better 

than those for the same period of 1966, but that relatively good 

performance only neutralized the poor performance earlier in the 

year. Cumulative sales for 1967 were just matching those of last 

year.  

He would point out, Mr. Ellis said, that the volume of 

business transactions must be increasing. The number of checks 

the Boston Bank handled during the month of April exceeded year

ago volume by 12 per cent. On a dollar-value basis, checks 

cleared in the four weeks ending May 3 ran 16 per cent ahead of 

last year's comparable period. Credit flows in the District were 

dominated by signs of more widespread easing. At District savings 

banks the rate reductions on mortgages he had reported for the 

Boston banks at the previous meeting had now become widespread.  

Of the 70 non-Boston savings banks in the District 28 now reported 

their most common rate at 6 per cent. One bank had reported a 

5-3/4 per cent mortgage rate. On the other hand, the rates paid 

on deposits continued to rise; seven of the 80 banks in the



5/23/67 -43

reporting survey increased their rates in April. Sixty-five per 

cent of those banks now reported 4-1/2 per cent as the rate they 

paid. Discussions with District savings bankers revealed some 

desire on their part for a lower rate on their deposits, but no 

willingness to start a downward trend. Happiness with the inflow 

of funds did not incline them to upset the relationships which 

supported that inflow.  

At commercial banks, too, liquidity was rebuilding 

compared to a year ago, Mr. Ellis continued. Investment port

folios had been increased by about 25 per cent, with the major 

source of funds being the time deposit sector. Time deposits 

had grown 21 per cent in the past year in the First District, 

compared with 8 per cent for the nation. With loan demand 

unchanged or only slightly stronger, banks' willingness to supply 

funds was definitely greater than it had been three months ago.  

There was evidence also that the banks were reaching into the 

fall maturities in signing up CD's. Long-maturity CD's had been 

getting the largest boost in rates, which had ranged upward to 

25 basis points in the First District. Banks appeared to be 

providing themselves with funds for use late in the year when 

business bank loan demand could rise appreciably. District insur

ance companies reported that policy loans seemed to have leveled 

off at a rate approximately twice their 1965 level, and that an



5/23/67 -44

increase in mortgage payments and in other flows of funds had 

permitted them to resume commitments at a rate comparing very 

well with the 1965 level.  

Mr. Ellis found the staff analysis presented in the green 

book and the blue book in advance of today's meeting to be espe

cially useful because it concentrated more than usually on 

projecting the probable course of the economy for the remainder 

of the year. He agreed very much with the tone of that analysis 

and with Mr. Koch's comments this morning, and was glad to see 

the emphasis on final demand in the analysis. He found himself 

wanting to take issue with the projections at only two points, 

at both of which he thought the analysis was more conservative 

than was warranted. His first question related to the projec

tion for "only a moderate growth in consumer expenditures in 

the second and third quarters."1/ He had difficulty accepting 

1/ The language quoted by Mr. Ellis was employed on 
page 11-4 of the green book, in the context of the following 
passage: "In real terms, the rise in disposable income in 
the first quarter was larger than in any quarter of the past 
year. Although the second quarter flow of income will be 
somewhat smaller, the increase in spending power will still 
be substantial. Gains in total employment--although not in 
industrial employment--and wage rates are continuing, while 
the small increase in the personal tax-take in the first half 
of this year is leaving an unusually high proportion of income 
gains in consumer's hands. These high levels of real income 
have been reflected in an exceptionally high and rising saving 

rate over the last six months, and consumers are therefore in 
a position to step up spending. However, total retail sales 
are still sluggish, and since extended periods of high rates 
of consumer savings have occurred before, we are projecting 
only a moderate growth in consumer expenditures in the second 
and third quarters."



5/23/67 -45

the logic of the argument that the occurrence of extended periods 

of high savings rates in the past was adequate reason to expect 

only moderate growth in consumer spending. The facts that incomes 

were growing rapidly and that savings had been high would incline 

him to expect a step-up in consumer spending of significant 

proportion--and he said that knowing the retail sales data for 

March had been revised downward.  

The second point at which Mr. Ellis' expectation differed 

from the staff's related to the estimates of Federal expenditures 

underlying the projections of the high-employment deficit shown 

in the table on page 111-18 of the green book. As he read the 

numbers, the staff's estimates were conservative. In particular, 

the projected third-quarter high-employment Federal deficit of 

$10.2 billion seemed to him to be an underestimate, and portended 

an even higher fourth-quarter deficit.  

Unhappily, Mr. Ellis said, both of those differences in 

projections served only to intensify concern for the inflationary 

pressures that would be present in the economy in the third, and 

especially the fourth, quarters of this year. In that connection 

Mr. Hersey had done the Committee a service in reminding it of 

the importance of preserving price stability for the sake of the 

balance of payments.



5/23/67 -46

In seeking to translate such economic projections into 

policy prescriptions, Mr. Ellis continued, one obviously arrived 

first at a conclusion that fiscal policy as presently projected 

was quite inappropriate for the needs of the economy. Not only 

would fiscal policy be very stimulative; debt management would 

be impeding the possibility of utilizing monetary policy smoothly 

and effectively. The unprecedented borrowing needs, on the order 

of $18 billion, between July and December of this year obviously 

translated into frequent and large Treasury issues in the capital 

market. The obvious desirability of avoiding major shifts in 

monetary policy during the course of Treasury financing would 

mean that the opportunities for shifting policy after early July 

were very likely to be limited.  

In Mr. Ellis' opinion those reflections added up to a very 

uncomfortable choice facing the Federal Reserve. The projections 

clearly indicated intentions of consumers, business, and Government 

to be spending at levels which could not be satisfied by an economy 

already operating with high rates of utilization of its labor 

resources. The mechanics of Treasury financing were going to 

make policy moves difficult to schedule between July and December, 

and yet between now and the first of July it was quite likely that 

the unemployment rate might move up fractionally and there might 

be additional public attention given to slight declines in the



5/23/67 -47

capacity utilization rate in manufacturing. But because monetary 

policy worked with a lag, because the projections were firm, and 

because later changes in policy would be difficult, in his judg

ment the trend of policy should be gradually shifted into a 

posture of lessened ease between now and the first of July. It 

should become clear to the market that the Committee was not 

pressing to maintain a rapid rate of bank credit expansion as a 

continued means of resisting recession. Mr. Koch had used the 

phrase "cautious ease" to describe the Committee's current policy.  

He (Mr. Ellis) would urge rather a little more caution and a little 

less ease.  

From that point of view, Mr. Ellis said, it would be 

clearly inappropriate to put major emphasis on coupon operations 

designed to tip long-term rates into a downward path. The volume 

of coupon purchases the Manager had suggested--$250 million--was 

quite large, and would signal a continued intention to fight 

recession with further ease. He thought the Committee could not 

stem the tide of rising long-term rates, and an effort to do so 

would be interpreted as a deliberate policy move, 

Furthermore, Mr. Ellis remarked, the existence of high 

long-term rates must be having some marginal effect in restrain

ing capital investment. In view of the GNP projection, the 

Committee might logically conclude that it should be thankful



5/23/67 -48

for whatever restraint such rates will have provided by next fall.  

Without prejudice to the value of coupon operations on some occa

sions, he saw no long-range objective in their intensification at 

this time and he would reject alternative B of the directive drafts.  

In keeping with the objective he had expressed of beginning 

to tip policy toward less ease, Mr. Ellis said, he would urge that 

the proviso clause of alternative A be amended to provide for off

setting only those deviations of bank credit expansion in excess 

of the projected 4 - 7 per cent growth rate. That could be done 

quite simply by inserting the word "upward" before the word 

"deviations" in the proviso clause of alternative A.  

Mr. Irons reported that economic conditions in the Eleventh 

District were strong. Although rates of increase had moderated 

considerably and the District economy was moving sidewise, activity 

was at a very high level. The employment situation continued to 

be very tight around such major cities as Dallas and Houston, where 

unemployment rates were running in a 1.9 to 2.2 per cent range and 

the numbers of employed persons rose each month. The District 

production index had remained about unchanged for the past two or 

three months, with activity in both durable and nondurable goods 

industries relatively stable. Residential construction was down 

from its year-ago level, but nonresidential construction was up and 

total construction activity probably was up slightly. Department



5/23/67 -49

store sales were 7 per cent above a year ago in the week ending 

May 13, and for the year to date they were up about 4 per cent.  

Automobile registrations were running about 8 per cent below last 

year. The picture in agriculture was mixed; moisture conditions 

had become good recently in large areas of the District, but in 

the western part there continued to be a serious need for moisture.  

In the financial area, Mr. Irons said, bank loans, demand 

deposits, and time and savings deposits were all down less than 

seasonally during the past three or four weeks. Most of the loan 

decline was in loans on Government securities; commercial and 

industrial loans were up by a moderate amount. The decline in 

time and saving deposits was due largely to a reduction in large 

CD's, although some bankers also reported that there had been some 

slowing of growth in consumer-type CD's. District banks, espe

cially the larger banks, were more liquid now than at this time 

a year ago, just prior to the intensification of monetary restraint.  

However, they were not as liquid as they would like to be, in view 

of the loan demands they anticipate. They also pointed out that, 

if it became necessary for the System to shift toward restraint 

again this year, the impact upon bank liquidity might be more 

rapid; thus, their concern with the current liquidity position, 

even though it is somewhat better than a year ago.



5/23/67 -50

Member bank borrowings from the Dallas Reserve Bank had 

been negligible recently, Mr. Irons continued, but District banks 

had increased their borrowings through the Federal funds market 

and in total were sizable net purchasers of Federal funds. Some 

District banks were maintaining day-to-day balances of funds 

purchased ranging from $25 - $35 million up to as high as $85 - $95 

million.  

With respect to the national economy, it seemed to Mr. Irons 

that the situation was one of continuing adjustment of a sort that 

the Committee had desired and had hoped would occur smoothly. The 

current inventory adjustment, and the related adjustments in indus

trial production and employment, seemed to him to be of that type.  

There apparently also had been an adjustment, if that is the word 

for it, between consumer income and expenditures, with the savings 

rate rising somewhat. Defense expenditures were continuing to rise, 

with no promise of moderating. He was concerned about the wage 

pressures that might develop and was inclined to agree with 

Mr. Treiber regarding the possibility of settlements involving 

6 per cent increases. Such wage rises would have a substantial 

effect on prices.  

In Mr. Irons' judgment the money markets had performed rea

sonably well in the past few weeks, but the capital market certainly 

had been under pressure. Increasing numbers of observers appeared



5/23/67 -51

to be expecting tighter money market conditions. There was 

general concern about the Federal budget deficit and the means 

by which it would be financed; if an expansionary credit policy 

was to be employed to help finance it, it was expected that the 

System would be fighting inflation again soon. He found very 

few people who anticipated much help from fiscal policy. On the 

contrary, stimulative rather than a restrictive fiscal policy was 

anticipated. There also was concern about the U.S. balance of 

payments position. While the trade sector had shown improvement 

recently, other sectors had deteriorated to the point at which 

the over-all balance of payments problem continued to be serious.  

Also, more people were becoming concerned about recent events and 

speculations with respect to silver and gold. The typical Eleventh 

District businessman did not like the notion of tinkering with 

U.S. gold policy.  

Against the background of that general situation, Mr. Irons 

felt that this was a good time for the Committee to indicate by its 

actions that no change was being made in credit policy. He liked 

Mr. Koch's phrase, "cautious ease," and thought that should be the 

Committee's objective. He favored alternative B for the directive 

because it pointed up the problem that the Committee had been and 

would be facing in the capital market. He agreed that caution 

would be necessary in operating in coupon issues; it would be



5/23/67 -52

unfortunate if the market came to believe that the Committee was 

virtually pegging long-term rates or setting a pattern for them.  

But it might be well to engage in operations in longer-term 

securities within reasonable limits and at times when the Desk 

judged such operations to be feasible, simply to give some 

support to the market and without leaving the impression that 

the Committee was attempting to peg a rate or a pattern of rates.  

With that qualification, he favored alternative B.  

Mr. Swan remarked that developments in the Twelfth 

District had contributed to the weakness in the national statistics 

for April. The unemployment rate in the Pacific Coast States rose 

sharply to over 5 per cent, with reductions in employment most 

marked in agriculture, construction, and manufacturing. However, 

unusual rains and cold weather during much of April undoubtedly 

played a significant role in that situation. The weather probably 

was a major factor in the weakness in construction activity and 

lumber production; it probably explained in good part the drop in 

housing starts in the West at a time when such starts were rising 

elsewhere. District fruit and vegetable crops also had been 

adversely affected by weather during the period. Seattle was the 

one booming area in the District; indeed, it was the only metropol

itan area in the District, out of 60 in the country, that had a 

"B"--or "low unemployment"--rating.



5/23/67 -53

In the three weeks through May 10, Mr. Swan said, total 

credit at the District weekly reporting banks declined about 

$350 million, about equally divided between loans and investments, 

in contrast to an increase of about the same amount in the 

corresponding period of 1966. The major banks remained net 

buyers of Federal funds and were maintaining a considerable 

volume of loans to securities dealers. As elsewhere, interest 

rates on longer-term CD's had moved up fractionally in the last 

few weeks, although currently there did not seem to be any great 

pressure on banks to obtain funds. Scattered replies from the 

mid-May survey of bank lending practices suggested a difference 

between the current situation and bank expectations for the longer 

run. The replies indicated both increased willingness by banks 

to make most types of loans currently and expectations of moderately 

stronger loan demands over the next few months.  

Last week, Mr. Swan continued, one California mortgage 

company based in Los Angeles announced an increase in rates on 

residential mortgages. That company advised that the action re

flected a decision by its principal outlet, the Metropolitan Life 

Insurance Company, to favor other investments over residential 

mortgages. There had not been similar increases by other lenders 

in California nor, as far as he was aware, by correspondents of 

Metropolitan Life elsewhere. Certainly, mortgage funds were still



5/23/67 -54

available through savings and loan associations at rates below 

that announced by this mortgage company. Nevertheless, the action 

was an indication of some pressure in the mortgage market.  

Mr. Swan said he had nothing to add with regard to the 

national economic situation; he was essentially in agreement with 

the analysis given in the green book and by the staff this morning.  

As to policy, he also thought that the Committee should maintain 

prevailing money market conditions and should continue about the 

present stance of over-all reserve availability, given the bank 

credit projection for June. He would hope, however, that bank 

credit growth would be closer to the lower end of the 4 - 7 per 

cent range projected than to the higher end. The money market 

conditions specified in the blue book seemed rather reasonable to 

him, but if the recent heavy demands for bills and other short

term instruments persisted he would expect the Federal funds rate 

to be somewhat below 4 per cent, even though other money market 

conditions were maintained as at present.  

Given prevailing conditions in the capital market, it 

seemed to Mr. Swan that some purchases of coupon issues would be 

justified in the coming period within the reserve-supplying opera

tions that would be undertaken in any event. He would not want 

purchases of coupon issues to go so far as to create an impression 

that the Committee had rate objectives. But it did seem appropriate



5/23/67 -55

to attempt to relieve some of the pressures and to maintain 

orderly conditions in that area.  

Mr. Swan said he had a few comments on the draft directive.  

The opening sentence of the first paragraph said that " 

renewed economic expansion is in prospect" without any indication 

of timing. He would prefer to have the statement read, " 

renewed economic expansion later in the year is in prospect." 

With respect to the alternatives for the second paragraph, it was 

true that the Committee had engaged in operations in coupon issues 

in the past without mentioning them specifically in the directive.  

He believed, however, that under present circumstances a reference 

in the directive was desirable. Accordingly, he preferred alter

native B to A. But he had two questions about the language of B.  

First, the phrase, "insofar as practicable" in the final clause 

of the draft seemed to him to raise many questions. He would 

suggest dropping that phrase, and adding the word "unusual" before 

the word "pressures." The clause would then read, "while modera

ting unusual pressures in the capital market." Secondly, whether 

the Committee adopted alternative A or B he felt strongly that it 

should reintroduce the proviso clause, which had been deleted from 

the directive adopted at the preceding meeting only because even 

keel considerations were dominant then. He could accept either a 

two-way clause such as was shown in alternative A or the one-way



5/23/67 -56

version that Mr. Ellis had suggested. If a proviso clause was 

added to B, however, he thought its opening words should be, "but 

open market operations shall be modified," rather than "but opera

tions shall be modified," to make clear that the reference 

intended was not to operations in coupon issues.  

Mr. Galusha commented that the Ninth District economy 

still seemed to be going along nicely. It was not growing as 

rapidly as it had been, but through the first quarter it grew 

more, relatively, than did the national economy. He had never 

thought of his District as being an arsenal of democracy but 

obviously defense orders had had a lot to do with maintaining 

the growth of output.  

Optimism remained high among nonagricultural producers 

in the District, Mr. Galusha said. So far, there had been no 

hint of impending cutbacks in capital spending. One could find 

differences of opinion about the near-term future of construction, 

but his judgment was that optimism dominated. He had even heard 

talk of an increase in mortgage rates. There was a very sharp 

increase in building permits in April. Expectations in the 

construction industry were high. Lumber production in Western 

Montana had increased, but proof of sustainable recovery had yet 

to come in.  

The mood of agriculture remained dark, Mr. Galusha contin

ued. Farmers and cattlemen continued unhappy. Although generally



5/23/67 -57

there would be increased acreages, distrust of long-run U.S.  

Department of Agriculture objectives would keep plantings below 

maximum acreages. There was no credit pressure anticipated from 

agriculture in the District this year.  

Mr. Galusha commented that he had little to say this 

morning about monetary policy. It might be doubtful that further 

purchases of coupon issues, even if sizable, would produce a sharp 

decline in long-term rates. Such a decline would come only when 

financial markets became convinced that taxes were going to be 

increased. In visits yesterday on Capitol Hill he had found a 

surprising receptivity to a tax increase and a good deal of 

unhappiness that the Administration was not openly pushing for 

its tax program. That attitude was based on many things, but 

mainly on mail indicating that people wanted to have a sense of 

sacrifice and of participation in the war effort.  

It was not clear, Mr. Galusha continued, that long-term 

rates should be a good deal lower than they presently were, given 

the staff's appraisal of economic prospects. Granting that, he 

still would be more comfortable if long-term markets were less 

plagued by uncertainties than they appeared to be, or were feeding 

less on what hopefully were false expectations. At the moment, 

there might be no good case for appreciably lower long-term rates.  

But there also seemed to be little point in letting those rates 

go to levels which, come fall, would appear too high.



5/23/67 -58

Translating that view into directive language presented the 

same problems to him as it had to Mr. Swan, Mr. Galusha said. But 

if he understood Mr. Swan's proposed language correctly, it would 

seem to give ample latitude to the Desk to curb its operations in 

the coupon area if it appeared that they were leading to the sub

stitution of a new set of false expectations for the present ones.  

Mr. Scanlon remarked that the economic picture in the 

Seventh District was similar to that reported at the last meeting.  

A rapid, even inflationary, upswing was widely expected for the 

remainder of the year, but available statistical evidence on 

employment, output, orders, and retail trade did not yet support 

that view.  

The most spectacular development of the past few months, 

Mr. Scanlon said, was the large increase in new claims for 

unemployment compensation, which were no longer confined to the 

auto industry. Reports of Chicago purchasing agents for March 

and April showed faster deliveries and shorter order lead-times; 

stable inventories, production, and employment; lower new orders 

and backlogs; and poorer profits. Farm machinery had now expe

rienced a letdown in demand, probably associated with the recent 

decline of farm income. Tractor sales in the Corn Belt were off 

more than 15 per cent from last year in the first quarter and by 

more than 25 per cent in March.



5/23/67 -59

Banking data currently did not offer useful evidence as 

to the underlying strength of loan demand, Mr. Scanlon continued.  

The decline in outstanding loans during the first half of May was 

contrary to the usual pattern, but was not unexpected following 

the heavy tax borrowing in March and April. District bank expe

rience was similar to that for the nation except for a relatively 

stronger increase in real estate loans. The first District 

responses to the quarterly survey of bank lending practices 

indicated "no change to moderate easing" in loan posture compared 

with three months earlier.  

Mr. Scanlon went on to say that because of the huge volume 

of financing in the capital markets and the wide spread between 

bank loan rates and commercial paper rates, business loans could 

drop sharply in the months ahead, except for tax periods, unless 

business activity were to be very strong. A recent Standard and 

Poor's survey indicated that only 39 per cent of corporate bond 

offerings this year were intended to finance plant and equipment 

expenditures, compared with 63 per cent last year. The bulk of 

those funds apparently was to be used for working capital, 

refinancing bank loans, and building liquidity.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that concern for liquidity continued to 

be reflected in changes both in bank asset portfolios and in 

liabilities. The reduction in loan-deposit ratios of major District



5/23/67 -60

banks since late 1966 had been quite small, on the average, with 

the biggest declines at banks with ratios exceeding 75 per cent.  

Loan ratios of many banks had continued to rise. Holdings of 

short-term Governments and money market loans in relation to 

deposits likewise did not indicate much improvement in liquidity.  

Nevertheless, "borrowed" funds, from whatever source, had declined 

substantially, and although a large volume of funds had gone into 

"other" securities, those had been mainly short-term municipal 

obligations and PC's of Government agencies. Moreover, since 

March the major time deposit inflows had been in the form of 

consumer-type CD's, which the banks regarded as much less subject 

to withdrawals than the negotiable type but less stable than 

savings deposits. The fact that the biggest banks still appeared 

somewhat uncomfortable about their liquidity positions and desired 

to be better prepared for seasonal demands later in the year seemed 

to militate against any near-term downward adjustments in either 

loan or deposit rates at those banks.  

Mr. Scanlon agreed with the Manager that System operations 

in coupon issues had to be undertaken on a cautious basis. He 

would give the Manager ample latitude to operate in that area, 

but would discourage any feeling on the part of market participants 

that the Committee was now using a rate objective over the broad 

spectrum of maturities. It seemed to him that that was a very



5/23/67 -61

delicate business, particularly in view of the amounts the 

Committee was considering, and that it would require extreme 

skill and care on the part of the Desk in order to avoid giving 

the wrong signals to the market.  

As to policy, Mr. Scanlon favored maintaining the prevail

ing conditions in the money market--which was called for by both 

alternatives for the second paragraph of the directive. If, as 

Mr. Swan suggested, it was desirable to make reference in the 

directive to operations in coupon issues, he would accept Mr. Swan's 

proposed language.  

Mr. Clay said that, taking into account new data and revi

sions of earlier data, current evidence on the private economy 

and its near-term prospects was somewhat more restrained than at 

the time of the last meeting of the Committee. However, when that 

recent evidence was put into the larger prospective of economic 

forces at work and prospects for the balance of the year, and 

when account was taken of the stimulative actions of the System 

in the last six months, the monetary policy implications of the 

recent changes in economic information appeared to be small.  

While the future pattern of economic activity could not 

be said to be clear, Mr. Clay continued, there was substantial 

reason to believe that the economy would be moving ahead much more 

actively in the third and fourth quarters of the year. Recent



5/23/67 -62

official statements pointed toward a significant increase in the 

stimulative thrust of the Federal budget. Moreover, the lull in 

inflationary pressures probably would be short-lived, not only 

because of demand and wage developments in the nonfarm sector but 

also because of increasing food and farm commodity prices. All 

factors considered, it would appear appropriate at this time to 

conduct a more moderately expansive monetary policy than in the 

early months of the year.  

For the period immediately ahead, Mr. Clay thought mainte

nance of essentially the current money market conditions probably 

would be satisfactory. In that connection, it would be desirable 

if the Treasury bill rate did not fall below the levels of last 

week. The developments in long-term interest rates and the increas

ing spread between short- and long-term rates were matters of 

concern. That became particularly true as long-term rates once 

again approached levels that could have adverse effects upon the 

flow of funds to the credit markets relative to the savings 

institutions. While the demand for funds in the credit markets 

continued in its current volume, there was a real question as to 

how much could be accomplished by conducting open market operations 

in the longer maturities, at least without flooding the banking 

system with reserve funds. There probably would be some marginal 

impact upon both short- and long-term yields in using such



5/23/67 -63

operations in providing desired reserves, however, and under 

present circumstances that would appear to be in order.  

Alternative B of the draft economic policy directives, 

with Mr. Swan's modifications, appeared satisfactory to Mr. Clay.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business activity in the Fifth 

District had shown some small signs of improvement in recent 

weeks. Building permits rose substantially in April to the 

highest level since March 1966 and reports indicated modest gains 

in construction activity, while insured unemployment had declined 

marginally. Two large national companies had announced substan

tial reductions in the list prices of a wide variety of their 

man-made fibers. The optimism index of the Richmond Reserve Bank's 

survey panel was a shade higher than a month ago and now better 

than 80 per cent of the respondents expected stability or some 

improvement. New and unfilled orders remained weak but had perhaps 

improved a shade, while the pressure of inventories seemed to have 

moderated somewhat. The substantial cuts embodied in the recent 

tariff agreement would probably have a significant impact on the 

important textile and chemical industries in the District, but 

the fragmentary information presently available did not permit 

any accurate appraisal. District weekly reporting banks continued 

to be substantial sellers of Federal funds although they had been 

more active in expanding loans and total bank credit than city 

banks throughout the country.



5/23/67 -64

At the national level, Mr. Wayne continued, the economy 

was operating at a high rate with near-full employment, despite 

several major adjustments which were the inevitable consequences 

of de-escalating an inflationary economy. In the somewhat calmer 

environment of recent weeks, monetary policy had been able to 

operate more effectively than in earlier periods. Well supplied 

with reserves from the earlier operations of the System, the 

banks had been able to meet their loan demand with little or no 

need to borrow. Short-term rates had been pushed down to or 

below the discount rate, but bank lending rates remained relatively 

high and sticky, while long market rates had been moving steadily 

higher. Those rates were matters of concern and if conditions 

were different it might be appropriate to return to a policy of 

aggressive ease. But several factors in the present situation 

gave him pause: the lack of improvement in the U.S. balance of 

payments and the possibility of a rapid deterioration in the 

country's international financial relations; the delayed effects 

of the large amounts of reserves the System had already supplied; 

the certainty of large but indefinite budget deficits; the uncer

tainty of any supporting fiscal action to restrain inflation if 

the need should arise; and the possibility of a quick return to 

an overheated economy. If the latter should develop it would be 

accentuated by the low level of unemployment. Since the country



5/23/67 -65

was not now facing a liquidity crisis, he did not believe it was 

necessary to supply reserves on the large scale of the first 

quarter. Rather, he would favor a policy which would encourage 

a moderate and sustainable growth in reserves and bank credit 

and he would hope that could be done without any great change in 

prevailing money market conditions. Also, he agreed with the 

suggestion in the blue book that in supplying reserves the 

Committee should emphasize as much as feasible the purchase of 

coupon issues, and therefore he preferred alternative B. Like 

Mr. Swan, he favored a proviso clause. He would accept all the 

amendments Mr. Swan had suggested, including the change in the 

first sentence of the directive.  

Mr. Mitchell said that in his judgment the current heavy 

volume of capital market financing was probably all to the good-

to the degree that corporations were improving their liquidity 

positions, increasing their working capital, and paying off 

debts--even though the large volume of financing had forced up 

long-term interest rates and provided some measure of financial 

restraint. He was still quite uneasy about the economic situation, 

but he thought his unease could be traced to the posture of fiscal 

policy, both last year and this year. More and more he had come 

to feel that early fiscal action was needed, not only for the 

reason Mr. Galusha had mentioned but also to deal with the problem 

of expectations and the problems of the real economy.



5/23/67 -66

Mr. Mitchell noted that he was unhappy about the staff's 

reliance on the bank credit proxy as a policy guide. It was 

evident that banks could increase the degree to which they were 

intermediating if they wanted to; rate ceilings were not limiting 

their ability to obtain funds at present. But because corpora

tions were repaying bank loans, loan demands were not strong and 

banks did not have an incentive to increase their intermediation.  

It was a mistake, he thought, to use as a criterion for policy a 

measure that was influenced by the extent to which banks chose to 

intermediate. About all the System should do in that connection 

was to try to dissuade the Home Loan Bank Board from rolling back 

the rate ceilings at savings and loan associations.  

Thus, Mr. Mitchell continued, he thought the Committee's 

objective should not be formulated in the directive in terms of 

bank credit. In what terms should the objective be formulated? 

If long-term interest rates were used as a criterion, it would 

appear that there had been a great deal of restraint recently.  

But he did not think that the recent increases in long rates 

actually were imposing a large measure of restraint; rather, they 

reflected a kind of structural adjustment. He came back to the 

money supply as the criterion for policy. In his judgment, growth 

of the money supply in recent months had been adequate, if not 

generous, and he would not attempt to restrict it at this point.



5/23/67 -67

That led him to favor about the same posture for policy--not much 

change--that most other speakers had advocated today. He favored 

System purchases of coupon issues for two reasons. First, with 

the large demand for bills at present, it would be desirable to 

avoid reducing the supply. Secondly, such operations perhaps 

would result in some moderation in long-term rates.  

Mr. Daane said he had little to add to the staff materials 

and the discussion today of the economic situation. In his judg

ment, the cross-currents and uncertainties--which were well 

illustrated by the colloquy between Messrs. Mitchell and Koch 

following the latter's statement--pointed clearly to the desir

ability of an unchanged policy. While he (Mr. Daane) would not 

change policy today, he was concerned about the current and 

prospective balance of payments situation, and by the implications 

of the defense spending picture. The latter suggested an attempt 

to run a "guns and butter" economy, but he was skeptical as to 

whether that could be done without regenerating inflationary 

pressures. As Mr. Ellis had suggested, the Committee might be 

approaching the point at which it would be desirable to put more 

emphasis on caution and less on ease--that is, the point at which 

it might want to think twice about the risk of supplying reserves 

at a rate that might add to subsequent inflationary pressures.  

Today, Mr. Daane said, within the framework of an unchanged 

policy he would favor emphasizing coupon operations in the manner



5/23/67 -68

and to the extent that the Manager had indicated, with full 

recognition that there was no intention of trying to alter market 

expectations regarding the level and pattern of interest rates.  

He thought coupon operations would be desirable not only in 

helping to relieve the market overhang, but, more importantly, 

in cushioning downward pressures on bill rates for balance of 

payments reasons.  

Mr. Daane said he would go along with the thrust of 

alternative B of the draft directives. However, he did not favor 

the language reading "while moderating pressures in the capital 

market insofar as practicable" because it carried the connotation 

that the Committee thought it could move against the tide. He 

personally would prefer language reading, "while emphasizing 

operations in coupon issues in supplying reserve needs." That 

language would make it clear that purchases of coupon issues were 

to be made within the framework of reserve-supplying operations, 

and it did not carry any connotation that the Committee's opera

tions by themselves could move the market or that the Committee 

was trying to do so.  

Mr. Daane concluded by saying that he would not favor 

adding a proviso clause to alternative B, as Mr. Swan had suggested.  

He had been skeptical from the time the proviso clause was first 

introduced into the directive about the desirability of attempting



5/23/67 -69

to "fine tune" Desk operations to deviations of the proxy from 

expectations, and he continued to have that skepticism.  

Mr. Maisel commented this was an unusual day. Mr. Daane 

had just made all the points he (Mr. Maisel) had wanted to make.  

He had intended to recommend a change in the language of alterna

tive B along the lines of that Mr. Daane had suggested and he had 

also planned to speak against the proviso.  

Mr. Maisel agreed that the present was a confused period 

with many types of cross-currents. That was a prime reason why 

he wished to support the policy outlined in alternative B, 

although he had some misgivings over the way it had been pre

sented. It seemed to him the Committee need not adopt a long-term 

interest rate objective or even state its concern in terms of a 

problem of over-all pressures in the capital market.  

First, Mr. Maisel said, he would like to stress the 

importance of maintaining a steady growth of credit to avoid 

distortions in the economy. The projections of bank credit growth, 

for the next six weeks and for the current fiscal year, were neither 

quite up to normal. There was no reason not to furnish a normal 

growth of total reserves. Granted that posture of continuing 

expansion, the System would have to furnish reserves during the 

coming period. Given the state of expectations in the market and 

the over-all objectives for the economy this year, a question arose 

concerning the logical place for those reserves to be injected.



5/23/67 -70

It seemed clear to Mr. Maisel that the System should put 

the reserves into the long-term area rather than the bill area.  

In the bill area they would act mainly to force the bill rate 

down even further. Purchases would be competing in an area where 

the market, through its purchases, was showing its own strong 

preferences. On the other hand, if the System put them into 

longer-term issues, it would be aiding the market by supplying 

bills to help meet the market's desires for short-term liquidity.  

At the same time, the System would be decreasing the total of 

long-term issues, which the market said it was having trouble in 

digesting.  

It might be noted, Mr. Maisel continued, that to do other

wise meant that the System would be continuing to shorten still 

further the average maturity of its portfolio, which already was 

a good deal shorter than in many past periods. The System had a 

large portfolio. That meant it had to determine its average 

length. To shorten it rather than to lengthen it would mean the 

Committee was adopting a portfolio policy opposite to its basic 

goals.  

Also, Mr. Maisel said, by staying in the short end, the 

Committee might be increasing future problems. He was somewhat 

surprised that the question of a discount rate reduction had not 

been raised by those concerned with the technical relations between



5/23/67 -71

the bill rate and the discount rate. The gap below the discount 

rate was wider now than in over five years. Only in periods 

following two or more discount rate decreases in the past had 

there been a wider spread between the bill rate and the discount 

rate. Did technical relations hold in only one direction? 

It seemed to Mr. Maisel that the proper policy was simply 

to continue the Committee's current reserve policy, while adopting 

a portfolio policy related to the market. The reserves necessary 

to insure a normal growth in bank credit should be furnished through 

purchases of long-term issues. The Committee would not attempt 

to set the interest rates in the long-term market but would not 

stop them from adjusting in accordance with the demand and supply 

forces which its portfolio adjustments created.  

While he had frequently supported the inclusion of a 

proviso clause in past directives, Mr. Maisel said, he thought the 

Committee ought to avoid the use of the proviso unless it had a 

very firm policy goal to which it could be applied. He had no 

feelings at the moment that the Committee had a firm enough fix 

on liquidity requirements and the need for bank credit to recognize 

what a specific proviso should entail.  

Since he believed that the directive should include the 

term "coupon issues" in it, Mr. Maisel supported the wording



5/23/67 -72

Mr. Daane had proposed for that purpose. Coupon issues should 

be emphasized in furnishing reserves.  

Mr. Brimmer said he favored alternative B for the direc

tive with the wording regarding coupon issues that Mr. Daane had 

proposed. He would stress that he did not consider attempts to 

influence the level of long-term interest rates as "pegging" the 

market. He assumed that no one would want the Manager to engage 

in coupon operations in an aggressive way; he personally would 

favor supplying about half of the $500 million indicated reserve 

need through purchases of coupon issues, with those purchases 

spread over a period rather than made in a few days. It was impor

tant to keep in mind the likelihood that rising long-term rates 

would have an adverse effect on flows of funds to savings 

intermediaries. He noted that the staff's projection anticipated 

growth in residential construction of $2 billion in the third 

quarter, and that that expected increase accounted for roughly 

one-fifth of the increase in total private GNP projected for that 

quarter. He assumed that the percentage would be about the same 

in the fourth quarter. If such growth in GNP was to be achieved, 

it was clearly necessary to assure that the revival in housing was 

not aborted. The Committee could not accomplish that goal by itself 

but it could help, by moderating increases in long-term interest 

rates. It also was vital for the System to maintain a firm stand 

against proposals for reducing ceilings on savings deposit rates.



5/23/67 -73

Mr. Brimmer said he would also ask the Committee, and 

particularly the Reserve Bank Presidents, to give further thought 

to the problem of restructuring reserve requirements of smaller 

banks. In visiting recently with Ninth District bankers he had 

learned that the Minnesota Act abolishing nonpar banking also 

authorized State banks to invest up to 30 per cent of their 

required reserves in earning assets. That would seem to represent 

quite a threat to Minnesota bank membership in the System, and the 

System should give thought to lightening the burden of membership 

on smaller banks by use of the authority it already had. He hoped 

that could be accomplished before it was precluded by a need for 

over-all credit restraint.  

Mr. Sherrill said he went along with the majority view 

today favoring the continuation of prevailing money market condi

tions because, while he agreed that an upswing in the economy was 

likely, he was not sure about its timing. He favored alternative 

B for the directive, but with the two-way proviso clause added-

again because of the existing uncertainties. He favored operations 

in longer-term issues, but would not get into the discussion of 

objectives because he agreed with various objectives that had been 

suggested. Basically, he would like to see the Committee use its 

operations in the longer-term market as constructively as possible, 

but he was not disturbed by the possibility that those operations 

would have some impact on long-term interest rates. He agreed on



5/23/67 -74

the need for caution. Perhaps coupon operations should be limited 

at this time to the $250 million figure that had been suggested, 

and the results evaluated before a decision was made to go further.  

Mr. Hickman remarked that it was clear from information 

published since the last meeting that the business picture deterio

rated in March and April, despite the optimistic expectations 

expressed by some participants at the Committee's meeting three 

weeks ago. In real terms, GNP for the first quarter was revised 

downward rather than upward, and private final sales were weaker 

than originally estimated. In April, a number of major economic 

series either were level or declined, including industrial produc

tion, new orders for durable goods, retail sales, housing starts, 

and factory payrolls. Thus, the over-all business picture was 

dominated by reports of declines or downward revisions in major 

cyclical indicators. For what it was worth, his staff estimated 

that real GNP, after declining slightly in the first quarter, 

would increase at annual rates of 1.3 per cent in the second quarter 

and 3.5 per cent in the third quarter. Those estimates were 

reasonably close--although suggesting slightly less vigor in the 

third quarter--to those presented in the green book, and to 

preliminary forecasts submitted by Fourth District economists, who 

would meet at the Cleveland Reserve Bank in early June. The figures 

indicated that the economy was in a fragile position, and would be 

operating below potential for several months.



5/23/67 -75

Given that outlook, Mr. Hickman thought that monetary 

policy should be moderately accommodative, to facilitate the 

inventory adjustment and to provide the funds needed to finance 

the expected pick-up of residential construction. His own 

preference was to permit the aggregate reserve measures and the 

bank credit proxy to expand at an annual rate around 5 to 7 per 

cent, with free reserves fluctuating in whatever range was consis

tent with those objectives. In addition, he would continue to do 

what was possible to relieve uncertainties and pressures in the 

long-term bond market. He therefore favored alternative B for 

the directive, with Mr. Swan's amendment to the first paragraph 

and Mr. Daane's to the second.  

As a matter of fact, Mr. Hickman said, a moderately accom

modative monetary policy such as he had suggested would probably 

be appropriate for an indefinite period, if it were not for the 

fact that the Committee knew so little about the future magnitude 

of defense spending. It had been trying to sort out fact from 

rumor ever since the war in Vietnam escalated two years ago. If 

there was another major escalation, pressures would develop that 

would require a change in the mix of monetary and fiscal policy.  

In fact, a major escalation of defense spending could cause the 

type of overheating and financial stresses and strains that 

developed in the economy in late 1965 and 1966. At the present



5/23/67 -76

time, however, those were only conjectures; with the information 

now available, and with major economic indicators level or weaker, 

the Committee should do the best that it could to restore sustain

able stable economic growth.  

Mr. Bopp commented that it should be no surprise that 

business did not look quite so good now as three weeks ago.  

Adjustment of the economy to the tremendous inventory accumulation 

of the fourth quarter of last year could hardly be expected to 

proceed smoothly and continuously. Adjustment of statistics from 

preliminary estimates was also a fact of life that unfortunately 

had a greater effect on attitudes than it should.  

However, Mr. Bopp said, after netting out the backing and 

filling, he came out about where he had been three weeks ago. The 

economy remained basically strong, as witness the relative stead

iness of employment and unemployment. But, after some favorable 

news for March, weaknesses had been called to attention again by 

declines in retail sales and production during April.  

For the fourth consecutive month, Mr. Bopp observed, signs 

of slack continued to dominate the economy of the Third District.  

Manufacturing activity was still weakening and final demand 

remained sluggish. Those signs might not adequately reflect the 

current climate since most District indicators were final only 

through March. Where April data were available, the rates of



5/23/67 -77

decline were slowing. That was evidenced particularly in manufac

turing employment. In addition, total unemployment had made a 

favorable about-face by April.  

Possibly reflecting those hints of an improved outlook, 

Mr. Bopp said, loan activity at Philadelphia banks in recent weeks 

had been increasing more than seasonally. Furthermore, expansion 

was expected to continue through fall. That expansion reflected 

(1) an expected pickup in economic activity, (2) some anticipatory 

borrowing by customers, and (3) expanded lines to small businesses 

under pressure from tax acceleration. Almost all of the bankers 

expected conditions to tighten as the summer progressed. Part of 

that would be seasonal, but part also reflected an expectation 

that economic activity was picking up. As yet, bankers had not 

been reluctant to extend larger credit lines or loans to new 

customers. Some, however, expected reluctance to develop.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that events in recent weeks seemed to 

him to have clouded rather than clarified the outlook. One basic 

uncertainty--the extent and duration of the inventory adjustment-

continued. A second--the degree of escalation of the war effort--had 

become more acute. Given those uncertainties, for the present he 

was inclined to mark time so far as policy was concerned. He was 

led to that conclusion also by developments in capital markets. The 

persistence of a large volume of new issues and the stubborness of



5/23/67 -78

longer-term rates reflected a belief that pressures for funds 

were likely to build up again before long. For those expecta

tions to be turned around, it probably would be necessary for 

the Desk to pump in very large amounts indeed. He would do 

whatever was possible by operations in coupon issues to keep 

long-term rates from rising, but would make no major move toward 

further ease.  

That position was reinforced by the large current Federal 

deficit, Mr. Bopp said. If large deficits continued as the 

economy picked up in the latter part of the year, it might be 

necessary to pay close attention to the fiscal-monetary mix so as 

to avoid too much stimulation. Caution in easing too much now 

would help to achieve that objective.  

For the directive Mr. Bopp favored alternative B, as 

modified by Mr. Daane, and with a proviso clause.  

Mr. Kimbrel reported that economic conditions were spotty 

in the Sixth District. The latest manufacturing figures showed 

a further decline, as inventory adjustments continued to affect 

adversely the apparel, lumber, and furniture industries. However, 

the Sixth District, too, was beginning to see some ray of sunshine, 

which would indicate that a good many of those adjustments were 

behind it. He understood that very recently a large manufacturer 

of railroad equipment had been calling back employees, and that



5/23/67 -79

two steel mills were doing the same thing. While those reports 

might be only straws in the wind, they suggested that the 

visible statistics might not be an entirely accurate barometer 

of what was going on now. Automobile sales, on the other hand, 

were down about 10 per cent in April, after improving in March, 

and remained depressed in early May. A spot check of local 

bankers also revealed a decline in the demand for automobile 

and other instalment loans.  

The biggest complaint of District farmers had been the 

weather, Mr. Kimbrel said. Drought conditions in Florida and 

South Georgia forced cattlemen to feed hay and citrus pulp to 

their cattle. The drought was especially severe in parts of 

Florida, which was finally blessed with rain late last week.  

The same spottiness noted in business and agriculture 

carried over into banking, Mr. Kimbrel continued. Business 

lending, which showed a revival in the first half of April, 

slackened more recently, while other forms of lending improved.  

Here again, though, one should probably give as much attention 

to future prospects as to current developments. According to 

early indications gathered from the lending practices survey, 

many District bankers expected loan demand over the next three 

months to strengthen. Those prospects tied in with a consid

erable reluctance to reduce rates on savings certificates and



5/23/67 -80

with the practice of the large Atlanta banks of offering higher 

rates on CD's than banks in New York. That anticipation of a 

stronger loan demand was probably related in part to developments 

in the bond markets, which in the last two weeks caused an increase 

in discounts on FHA and VA mortgages in his area to 3-1/2 and 4 

points.  

Mr. Kimbrel said that he was, of course, quite aware that 

many of those same developments were taking place in other parts 

of the country as well, and that one could interpret them in 

different ways. But, to him at least, they suggested that monetary 

policy need not be as expansive now as it had been earlier in the 

year, although the spottiness of the statistics should caution 

against any sudden tightening. In fact, to stay about where the 

Committee was might be not only good economics but would also get 

applause from those academic economists who always favored a steady 

policy posture.  

Mr. Kimbrel added that if he were expressing a preference 

for the directive it would be in the general direction of 

alternative B.  

Mr. Francis said it appeared that the deceleration of 

economic activity had been halted, and that growth would soon be 

resumed. The increasing budget deficit of the Federal Government 

was providing a growing stimulus to the economy. Monetary actions



5/23/67 -81

had been very expansionary since early this year, and the response 

in the real sectors of the economy appeared to have been relatively 

quick. Since monetary and fiscal developments usually had their 

chief impact after some lag, the basic present problem was not how 

to achieve adequate total demand but how to avoid excessive demand.  

A review of recent monetary developments indicated that 

they had been very expansive, Mr. Francis continued. In the past 

three months, total member bank reserves and nonborrowed reserves 

had risen at about three times their 1960-1966 trends. Federal 

Reserve credit and the money supply had risen at about double their 

trends, and commercial bank credit and money plus time deposits 

had risen about 50 per cent faster than their growth trends.  

Mr. Francis thought an important concern now was that the 

System might overreact to the recent need for stimulation. It was 

necessary continually to keep in mind that actions had most of 

their effect after a lag. With total demand at a high level and 

likely to increase rapidly in coming months, with fiscal actions 

so expansionary, and with recent large increases in supplies of 

money and credit, he felt that this was the time to avoid over

reacting to the pause in total demand of last fall and winter.  

In formulating monetary policy for the future, Mr. Francis 

remarked, an effort should be made to visualize economic conditions 

as they would be when the Committee's actions became most effective.



5/23/67 -82

Projections presented in the green book indicated marked 

increases in demands for goods and services and in real GNP 

for the balance of the year. The decline in real GNP from the 

fourth quarter of 1966 to the first quarter of 1967 represented 

only a slight deviation from the growth path of high employment 

output. Recent Administration statements regarding the fiscal 

outlook for the rest of the year indicated, even if the 6 per 

cent surtax was passed, a growing net stimulative thrust to the 

economy from the Federal budget. With that prospect, excessive 

inflation was likely to appear later in the year unless monetary 

actions were moderated now.  

Mr. Francis said the Committee should profit from last 

year's interest rate experience. By limiting interest rate 

increases in early 1966, the stage was set for the severe 

restraint required last summer. Forecasts of a growing Gov

ernment deficit with large Treasury borrowing and continued heavy 

private demands for funds portended upward pressures on interest 

rates. System actions based on a desire to offset those pressures 

would provide loan funds in excess of planned saving. Such 

accommodating actions would lead once again to a need for severe 

restraint later in the year, with possible repetition of the 

market dislocations of 1966. If the fundamental situation was 

such that the Federal Government and the rest of the economy



5/23/67 -83

combined were going to demand more funds than planned saving at 

current rates, only inflation could follow from attempts on the 

Committee's part to hold down long-term interest rates. Since 

there was a reasonable prospect of renewed inflation, the 

Committee should move at this time to reduce its stimulative 

force on total demand.  

As to immediate policy, Mr. Francis believed the blue 

book's projected increase of money at an 8 to 11 per cent annual 

rate from May to June would be too rapid. He recommended a 

growth in money over the next three months at a 2 to 4 per cent 

rate. Or, in terms of total bank credit, a three-month growth 

rate of 5 to 7 per cent would seem appropriate. To that end, he 

recommended an acceptance of a firming of capital market yields.  

In addition, he believed some firming of the money market might 

be necessary to moderate the expansion of money and bank credit.  

It was Mr. Francis' belief that the proviso clause in the 

directive had been useful to the System in reaching its proximate 

objectives more quickly, while not reducing its effectiveness in 

day-to-day operations in the money market. In view of the dif

ficulties of selecting a money market target that would provide 

a desired growth in the Committee's proximate measures, a proviso 

clause seemed to be imperative for the effective implementation 

of Committee policy.



5/23/67

For the second paragraph of the directive, Mr. Francis 

favored language reading, ". . . System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 

a view to achieving some firming in the money market, but opera

tions shall be adjusted as necessary to moderate any deviations 

of bank credit expansion from a 2 to 6 per cent range." 

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

I think we need to recognize that there is a 
certain amount of uneasiness in the air these days-
for reasons which, if taken at face value, would have 
quite different implications for policy. There is 
uneasiness over the short-fall of recent business 

statistics below the most optimistic expectations of 
a few weeks ago. There is uneasiness about the state 
of the bond markets, with prices falling under the 
weight of the seemingly endless parade of corporate 

and municipal demands. Most of all, a deep-rooted 
uneasiness exists concerning the course of the war 

in Vietnam, and the chances that it may add still 

further to an already powerful but somewhat artificial 

fiscal stimulus to business activity.  

Some of these reasons might seem to argue for an 

easing of policy, while others might seem to support 

a tightening. In this kind of situation, I think the 

right posture for the Committee is to do neither. This 

is not the time to let particular developments cause 

us to become jumpy or panicky. Expectations can swing 

widely, and trying to follow along behind them with 

counteracting policy changes can simply lead to still 

greater fluctuations in economic and financial perform

ance.  
As a matter of fact, a good many of the forces at 

work today ought to partly compensate for one another, 

and the expectation which seems to me most likely to 

prove correct is for a resumption of vigorous economic 

advance later in the year. Accordingly, I think the 

wisest policy decision right now would be to hold a 

steady course, keeping the money market reasonably

-84-



5/23/67

comfortable, and allowing the adjustments still in 
process to proceed in an orderly fashion.  

Even within such a policy of "no change," how
ever, almost everyone who has spoken today believes 
there is room for added attention to the long-term 

markets--that we should give more support to the bond 
market. At the risk of sounding like a broken record, 
let me say again that I think this is an area of opera
tions of which the Federal Reserve should be very wary.  

The benefits, it seems clear, are not very large or 
very certain, and the costs in terms of market 

interference can easily outweigh them.  
I do not mean to argue that the System should 

never intervene in the market for coupon issues. I 
recognize that there can be a turn of events in which 

a major overhang of securities inventories is virtually 

choking the market, and in that circumstance a decisive 

(and adequately explained) official move to buy up the 

excess supplies in one swift succession of operations 

may be the wisest course. But stepping in to buy up 

bonds when the market is in less extreme difficulties, 
if it is repeated often enough, will tend to reduce 

the market's self-reliance, its capacity for responsible 

behavior, and its ability to index and to balance 

changing demands and supplies of funds. Granted that 

the Manager might well be able to complete some particular 

buying action neatly, the hidden cost of any succession 

of such operations may be expected to unfold over the 

longer run in terms of a potentially less effective 

market performance. I, for one, would rather not pay 

that cost when it can be avoided.  

For these reasons, I am in favor of alternative A 

for the directive as drafted by the staff, particularly 

with its two-way proviso clause focused on bank credit.  

Recognizing that June is likely to be a month of 

considerable financial churning, however, I would 

encourage the Manager to wait for somewhat larger 

deviations from expectations than he would ordinarily 

look for, especially on the upside, before bringing 

the proviso into play.  

Chairman Martin said he sympathized with Mr. Robertson's 

views on System operations in the long-term market; his position

-85-



5/23/67 -86

on that subject through the years was well known. But the 

Committee had taken another course for some time, and he 

thought it should be prepared to play its hand out. Accord

ingly, he had no objections to coupon operations at this time.  

Much depended on how skillfully they were carried out, and he 

thought the Committee could rely on the Manager in that 

connection. If such operations were to be undertaken, he 

would favor referring to them in the directive, as was done in 

alternative B.  

The Chairman noted that the Committee was not unanimous 

on policy today, with Mr. Francis favoring some firming of money 

market conditions and the remaining eleven members favoring the 

maintenance of prevailing conditions. Also, a number of 

suggestions had been made for revising the language of the draft 

directive. He suggested that the Committee try to arrive at a 

directive that was acceptable to the majority, with Mr. Francis 

to be recorded as dissenting if he so desired.  

In discussing the directive, the Committee first considered 

the various suggestions that had been made for revising the staff's 

draft of alternative B for the second paragraph. Mr. Mitchell 

indicated that he would rather not have the proviso clause included 

in the directive at this time. Messrs. Brimmer and Treiber concurred,



5/23/67 -87

and Messrs. Daane and Maisel noted that they had expressed a 

similar view in the course of the go-around.  

Chairman Martin said that he also would prefer to omit 

the proviso clause, which he had never liked much in any case.  

He asked whether there was any disagreement on the proposal to 

omit it.  

Mr. Wayne commented that he still had the preference 

for including the clause that he had expressed earlier, but he 

was not prepared to vote against the directive if the majority 

wanted to omit it.  

Mr. Swan indicated that he also preferred to retain the 

clause. He noted that the broader question had been raised of 

whether the directive should include a proviso clause generally.  

He would be highly reluctant to see the clause abandoned, and he 

hoped the Committee would discuss the broader issue at some point.  

Mr. Maisel commented that as a general rule he preferred 

to have a proviso clause in the directive, but thought that this 

was not the right time for it since the members were not of one 

view on how it should be formulated.  

Mr. Mitchell remarked that the present seemed to be a 

singularly inappropriate time to include a proviso clause.  

Chairman Martin commented that he would prefer to eliminate 

the clause in general, but his position on the issue was not hard 

and fast.



5/23/67 -88

The discussion then turned to the formulation of the 

phrase relating to operations in long-term markets, for which 

Messrs. Swan and Daane had both proposed language different from 

that in the staff's draft.  

Mr. Robertson said he could vote for Mr. Swan's suggested 

language, calling for "moderating unusual pressures in the capital 

market." He could not vote for a directive which, as Mr. Daane 

had proposed, called for "emphasizing operations in coupon issues 

in supplying reserve needs." 

Mr. Daane said he thought it was the majority view that 

the phrase "while moderating unusual pressures in the capital 

market" would suggest that the Committee was seeking to go further 

than it in fact wanted to. The phrase he had suggested struck him 

as more straightforward because it indicated that coupon operations 

were to be conducted in the context of supplying reserve needs, 

and he believed it was more nearly consistent with the majority 

view.  

Mr, Swan said he had no particular pride of authorship in 

the phrase he had proposed, and had no objection to the general 

thrust of Mr. Daane's suggested language. But he thought the word 

"emphasizing" was too strong. Perhaps a more neutral word could 

be found.



5/23/67 -89

Chairman Martin then suggested using the word "utilizing" 

rather than "emphasizing." 

Mr. Daane agreed that that substitution would be appro

priate. He added that it might also be desirable to include the 

words "part of" before "reserve needs." The phrase would then 

read, "while utilizing operations in coupon issues in supplying 

part of reserve needs." 

In response to the Chairman's request for comment, 

Mr. Holmes said it appeared from the go-around that most members 

were agreed that coupon operations would have to be conducted 

cautiously, and comment also had been made to the effect that 

the Desk should have latitude to curb operations in coupon issues 

if they appeared to be leading to difficulties. He thought the 

word "utilizing" was more neutral than "emphasizing," and thus 

preferable.  

With respect to the first paragraph, the Committee agreed 

to adopt Mr. Swan's suggestion to insert the phrase, "later in the 

year" in the opening sentence, between "renewed economic expansion" 

and "is in prospect." 

Mr. Mitchell then proposed that the second sentence be 

revised to read: "Output is still being retarded by adjustments 

of excessive inventories, but with no interruption in the sharply 

rising trend in Government outlays now in sight the prospect is 

for stronger growth in aggregate final demands."



5/23/67

Mr. Koch commented that the language Mr. Mitchell had 

proposed did not appear consistent with the staff projections 

of a declining rate of increase in Federal defense spending.  

Such spending, which had risen at a rate of $4.2 billion in 

the first quarter, was projected to increase at rates of $3 

billion in the second quarter and $2.5 billion in the third.  

Mr. Wayne said he would favor the language Chairman 

Martin had suggested earlier, following Mr. Mitchell's comment 

on the second sentence in the course of the go-around.  

Other members concurred in Mr. Wayne's observation.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 
authorized and directed, until other
wise directed by the Committee, to 
execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting suggest that renewed economic expansion 
later in the year is in prospect. Output is still 
being retarded by adjustments of excessive inventories, 
but growth in final demands, particularly Government, 
continues strong. Average wholesale prices have 
declined recently, but unit labor costs in manufacturing 
have risen further. Bank credit expansion has slowed 
in recent weeks from its earlier rapid rate. Long-term 
interest rates have continued to rise under the influence 
of heavy securities market financing, but short-term 
yields have declined further. Some further reductions 
have been made in foreign central bank discount rates.  

The balance of payments deficit has remained substantial 
despite some improvement in the foreign trade surplus.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's

-90-



5/23/67 -91

policy to foster money and credit conditions, 
including bank credit growth, conducive to 
renewed economic expansion, while recognizing 
the need for progress toward reasonable equilib
rium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing conditions in the money market, while 
utilizing operations in coupon issues in supplying 
part of reserve needs.  

Chairman Martin then observed that the Committee had 

planned to continue its discussion today of the implications 

for its procedures of the "Freedom of Information Act." He 

noted that certain additional materials bearing on the matter 

had been distributed since the preceding meeting. These 

included a memorandum to the Committee from Mr. Hackley dated 

May 16, 1967, entitled "Rules regarding availability of informa

tion," and a memorandum to the Committee from the staff dated 

May 17, 1967, entitled "Proposed availability of records relating 

to domestic open market operations at the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York under the Freedom of Information Act." Also, at his 

(Chairman Martin's) suggestion, on May 22 the Secretary had 

distributed copies of a memorandum with certain attachments that 

Mr. Hackley had addressed to him on May 8, 1967. That memorandum, 

entitled "The Federal Open Market Committee and the Freedom of 

Information Act," was concerned primarily with the question of 

seeking an executive order exempting the Committee's records



5/23/67 -92

from disclosure.1 / The Chairman then asked Mr. Hackley to open 

the discussion.  

Mr. Hackley said he thought the most important question 

immediately before the Committee was that raised at the preced

ing meeting, relating to a possible executive order exempting 

all of the records of the Committee. Before turning to that 

question, however, he would touch briefly on certain other 

matters. First, last Wednesday the Legal Division had received 

from the Department of Justice, with a request for comments by 

last Friday, a revised draft of the Manual providing guidelines 

for Government agencies in implementing the Freedom of Information 

Act. The revised draft, in his judgment, was an improvement over 

the earlier draft. For example, it contained a specific statement 

to the effect that records of deliberations of an agency were 

completely exempt from disclosure under the Act. In that connec

tion, he would recommend that the Committee approve a division of 

the documents traditionally known as the "minutes" into two 

documents: one, a record of actions taken, to be called "action 

minutes" and to be made available on a deferred basis; and the 

other, a record of the Committee's discussions, which would be 

exempt from disclosure. The Legal Division's comments on the 

1/ Copies of the various documents referred to have been 

placed in the files of the Committee.



5/23/67 -93

revised draft of the Manual were concerned principally with the 

desirability of clarifying the point that materials which were 

not exempt from disclosure might nevertheless be disclosed on a 

deferred basis, where some time lag was necessary to avoid 

impairing an agency's operations. In his judgment the law could 

be construed to permit such time lags, but it would be helpful to 

have the point clearly stated in the Manual.  

Mr. Hackley noted that with his memorandum of May 16 he had 

submitted a draft of proposed new Committee Rules regarding availa

bility of information. He recommended that the draft be approved, 

subject to any necessary technical or editorial changes and subject 

to the Committee's final determination with respect to the length 

of the time lag for publication of its directives and authorizations.  

He would continue to recommend a time lag of 60 rather than 90 days 

simply because the shorter period seemed to comply more clearly with 

the requirement of the Act that statements of general policy be 

published "currently." However, he thought that a lag of 90 days 

would be defensible, if that turned out to be the Committee's 

preference.  

As the draft of the new Rules was formulated, Mr. Hackley 

continued, it not only provided for specifying the lag with which 

the Committee's directives and authorizations would be published, 

but also indicated that certain unpublished records would be made



5/23/67 -94

available to the public with such time lags as the Committee might 

decide upon. For example, the Committee could approve a schedule 

indicating particular time lags--1 day, 8 days, 30 days, or what

ever--with respect to the availability of particular records, 

relating to open market operations, that were held at the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York. A proposed schedule of that type was 

attached to the staff's memorandum of May 17. The schedule listed 

only documents relating to domestic operations, but a similar 

list could be prepared for documents relating to foreign currency 

operations.  

Turning to the question of an executive order, Mr. Hackley 

recalled that at the previous meeting he had been directed to 

prepare a letter to the Department of Justice asking for such an 

order exempting the records of the Committee relating to both 

domestic and foreign currency operations. A draft of such a 

letter had been prepared, and a copy was attached to his memorandum 

to Chairman Martin of May 8 that had been distributed to the Committee.  

However, he continued to feel strongly that it would be unwise and 

unnecessary to seek an executive order such as that contemplated by 

the draft letter, providing for exemption of all records of the 

Committee. In his judgment it would be preferable for the Committee 

to take the position that in complying with the letter and spirit 

of the law it would lean over backward to make available all records



5/23/67 -95

for which that was practicable; and, where absolutely necessary to 

avoid impairment of its operations, it would rely upon the statutory 

exemptions. He believed, and he understood that the legal staff of 

the New York Bank agreed, that practically all of the Committee's 

records either were exempt from disclosure under the Act or could 

be made available on a deferred basis. It was his personal judgment 

that the Committee would not find itself faced with any serious 

problems if it did not obtain an executive order.  

As he had mentioned at the preceding meeting, Mr. Hackley 

said, the Treasury Department had requested an executive order 

exempting its records relating to foreign currency operations.  

They had indicated that their first preference was for an amendment 

to the 1953 executive order regarding classification of defense 

information, making it clear that the term "defense information" 

embraced economic, financial, and monetary matters bearing on U.S.  

relations with foreign governments. Their second choice was for a 

separate executive order covering their foreign currency operations.  

If the Committee were to obtain an exemption for its own 

foreign currency operations, Mr. Hackley observed, in his opinion 

the procedure of amending the defense information executive order 

to grant that exemption would lead to many problems. The order 

contained detailed and rigid requirements regarding classification 

and declassification of documents, handling of classified documents,



5/23/67 -96

clearances of personnel, and so forth, that would prove burdensome.  

It also would be necessary for the Committee to request authoriza

tion to make original classifications of defense information under 

that order; while the Treasury had such an authorization at present, 

neither the Committee nor the Board did. Accordingly, if the 

Committee were going to ask for an executive order, he believed it 

should request one that was separate from the defense order.  

On checking with the Treasury this morning, Mr. Hackley 

said, he had learned that as yet they had had no reaction from the 

Department of Justice to their request, which had been made by 

letter on April 21. At this point, therefore, it was by no means 

certain that the Treasury would obtain an executive order exempting 

their foreign currency records. If the Committee wished to have the 

matter pursued further, it might authorize the staff to talk with 

the Treasury staff about coordinating the System's and Treasury's 

approaches to the matter more closely, and to hold discussions with 

the appropriate people in the Justice Department.  

Mr. Maisel noted that the next item on the Committee's agenda 

today concerned policy with respect to publication of information on 

drawings under the swap network and on other System foreign currency 

operations. He asked Mr. Hackley to comment on the relation between 

the proposed new Rules and decisions on such questions.



5/23/67 -97

Mr. Brimmer said he had a similar question. The item 

Mr. Maisel had mentioned had been placed on the agenda following 

a discussion by the Board of a draft of the Special Manager's 

report for 1966, prepared for inclusion in the Board's Annual 

Report. One of the points discussed, he recalled, was a request 

by the Bank of Canada that information not be published at that 

time regarding a drawing they had made during the year under their 

swap arrangement with the System. How would such situations be 

handled under the proposed new Rules? 

Mr. Hackley replied that his recommendation would be that 

the Committee rely in such cases on a reasonable construction of 

the statutory exemptions, as the Justice Department's draft Manual 

suggested. In his opinion one or more of the statutory exemptions 

could be construed to cover information relating to operations 

under a swap agreement. Legally, swap drawings were borrower

lender transactions, and it was clear from the draft Manual that 

information on such transactions was exempt.  

In reply to Mr. Maisel's question about the status of 

information concerning negotiations of swap agreements and Committee 

discussions on that subject, Mr. Hackley said he thought it was 

clear that such information would be exempt.  

Mr. Treiber said he would suggest that the Federal Reserve 

seek promptly an exemption from the Freedom of Information Act of



5/23/67 -98

Committee records pertaining to foreign currency transactions. He 

had hoped that the Treasury would join in a similar request seeking 

the exemption of Treasury records pertaining to foreign currency 

transactions.  

As regards Federal Reserve foreign currency transactions, 

Mr. Treiber continued, all such transactions, whether initiated by 

the Federal Reserve or the foreign central bank, involved a confi

dential relationship between the System and the foreign central 

bank. The System should not reveal to the public on an automatic 

basis information involving such a relationship. Operations on 

System initiative were undertaken to defend the dollar, a purpose 

that could be frustrated by premature disclosure. Similarly, a 

foreign central bank might find its purposes frustrated by premature 

disclosure. Unless arrangements, such as the swap arrangements, 

were mutually advantageous, the partnership could fall apart. The 

foreign partner might not care to be a partner if the American 

partner was committed to disclosure of the transactions on an 

automatic basis and not on a basis of mutual discussion and a 

weighing of the interests of the parties.  

Mr. Treiber noted that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

conducted similar transactions for the System and for the Treasury.  

Sometimes the transactions were alike and simultaneously executed 

with the same foreign entity. Clearly, administration would be much



5/23/67 -99

simpler at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York if the basic dis

closure rules were similar. If the Treasury transactions were 

classified as "confidential" or "secret" under the 1953 executive 

order relating to defense information, and the Federal Reserve 

transactions were a quite different affair, the difficulties would 

be many. If the Federal Reserve transactions were considered 

"secret" defense information, there would be a whole new array of 

problems.  

He trusted, Mr. Treiber continued, that there could be 

parallel treatment affording an exemption to records regarding 

foreign currency transactions by the Treasury and such transactions 

by the Federal Reserve. He trusted that that treatment could be 

provided for by an executive order addressed specifically to foreign 

currency transactions. He would consider it unwise to treat such 

transactions as secret defense material with all the cumbersome 

procedures and red tape associated with such a classification.  

Mr. Hackley noted that the Treasury thought a separate 

executive order might involve difficulties in that it would be 

necessary to include a specific enumeration of all categories of 

information for which secrecy was required in the interest of 

national defense or foreign policy. But there was no such enum

eration in the existing defense information order, and he did not 

believe one would be necessary in a separate order. The latter in



5/23/67 -100

general could parallel the defense order except with respect to the 

detailed requirements for handling classified materials. The sepa

rate order might simply say that information of the Committee 

relating to foreign currency operations would be exempt from dis

closure to the extent that the Committee determined was necessary.  

Mr. Maisel asked whether Mr. Hackley thought there would be 

any substantial difference in the Committee's procedures if it did 

or did not obtain an executive order exempting information on its 

foreign currency operations.  

Mr. Hackley replied that in his judgment the Committee's 

procedures could be substantially the same whether or not it obtained 

such an order, on the assumption that the Act permitted a time lag in 

disclosing information in cases where premature disclosure would impair 

performance of its statutory functions.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether Mr. Hackley was saying that in the 

absence of an executive order the Committee could defer release of 

some information relating to foreign currency operations, but would 

have to make all such information available at some point.  

Mr. Hackley replied in the negative, noting that most such 

information would be completely exempt from disclosure in any case.  

In response to the Chairman's request for comment, Mr. MacLaury 

said that, while not prejudging the next item on today's agenda, the 

goal with respect to information on foreign currency operations as



5/23/67 -101

seen by the staff concerned at the New York Bank was to avoid being 

forced to disclose more than was currently being disclosed as a 

matter of public policy. Although Mr. Hackley had suggested that 

obtaining an executive order exempting foreign currency information 

would make little difference, he would urge that such an order be 

sought. Of the nine specific exemptions listed in the Act the 

first, relating to information required to be kept secret in the 

interest of national defense or foreign policy, seemed most closely 

applicable to the System's foreign currency operations; but under 

the language of the Act it could not be relied on unless an executive 

order was obtained. He agreed that if such an order was sought it 

would be preferable to have it separate from the existing defense 

information order, and that it would be desirable to have System 

and Treasury foreign currency operations treated in parallel fashion.  

Mr. Daane commented that the Treasury's request for an execu

tive order suggested that they thought one was necessary.  

Mr. Hackley agreed that that might be the case. He added 

that one possible approach would be to seek a single order covering 

foreign currency operations of both the Treasury and the System.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether the Treasury was relying on the 

"Trading with the Enemy Act" in the present connection, and 

Mr. Hackley replied that he had no reason to think so.



5/23/67 -102

Mr. Robertson asked whether there was any time limit within 

which an executive order had to be sought. If not, the Committee 

might authorize the staff to consult with the Justice Department 

while waiting to see what disposition was made of the Treasury's 

request for an order, If the latter was approved, the Committee 

could seek an equivalent order at a later date.  

Mr. Treiber said he would be disturbed if an exemption was 

granted in the manner the Treasury had suggested--by an amendment 

to the defense information executive order--since the procedures 

for handling materials under that order were cumbersome. He thought 

it would be desirable, before action was taken on the Treasury's 

request, to try to get a separate order, of simpler form, covering 

both Treasury and System foreign currency operations.  

Mr. Daane asked whether the question of the probable 

response to such a request had been explored with the Department 

of Justice.  

Mr. Hackley replied in the negative, noting that the Legal 

Division had felt that it should have definite authorization from 

the Committee before pursuing the matter with the Justice Department.  

As he had indicated earlier, however, he thought that such explora

tions might be desirable.  

Chairman Martin said the Committee might authorize Mr. Hackley 

to explore all aspects of the matter with the Treasury and Justice



5/23/67 -103

Departments and report back at the next meeting, on June 20. It 

would be necessary to reach decisions by that time since the Act 

became effective on July 4.  

The Chairman went on to say that he had discussed the 

matter with a number of people, including the Attorney General.  

The more he had thought about it the more he had come to hope that 

the Committee would not permit itself to appear to be dragging its 

feet in releasing information that was of legitimate interest to 

the public. On reviewing the Committee's minutes recently, he had 

become increasingly convinced that its domestic operations would 

not be disturbed if the current policy directives were to be 

published with a 60-day lag--and certainly not if the lag was 90 

days.  

Mr. Daane noted that he would not be able to attend the 

Committee meeting on June 20 and accordingly would like to pursue 

the matter further today. While he was not opposed to providing 

information to the extent feasible, he was concerned about the 

possible effects on the Committee's operations and he was not 

convinced that there would not be the risk of considerable loss 

of effectiveness unless the Committee was able to retain maximum 

flexibility with respect to the release of information. He agreed 

that exploratory discussions should be held to the extent possible, 

but he would be disturbed if decisions were put off until June 20, 

when there might be fewer options left open.



5/23/67 -104

Mr. Brimmer noted that he had made a similar point in the 

discussion at the previous meeting. He suggested that the Committee 

not confine itself to asking Mr. Hackley to explore the question of 

an executive order exempting information on its foreign currency 

operations. The Secretary of the Treasury might also be asked to 

seek postponement of action on the Treasury's request for an exemp

tion until there was an opportunity to review the question with the 

Secretary and to work out a coordinated approach to foreign currency 

operations.  

Mr. Brimmer said he had changed his position somewhat since 

the previous meeting. He was now prepared to drop his earlier 

suggestion for seeking an executive order exempting information on 

domestic as well as foreign currency operations, on the assumption 

that the Committee would agree to a lag of 90 days for releasing 

its directives. He was opposed to a 60-day lag.  

Mr. Wayne noted that there appeared to be general agreement 

on the desirability of obtaining an exemption for information on 

foreign currency operations by executive order. He suggested that 

the Committee authorize Mr. Hackley to discuss a coordinated approach 

with the Treasury, on the understanding that if that did not prove 

feasible he would be authorized, without reporting back to the 

Committee, to request a separate executive order covering System 

foreign currency operations.



5/23/67 -105

Mr. Maisel remarked that in his judgment an executive order 

indicating that information on foreign currency operations in 

general--that is, both those of the System and the Treasury--were 

required to be kept secret in the interest of foreign policy was 

preferable to an order directed to the System's foreign currency 

operations alone.  

Chairman Martin said that he and Mr. Robertson might under

take to act for the Committee in connection with foreign currency 

information. He would much prefer not to have the Committee seek 

an exemption covering its domestic operations.  

Mr. Daane observed that if that was the position of the 

Committee--and he continued to have reservations regarding its 

appropriateness--he would share Mr. Brimmer's feeling that the 

lag in releasing the directives should be 90 rather than 60 days.  

Mr. Maisel commented that if the Committee agreed on a 

90-day lag today, it might plan on publishing its policy record 

entries for the first quarter of 1967 on June 7, 90 days after the 

March 7 meeting.  

Chairman Martin remarked that such a publication date would 

be so close to the July 4 effective date of the Act that he could 

see little gain in anticipating the effective date.  

Mr. Brimmer said that whether or not the Committee planned 

to publish its first-quarter record in June, it was important to



5/23/67 -106

reach a decision on the lag soon so that the staff would be able to 

move ahead in preparing for publication. He hoped that decision 

could be taken today.  

Mr. Daane agreed. He added that he had some questions 

regarding the list of documents relating to the operations of the 

Desk, attached to the staff memorandum of May 17, that were proposed 

for release with various time lags. He personally was not prepared 

to accept the list at this juncture. He asked whether Mr. Holmes 

was satisfied with it.  

Mr. Holmes replied that the list in question omitted a 

number of types of records at the New York Bank relating to opera

tions of the System account. While the Bank's legal staff believed 

that those documents were exempt under the Act, it was not certain 

that a court would agree. If it became necessary to disclose them 

the question would be whether the lag permitted was sufficiently 

long to prevent damage to operations.  

The Chairman then asked whether the members would indicate 

whether they would prefer a 60- or a 90-day lag for release of the 

directives, noting that he personally favored the shorter lag.  

Messrs. Swan and Wayne expressed a preference for a 60-day 

lag, with the latter adding that he nevertheless would not object 

to 90 days.



5/23/67 -107

Mr. Maisel said he thought a 60-day lag probably would be 

preferable, but he would be willing to start with a 90-day lag and 

consider shortening it later since it would be far easier to shorten 

to 60 days than it would be to extend the delay if the initial choice 

turned out to be inappropriate.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that in his judgment a 60-day lag 

probably would be adequate in the great majority of cases. However, 

since a 90-day lag might be desirable occasionally, he would prefer 

that the longer lag be used on a regular basis.  

Messrs. Brimmer and Daane commented that they felt strongly 

that the lag should be 90 days. Mr. Brimmer then asked if the 

Manager would comment on the question.  

Mr. Holmes said he agreed with Mr. Mitchell that a 60-day 

lag for releasing the policy directive might ordinarily not be 

damaging, but that a 90-day lag might be preferable for the reason 

Mr. Mitchell had mentioned.  

Chairman Martin then commented that the question of the 

appropriate time lag seemed sufficiently important to warrant more 

study. Accordingly, he proposed that the Committee defer a decision 

on it until its next meeting. It was unfortunate that Mr. Daane 

would not be present at that meeting, but if he so desired he could 

distribute a written statement of his views in advance.



5/23/67 -108

Mr. Wayne noted that Mr. Hackley had made certain recommen

dations which appeared to be noncontroversial, and on which the 

Committee might act today. One such was the recommendation that 

the Committee's minutes be divided into action minutes and records 

of discussion.  

Chairman Martin asked whether there was any objection to 

approving Mr. Hackley's recommendation concerning the minutes, and 

none was heard.  

Mr. Hackley asked whether the Committee was prepared to 

approve the draft of new Rules regarding the availability of 

information on a tentative basis.  

Mr. Treiber remarked that any such approval presumably 

would be in principle, with the language of the Rules subject to 

any changes of detail that might be found desirable after further 

study.  

Chairman Martin said it appeared that the Committee was 

prepared to approve the draft rules on that basis. The Chairman 

then remarked that the Committee obviously had some difficult 

decisions to make in connection with the Freedom of Information 

Act, but he would reiterate his hope that it would not get into a 

position of seeming to be reluctant to release information to the 

public. A great deal of progress had been made in recent years in 

demonstrating that the Committee was not trying to operate in total



5/23/67 -109

secrecy. In cases where secrecy was important it should be preserved, 

but those who favored more disclosure had a good deal of support and 

he thought the System would be better off if it furnished as much 

information as possible.  

The Chairman then suggested that in view of the hour the 

Committee postpone discussion of the final item on the agenda, 

relating to policy on information regarding swap drawings and other 

System foreign currency operations.  

There was no disagreement with the Chairman's suggestion.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, June 20, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 22, 1967 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on May 23, 1967 

FIRST PARAGRAPH 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting suggest that renewed economic expansion is in prospect.  
Output is still being retarded by adjustments of excessive invento
ries, but growth in aggregate final demands continues strong.  
Average wholesale prices have declined recently, but unit labor 
costs in manufacturing have risen further. Bank credit expansion 
has slowed in recent weeks from its earlier rapid rate. Long-term 
interest rates have continued to rise under the influence of heavy 
securities market financing, but short-term yields have declined 
further. Some further reductions have been made in foreign central 
bank discount rates. The balance of payments deficit has remained 
substantial despite some improvement in the foreign trade surplus.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's policy 
to foster money and credit conditions, including bank credit growth, 

conducive to renewed economic expansion, while recognizing the need 

for progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 

of payments.  

SECOND PARAGRAPH 

Alternative A 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to maintaining the prevailing conditions in the money market, 

but operations shall be modified as necessary to moderate any 

apparently significant deviations of bank credit from current ex

pectations.  

Alternative B 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 

view to maintaining the prevailing conditions in the money market, 

while moderating pressures in the capital market insofar as 

practicable.


