











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

November 14, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 14, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 

Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 

Swan 

Wayne

Messrs. Ellis and Hickman, Alternate Members of 

the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 

Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Holland, Secretary 
Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Hackley, General Counsel 

Brill, Economist 
Hersey, Associate Economist 

Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account

Mr. Sammons, Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors



11/14/67 -2

Messrs. Kimbrel and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of Atlanta and Minneapolis, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 24, 

1967, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on October 24, 1967, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, and subject to a determination by 

Chairman Martin that such actions were in accordance with the 

position of the U.S. Government in the current international nego

tiations concerning sterling, the Committee (a) approved an increase 

from $200 million to $300 million equivalent in the limit on System 

Account holdings of sterling purchased on a covered or guaranteed 

basis in terms of the dollar under agreement with the Bank of England; 

(b) approved an increase from $200 million to $350 million equivalent 

in the limit on outstanding System Account forward commitments to 

deliver foreign currencies to the Stabilization Fund, and thereby 

also effectively increased by a maximum of $150 million equivalent 

the amount of foreign currencies that could be held spot or purchased 

forward for the purpose of fulfilling outstanding System Account 

forward commitments; and (c) authorized forward commitments by the 

System Account to deliver to the Stabilization Fund foreign 

currencies in which the U.S. Treasury did not have outstanding 

indebtedness.



11/14/67 -3

In consequence of the foregoing action, and effective as 

of the date of the determination by Chairman Martin specified 

therein, the necessary amendments to paragraphs 1B(3) and 1C(1) 

of the authorization for System foreign currency operations 

were approved unanimously. With these amendments, on such a 

determination the affected paragraphs would read as follows: 

1B(3). Sterling purchased on a covered or guaranteed 
basis in terms of the dollar, under agreement with the 
Bank of England, up to $300 million equivalent.  

* * 

1C(1). Commitments to deliver foreign currencies to 

the Stabilization Fund, up to $350 million equivalent.  

Secretary's Note: The amendments to 
paragraphs 1B(3) and 1C(1) of the 
authorization described above became 
effective on November 21, 1967, and 
November 22, 1967, respectively, upon 
determinations by Chairman Martin that 
such actions were in accordance with 
the position of the U.S. Government.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period October 24 through 

November 13, 1967, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a period of twelve 

months of the $100 million basic swap arrangement and the $50 

million supplementary arrangement with the National Bank of 

Belgium, both maturing December 22, 1967, and the consolidation 

of the two into a single arrangement, were approved.



11/14/67

By unanimous vote, renewal for a period of twelve months 

of the $400 million swap arrangement with the German Federal 

Bank, maturing December 15, 1967, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renegotiation of the System's swap 

arrangements with the Bank for International Settlements and the 

central banks of Austria, Canada, Denmark, England, Japan, Mexico, 

Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland, to arrange for lines having 

twelve-month periods and December maturities, with no change in 

the size of the lines, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indi

cates that, while the direct and indirect effects of 

strikes have been retarding activity in some areas of 

the economy, prospects still favor more rapid economic 

growth in the months ahead. Although prices of farm 

products and foods have declined recently, upward 

pressures persist on industrial prices and costs.  

While there recently have been further inflows of 
liquid funds from abroad through foreign branches of 
U.S. banks, the balance of payments continues to 

reflect a substantial underlying deficit. Bank credit 
expansion has continued large. The volume of new 
private security issues has expanded further and 

interest rates remain under upward pressure,reflect

ing in part increased doubts in financial markets 
concerning enactment of the President's fiscal 

program. In this situation, it is the policy of the 

Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial



11/14/67

conditions, including bank credit growth, conducive to 
sustainable economic expansion, recognizing the need 
for reasonable price stability for both domestic and 
balance of payments purposes.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the 
prevailing conditions in the money market; but opera
tions shall be modified as necessary to moderate any 
apparent tendency for bank credit to expand significantly 
more than currently expected.  

The following members of the staff entered the meeting: 

Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Jones, and Koch, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 
Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Eastburn, Mann, Taylor, Tow, 

and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 

Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 

Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Monhollon, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period October 24 through November 13, 1967, were approved, ratified,

and confirmed.



11/14/67 -6

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, December 12, 1967, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


