











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 24, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 24, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 

Swan 
Wayne 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, Patterson, and Galusha, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Garvy, Hersey, Jones, 
Koch, Partee, Parthemos, and Solomon, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



10/24/67

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Axilrod and Gramley, Associate Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Assistant Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Brandt, 

Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 

Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas City, 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 3, 1967, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on October 3, 1967, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period October 3 through 23, 1967,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



10/24/67

By unanimous vote, renewal of the $100 million standby swap 

arrangement with the Bank of France from November 11 to December 29, 

1967, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period October 3 through 23, 1967, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that, apart from the effects 
of strikes in the automobile and other industries, 
underlying economic conditions continue strong and 
prospects favor more rapid growth in the months ahead.  
Upward pressures on costs persist, average prices of 
industrial commodities have risen further, and the 
rate of increase in consumer prices remains high.  
While there recently have been large inflows of liquid 
funds from abroad through foreign branches of U.S.  
banks, the balance of payments continues to reflect a 
substantial underlying deficit. Bank credit expansion 
has continued large. The volume of new security issues 
is expanding again and interest rates have risen further, 
reflecting in part increased uncertainties in financial 
markets concerning enactment of the President's fiscal 
program. In this situation, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con
ditions, including bank credit growth, conducive to 
sustainable economic expansion, recognizing the need 
for reasonable price stability for both domestic and 
balance of payments purposes.



10/24/67

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
forthcoming Treasury financing activity, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the 
prevailing conditions in the money market; but operations 
shall be modified, to the extent permitted by Treasury 
financing, to moderate any apparent tendency for bank 
credit to expand significantly more than currently 
expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, November 14, 1967, at 

9:30 a.m.  

By unanimous vote, the recommendation of the Steering Com

mittee for the U.S. Government Securities Market Study, that daily 

reports of individual Government securities dealers regarding their 

positions, trading, and borrowings be made available to senior 

personnel at the Trading Desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 

was approved.  

Secretary's note: On November 3, 1967 
the following letter was sent to Govern
ment securities dealers over the signatures 
of Secretary Fowler and Chairman Martin: 

In January 1960 the then Secretary of the Treasury and 

the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System wrote the Government securities dealers requesting 
their cooperation in an information program covering the 

Government securities market. The program provided for the 

collection, by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, of 

dealer figures on positions, volume and borrowings with 

appropriate safeguards to assure the confidentiality of 
individual dealer information.  

In this connection Mr. Alfred Hayes, President of the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, wrote the dealers on



10/24/67

May 17, 1960 to the effect that the dealer data would 
be collected and retained in the Market Statistics 
Department of that bank and that data on individual 
firms would be released outside the Department only 
under certain conditions which included the following: 

1. Summary figures requested by the Manager 
of the System Open Market Account for 
individual dealers seeking repurchase 
accommodation; 

2. individual dealer reports requested by 
the Manager of the Open Market Account 
in market situations determined to be 
disorderly; and 

3. other circumstances of an exceptional 
nature.  

Under these arrangements the Manager of the System 
Open Market Account and his assistants have had access 
to the individual dealer data only on a few unusual 
occasions, whereas prior to 1960 dealers had reported 
directly each day to the Desk. With the passage of time 
it has become apparent that the quality of information 
available to the Trading Desk for interpreting the state 
of the market has deteriorated considerably because of 

the lack of access to these figures. Given the Trading 
Desk's responsibilities as the eyes and ears of the 
Treasury and the Federal Reserve in the market, the 
importance of full information should be obvious to all 
market participants. The current joint Treasury-Federal 

Reserve study of the Government securities market con
firms the Manager's need for more detailed information 
on dealer market activities.  

Accordingly, the Federal Open Market Committee and 
the Treasury have approved the release of the daily 
reports of the individual dealers on positions, volume 
and borrowings to the Manager of the System Open Market 
Account, and to a restricted list of officers and senior 
staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York directly 

responsible to the Manager. We understand that Mr. Alan 
Holmes has discussed the proposed policy change with all 
dealer firms, and that while some dealers have reservations 

about the change in procedure, none of these is of a nature 

that would cause any firm to object to the change.



10/24/67

We stress again that the purpose of the change is 
to provide more accurate information about the state of 
the market. No change in the data to be submitted by 
your firm to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is 
involved nor is there any change in the procedures 

currently in effect with respect to the supply and 
publication of data. These data will not be used in 
connection with particular transactions to be carried 

out in the market with individual dealer firms, apart 
from exceptional market circumstances of the sort where 
the existing rules already provide for the release of 
individual dealer figures outside the Market Statistics 
Department. The Treasury and the Federal Reserve stand 
ready to discuss any aspect of the statistical program 
with any dealer firm at any time.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


