









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 4, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT. Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Shepardson 
Swan 
Wayne

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, Patterson, and Galusha, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 

Committee

Messrs. Bopp and Irons, Presidents of 

Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 

respectively

the Federal 
Dallas,

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Jones, Koch, Partee, 

and Solomon, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors 
Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors



4/4/67

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Link, Eastburn, Mann, Brandt, Tow, 
and Green, Vice Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Meek and Snellings, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Arena, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Chairman Martin said that he felt honored to have been asked 

by the President to continue to serve in the capacity of Chairman 

of the Board of Governors, and would do his best to fulfill the 

responsibilities of that office. He considered his redesignation 

as Chairman not as a tribute to himself but as an indication of the 

attitude of the President toward the System and the importance of 

its work. He regretted that the President had not found himself 

able to waive the provisions of law that required Mr. Shepardson to 

retire from the Board at the end of this month rather than continuing 

to serve until the end of his term in January 1968. However, he 

fully understood the President's position, and he thought Mr. Shepardson 

did also. It was clear from his conversations with the President 

that the decision was based on a desire to carry out Civil Service



4/4/67 -3

retirement procedures. Unless the Committee happened to hold a 

special meeting later this month, today's meeting would be the 

last that Mr Shepardson would attend. He was sure that all of 

the Committee members shared his feeling that it had been a priv

ilege to have served in the System with Mr. Shepardson over the past 

thirteen years.  

Mr. Hayes, speaking as Vice Chairman of the Committee, 

expressed the sense of pleasure that he knew everyone present had 

felt on learning of Mr. Martin's redesignation.  

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the minutes of the meeting of the 
Federal Open Market Committee held 
on March 7, 1967, were approved.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open 

Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market 

Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period 

March 7 through March 29, 1967, and a supplemental report for March 30 

through April 3, 1967. Copies of these reports have been placed in 

the files of the Committee.  

In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs 

said that the Treasury gold stock was unchanged again this week.  

The Stabilization Fund now had roughly $75 million of gold on hand, 

with no important orders in sight. In addition, the Canadians would



4/4/67 -4-

be selling $50 million in gold to the United States tomorrow, so

the Stabilization Fund might well end up the month with a comfortable

balance of more than $120 million.

On the London gold market, Mr. Coombs continued, South

African deliveries continued to run well above normal and enabled

the London gold pool to take in $18 million during March. The pool

now had available a reserve of $106 million, which would provide a

useful cushion when the flow of gold from South Africa returned to

normal--or what was perhaps more likely, subnormal--levels during

coming months.

Sterling was in very strong demand throughout March,

Mr. Coombs said. The Bank of England took in a total of nearly $700

million in what was probably the best month sterling had ever had.

Of that gross inflow, only $90 million had been allotted to a

reserve increase that was being announced today; $350 million had

been used to pay off central bank debt, including a $100 million

payment to the Federal Reserve early in the month; and a sizable

reduction in forward contract liabilities also was made. The March

debt repayments left $180 million still outstanding at month-end

under the so-called sterling balance credit arrangement, and that

figure was reduced to $150 million yesterday. As the Committee would

recall, last summer the Bank of England incurred central bank and

market forward obligations of roughly $2-1/2 billion, with their



4/4/67 -5-

central bank debt alone rising to more than $1-1/2 billion. In

effect, they had now repaid all but $150 million of their central

bank debt, as well as substantially reducing their forward commit-

ments. That represented a tremendous turnaround in their position.

He would hope that the publication today of good figures for March

would give further stimulus to the demand for sterling, and that

April would start off well.

Mr. Coombs added that near the end of March the United

States had sold to the Bank of England a total of $56 million of

sterling, divided equally between System and Treasury account, that

had been held under that Bank's guarantee. If sterling remained

strong during April, he thought it would be wise to reduce the

holdings of guaranteed sterling substantially further in order to

reconstitute, as far as possible, a facility that had proved

extremely useful in several difficult situations during the past

eighteen months. The Bank of England had no objection to such a

procedure as long as it was not carried to the point at which it

would impair their end-of-month reserve position.

Elsewhere on the exchanges, Mr. Coombs reported, the German

mark remained extremely strong, mainly owing to the reemergence of

a huge trade surplus. Much of the dollar inflow was being channeled

back into the international credit markets, however, and the Bundesbank



4/4/67 -6

had, in any event, undertaken to refrain for the time being from 

converting into gold any increases in its dollar reserves.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs said, there were indications that France 

might be slipping more deeply into deficit. In the next day or so 

the Bank of France might be announcing another reserve loss of $15 

or $20 million for March, despite the fact that during the course 

of the month the Bank of England had purchased $80 million of French 

francs in anticipation of debt repayments to the International 

Monetary Fund. That would suggest that during March the French 

deficit might have run close to $100 million.  

In conclusion, Mr. Coombs noted that after the last Basle 

meeting he had stopped off in Copenhagen and Oslo to discuss with 

the central banks of Denmark and Norway the possibility of their 

joining the swap network, with lines of $100 million each, after 

they had achieved Article VIII status. Both central banks indicated 

interest, as they had earlier. They had a good many questions 

regarding the purposes and operating details of the arrangements; 

the visits gave him an opportunity to answer such questions and to 

point out the mutual advantages of the swap arrangements and the 

responsibilities undertaken by members of the network. On the basis 

of those rather brief visits he thought the Danes and Norwegians 

could be relied on to take an appropriate attitude toward any arrange

ments the System might make with them. As to timing, Denmark probably



4/4/67 -7

would be able to qualify for Article VIII status at almost any 

moment. Norway had somewhat more complicated problems which, while 

not serious, might delay their attaining Article VIII status for a 

few weeks after the Danes had done so. Both central banks preferred 

to join the network simultaneously, but there was some feeling on 

the part of the Danes that they might wish to negotiate with the 

System separately if the Norwegians did not resolve their problems 

within a reasonable time. He would hope to have some definite 

action to recommend to the Committee later in the month, or at 

least by the time of the next meeting.  

Mr. Hayes asked how Mr. Coombs viewed the near-term outlook 

for monetary policy actions abroad.  

Mr. Coombs replied that last week, in his opinion, the 

Bundesbank had been close to a decision to cut its discount rate 

again, from 4 to 3-1/2 per cent, and he hoped that they would take 

such action soon. If the Germans moved, the British probably would 

follow, and there might be a round of one-half per cent decreases 

by central banks. What action the System did or did not take on 

the discount rate this week would have a bearing on developments 

abroad; a reduction of 1/2 per cent in the Federal Reserve discount 

rate might well trigger fairly widespread cuts of the same size by 

European central banks.



4/4/67 -8

Mr. Brimmer asked how the European central banks might react 

to a 1/4 per cent reduction in the Federal Reserve discount rate.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he could only guess at the answer.  

He suspected that while a 1/2 per cent reduction in the U.S. discount 

rate would make it highly probable that there would be widespread 

similar reductions abroad, a 1/4 per cent reduction by the U.S. might 

inject an element of uncertainty in the minds of European central 

bankers, perhaps leading to less widespread and less decisive actions 

on their part.  

Mr. Brimmer then asked about the likely effects of a general 

round of discount rate reductions on flows of funds between the 

Euro-dollar market and the U.S.  

Mr. Coombs replied that if the discount rate--and, more par

ticularly, the CD rate--in the U.S. came down, the impact on the 

flows in question would depend in large measure on whether Euro-dollar 

rates fell sympathetically. Developments in the Euro-dollar market 

were always difficult to predict; rates there were sticky at times, 

and they might remain sticky after other interest rates here and 

abroad moved down. In that eventuality it might be desirable to 

arrange for the Bank for International Settlements to draw again on 

its swap line with the System and to put a moderate amount of money 

into the Euro-dollar market in order to nudge the rates down.



4/4/67 -9

Mr. Daane commented that he had talked with officials of the 

Bank of England last week, while in London enroute to the G-10 

meeting. From those conversations he felt that Mr. Coombs was quite 

correct in saying that both Britain and Germany were poised to lower 

their discount rates, and that a reduction in the Federal Reserve 

discount rate might well trigger action by them. They were likely to 

act whether the U.S. reduction was 1/2 or 1/4 per cent, although 

that choice might affect the sizes of their reductions and the extent 

to which similar actions spread to other countries.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether the U.S. would not be in a better 

position with respect to the Euro-dollar market if the Federal 

Reserve discount rate was lowered by 1/4 per cent, assuming other 

central banks made 1/2 per cent cuts.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the outcome would depend primarily on 

the response of the CD rate and the Federal funds rate here, and the 

changes in Euro-dollar rates on comparable maturities.  

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions 
in foreign currencies during the 
period March 7 through April 3, 
1967, were approved, ratified, and 
confirmed.  

Mr. Coombs noted that the standby reciprocal currency arrange

ment with the Bank of France, in the amount of $100 million, would 

reach the end of its three-month term on May 10, 1967. He recommended



4/4/67 -10

renewal of that arrangement at that time for a further period of three 

months.  

Renewal of the $100 million standby 
swap arrangement with the Bank of France 
for a further period of three months was 
approved.  

Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee continue its 

discussion, begun at the preceding meeting, of the possible inclusion 

of Mexico and Venezuela in the swap network. He invited Mr. Mitchell 

to comment.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that Mexico had already attained Article VIII 

status. He knew of no reason for not inviting that country to join 

the swap network, and he understood that the Treasury favored such a 

step. Accordingly, he thought the Committee should consider asking 

the Special Manager to discuss the question with the Mexicans.  

Venezuela had not yet achieved Article VIII status, and the present 

case for a swap line with that country was not so clear. However, they 

had bought gold in the past and he was not sure that the question 

should not be explored with them also.  

Mr. Coombs said that recently he had been moving increasingly 

to the view that if swap arrangements were made with Denmark and 

Norway it would be well to take a similar step with Mexico. On 

checking with Treasury officials before approaching the Danes and 

Norwegians, he found that they not only favored arrangements with those 

countries but volunteered that they also would take a favorable view



4/4/67 -11

with respect to Mexico. He gathered that they might have reservations 

about including Venezuela at this time, but would put no obstacles in 

the way of possible future action. In general, it would be his 

inclination to take the initiative with respect to negotiating with 

Mexico, but not to do so with Venezuela until they had achieved 

Article VIII status.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed with Mr. Coombs' conclusion, primarily 

because only Mexico qualified at the moment. However, he felt it was 

important to recognize that the Venezuelans were highly sensitive 

about their position relative to Mexico. While he had no specific 

procedure to recommend, he thought that the Committee should proceed 

carefully, in full awareness that questions of national prestige were 

involved.  

Mr. Hayes agreed that it would be desirable to include Mexico 

in the swap network, but he was doubtful about Venezuela at this 

point. While he was not in a position to assess fully the importance 

of the sensitivity problem, he hoped the Committee would not act 

prematurely on a swap arrangement with Venezuela simply because of 

that problem. On the other hand, if the sensitivity of Venezuela 

was considered sufficiently serious, that could be a reason for 

delaying the Mexican arrangement. He would prefer to act on Mexico 

alone now, while not precluding the possibility of including Venezuela 

in the network later.



4/4/67 -12

Chairman Martin suggested that the best way of dealing with 

the problem might be to hold discussions with Venezuelan officials 

as well as Mexican, explaining the standards for membership in the 

network and pointing out the differences between their status and 

that of Mexico.  

Mr. Daane said that in his discussions with Treasury officials 

they had evidenced more enthusiasm about System swap arrangements 

with Mexico and Venezuela than with Denmark and Norway. He had not 

gotten the impression that they made the sharp distinction between 

Mexico and Venezuela that Mr. Coombs had suggested.  

Mr. Coombs commented that he and Mr. Daane may have talked 

with different officials at the Treasury who held dissimilar views.  

In any case, since Venezuela had not yet attained Article VIII status 

they were not immediately eligible.  

Mr. Wayne expressed the hope that the System would not enter 

into a swap arrangement with a country that had not achieved 

Article VIII status simply because of a desire by that country to 

enhance its prestige. Mexico met the Article VIII requirement, but 

unless other countries did so he would not favor entering into swap 

agreements with them.  

Chairman Martin thought Mr. Wayne's point was well taken; the 

Committee should not let questions of sensitivity be controlling. At



4/4/67 -13

the same time, it would be worthwhile to make sure that the 

Venezuelans understood what the standards for membership in the net

work were.  

Mr. Mitchell thought that Venezuela probably would undertake 

to meet the standards once they understood the importance of doing 

so.  

Mr. Wayne referred to Mr. Coombs' earlier suggestion that 

one's impression of the Treasury's views regarding the desirability 

of particular swap lines might depend on the Treasury official with 

whom one talked. While he would not propose that the Committee 

should give the Treasury veto power in connection with all such 

decisions, the importance of coordination with the Treasury had been 

recognized from the outset of the System's foreign currency 

operations. Accordingly, he thought the Committee should not move 

ahead on expanding the network without clarification of the Treasury's 

position.  

Mr. Solomon reported that he had talked recently with Under 

Secretary of the Treasury Deming, and had checked with the Deputy 

of the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, about the 

fact that the Committee was studying the possibility of enlarging the 

swap network. He had been informed that both the Treasury and the 

State Department were agreeable to the inclusion of Denmark and Norway, 

and both were receptive to the inclusion of the Latin American countries 

if they met the requirements.



4/4/67 -14

Mr. Hayes said that while, as he had indicated, he was 

sympathetic to a swap arrangement with Mexico he now wondered whether 

it might not be better to hold exploratory conversations with both 

Mexico and Venezuela rather than to go ahead on an arrangement with 

Mexico and present Venezuela with a fait accompli. The Venezuelans' 

attitude might be better if they were given an advance indication 

of the Committee's intentions.  

Chairman Martin commented that the Committee today might 

authorize the Special Manager to discuss possible swap arrangements 

with both Mexico and Venezuela, looking toward their inclusion in 

the network if they met the standards.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that he had the impression from the staff 

paper on Venezuela that that country might fail to meet standards 

for membership in the network other than the technical one involving 

Article VIII status. He would be reluctant to move ahead in connec

tion with Venezuela without further discussion within the Committee.  

Chairman Martin said he thought the major question was 

whether Venezuela would attain Article VIII status. As he had 

indicated, he thought the Committee might simply authorize discussions 

with Mexico and Venezuela concerning the swap network, on the 

understanding that Mexico probably could now meet the standards for 

inclusion in the network and that Venezuela would be informed as to 

what the standards were. He personally had talked at some length with



4/4/67 -15

the Venezuelans, and they were aware of the problems in their case.  

The object of further conversations with them was to minimize their 

sensitivity to a possible approval of a swap arrangement with Mexico 

if the Committee should decide to take that action. But he would 

suggest that the Committee defer action until Mr. Coombs had held 

exploratory talks and brought recommendations back to the Committee.  

No objection was raised to the Chairman's suggestion.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Daane to report on develop

ments at the recent meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten.  

Mr. Daane noted that the Deputies had met in The Hague on 

March 30 and 31 and April 1. The bulk of the discussion was 

concentrated on two illustrative schemes that the Fund's staff had 

developed--one on a new reserve unit basis and one on a drawing right 

facility basis. The technical discussion of the two schemes by the 

Deputies had been quite useful and productive. It was clear that at 

least from a technical standpoint it was quite feasible to contemplate 

an agreement on a contingency plan for new assets. However, over

hanging the discussion was the political problem posed by the attitude 

of the French. The question was whether or not the French would go 

along with a new asset and, if not, whether the other members of the 

Common Market would be willing to go along without the French. The 

political question was likely to be resolved in the very near future; 

the Monetary Commission of the European Economic Community was



4/4/67 -16

scheduled to meet on April 6, and the Ministers and Governors of 

the Common Market would meet in mid-April.  

In any event, Mr. Daane continued, the political problem 

made it much more likely that some form of a drawing rights scheme 

would emerge if the negotiations were successful. The difficulty 

was that there was a whole spectrum of types of drawing rights, 

ranging all the way from some modest extension of existing drawing 

rights to the other extreme of transferable drawing rights that 

would be scarcely distinguishable from a new reserve unit. The 

French as well as the Belgians were clinging to the lower end of 

the spectrum, but in his judgment the position they favored would 

not solve the problem with which the Deputies had been struggling-

namely, the development of a new asset that would be a satisfactory 

supplement to gold. The U.S. position was that while on balance it 

would still favor a new unit, it had never ruled out a drawing right; 

indeed, the original U.S. proposal had included provision for both.  

It was necessary to keep in mind, however, that there were differences 

in types of drawing rights, and that there was a real risk of being 

drawn into agreement on a compromise type of drawing right that would 

not represent a meaningful solution to the problem.  

Perhaps the most important point made at the meeting, 

Mr. Daane said, was an observation by Chairman Emminger toward the 

close of the session. He noted that the Deputies faced a dilemma: it



4/4/67 -17

was necessary, on one hand, to give reassurance to those who stressed 

the desirability of changing existing monetary institutions in an 

evolutionary way; and on the other hand it was necessary to convince 

the financial markets that the problem of constructing an acceptable 

supplement to gold was being dealt with effectively.  

Mr. Hayes said he was not sure one had to assume that what

ever decision was reached in the first instance would necessarily 

represent the final answer to the problem of the shortages of gold 

that might develop over the years. Perhaps agreement at this time 

on a drawing right that was unlike a new unit could be considered a 

constructive result, with the thought in mind that it would be 

possible to approach more closely to a new unit by agreements reached 

at some later date.  

In reply, Mr. Daane noted that the current discussions had 

been underway for some time. If they concluded with agreement on 

nothing more than a modest extension of existing drawing rights, it 

would be highly unlikely, in his judgment, that one could expect 

agreement within a reasonable time on a new unit that would meet the 

need for secular growth in reserves. It would be another matter, of 

course, if agreement could be reached now on a series of sequential 

moves. But to take a small first step without agreement on succeeding 

steps was not likely to lead to a solution.



4/4/67 -18

Mr. Brimmer asked whether different members of the U.S.  

delegation had taken different positions in the discussions.  

Mr. Daane replied in the negative, noting that the Treasury 

representative acted as spokesman for the United States and set 

forth the position of the Administration.  

Chairman Martin then noted that the Committee had agreed at 

its preceding meeting to continue the discussion today of its policy 

with respect to publication of information on drawings under the 

System swap network and on other System foreign currency operations.  

Observing that Mr. Robertson had offered a proposed statement of 

policy at the previous meeting, the Chairman invited him to comment.  

Mr. Robertson said that it seemed to him incumbent upon the 

Committee to have a definite policy in this regard and not to rely on 

ad hoc decisions. He had not received any comments thus far from 

other Committee members or staff on the particular statement he had 

proposed, and he was not certain in his own mind that that statement 

represented the right policy. Accordingly, he would suggest that the 

staff be asked to prepare a memorandum for consideration at the next 

meeting setting forth alternative proposals, so that the Committee 

could have the advantage of different points of view.  

Mr. Coombs commented that he had assumed the Committee did 

have a policy on publication and that that policy had been carried 

out. It had been his understanding from the inception of foreign



4/4/67 -19

currency operations, over five years ago, that information on all 

of the System's operations was to be reported within a reasonable 

period. At that time the magnitude of the risks that would be run 

with such a policy was not clear, but in fact information on System 

operations had been brought almost up to the minute in the published 

reports of the Special Manager.  

While he had assumed that it was the Committee's policy to 

have the information on System operations brought up to date in his 

reports, Mr. Coombs continued, he had also thought that emergencies 

might arise which could make deviations from that policy desirable.  

As distasteful as it might be to delay publication of certain 

information, the possibility that a need to do so might arise in 

an emergency argued against a definite commitment to publish 

information concerning all System operations on a set schedule.  

Fortunately, no such emergency had arisen to date.  

As for the use of the swap lines by foreign partners, 

Mr. Coombs said, he thought that on principle the Committee would 

not want to publish information without their consent. Furthermore, 

he would be dubious about pressing them too hard to consent to 

publication on any specific schedule. To do so might weaken their 

support of the swap network by seeming to open up a risk that 

information on particular transactions would be released before 

they were fully prepared for such release.



4/4/67 -20

Chairman Martin said he thought it would be desirable for 

the staff to review the matter along the lines Mr. Robertson had 

suggested, and for the Committee to plan on discussing it further 

at its next meeting.  

Mr. Mitchell suggested that the staff also be asked to 

comment on the appropriateness of the form in which foreign currency 

operations were reflected in the System's weekly statement--namely, 

through changes in the items for "other assets" and "other liabilities." 

Perhaps that form of reporting was satisfactory; on the other hand, 

perhaps it could be charged that the System was inappropriately 

concealing information. For example, the British had been engaging 

in window-dressing for some months, and the System had in effect 

been acquiescing in that procedure, given the way it published its 

figures. He was not necessarily critical of the present form of 

publication in the weekly statement, but he would feel more 

comfortable if he had the staff's judgment about its adequacy. If 

sterling had in fact not recovered from its recent difficulties 

many American businessmen might claim that they had been damaged 

because of inadequacies in the information published by the System.  

The question was whether such claims would be warranted.  

Mr. Hayes commented that there was merit in Mr. Mitchell's 

observation, but he thought the Committee had to weigh risks of that



4/4/67 -21

sort against whatever risks would be run by more complete current 

reporting. In the specific case of the British, there were many 

moments last year when they were highly anxious about possible 

market reactions to published information, and he would rather not 

have been in the position of insisting on any particular publication 

plan. The fact that sterling had recovered perhaps could be taken 

as evidence that the techniques used were successful.  

Mr. Mitchell agreed that no harm had been done in that par

ticular case. He was concerned about the possibility of a less 

fortunate outcome.  

Mr. Hayes rejoined that in his judgment the risk had been 

well worth taking.  

Mr. Daane said he would be reluctant to see the Committee 

take an inflexible stance on the point; he thought that could prove 

detrimental to the operations of the network. Certainly, no one 

wanted to conceal information, but as Mr. Hayes had noted it was 

necessary to weigh different kinds of risks in the balance.  

Mr. Brimmer observed that the Federal Reserve Bulletin 

regularly included information on convertible foreign currencies 

held by the Federal Reserve Banks, with detail by type of currency.  

However, the data were shown with a substantial lag; for example, 

the latest figures shown in the March 1967 Bulletin were for November 

1966.



Mr. Mitchell said he was concerned primarily about the 

timeliness of the published information. The data shown in the 

Bulletin were too old to be of value in current decisions by 

businessmen.  

It was understood that the staff would prepare a memorandum 

along the lines suggested for discussion at the next meeting of the 

Committee, 

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market 

Account covering open market operations in U.S. Government securities 

and bankers' acceptances for the period March 6 through March 29, 

1967, and a supplemental report covering the period March 30 through 

April 3, 1967. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files 

of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes commented 

as follows: 

The easier money market conditions sought by this 

Committee at its last meeting facilitated a large flow 

of funds through financial markets over a period that 

included the March corporate tax and dividend dates, a 

Treasury cash offering of tax anticipation bills, and 

a heavy calendar of corporate, municipal, and Federal 

agency financing. Moreover, the easier atmosphere helped 

produce a substantial decline in short-term interest 

rates. Strong market expectations of an early reduction 

in the discount rate were reinforced by signs of economic 
weakness, by the cut in the commercial bank prime rate, 
and by discount rate moves abroad. Together these factors 

produced a buoyant atmosphere in the capital markets and

4/4/67 -22-



4/4/67

long-term interest rates also moved lower, although the 
weight of new offerings and aggressive pricing of some 
new issues caused temporary setbacks. At the close of 
the period there were some signs of developing congestion-
particularly in the long-term municipal market. These 
and other factors affecting financial markets, of course, 
have been spelled out in some detail in the written re
ports to the Committee and in the blue book 1/ and need 
no extensive comment here.  

Treasury bill rates moved steadily down from the 
levels prevailing at the time of the last meeting until 
the unusually strong auction of March 20. After some 
backup, rates tended to stabilize at about 4.17 and 4.10 
per cent, respectively, on three- and six-month bills as 
bank and other demand slackened. Late last week, however, 
a resurgence of demand and expectations of a discount 
rate change pushed rates sharply lower. In yesterday's 
auction average rates of about 3.98 and 3.99 per cent 
were established for three- and six-month bills, about 
35 basis points below rates established the day before 
the Committee last met. There could be some reaction 
in rates if expectations changed regarding the discount 
rate and also if special stresses arise around the tax 
date. Taking a longer look ahead to the second quarter, 
however, it would appear that Treasury bill rates could 
come under substantial downward pressures as the Treasury 
pays off a total of $8.0 billion tax anticipation bills 
in April and June in the face of seasonal demand from 
State and local governments and the System. This suggests 
that open market operations might prudently rely somewhat 
more heavily on purchases of coupon issues than has been 
the case in recent months.  

The Federal funds rate was kept in a 4-1/2 - 4-3/4 
per cent range generally during the period, but large 
reserve injections were required to prevent the persistence 
of an appreciable premium above the discount rate. The 
persistent tendency for a premium--despite the recent 
volume of free reserves in the banking system--reflects 
the dependence of many of the larger banks around the 
country on Federal funds purchases and other borrowing to 
meet substantial basic reserve deficits, which in turn are 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-23-



4/4/67

partly related to heavy dealer financing needs. Quite 
naturally, such banks recognize that they cannot use the 
discount window as a continuous source of funds, and a 
few have been willing to bid up the funds rate instead 
when their needs have been large. This is apt to be a 
recurring phenomenon and we should not expect the old 
relationship of the discount rate as a ceiling to the 
funds rate to be readily restored--unless, of course, 
we are prepared to be even more aggressive in supplying 
reserves to the banks.  

In the capital markets the pressure of new financing 
may well have passed its peak, although the calendar is 
heavy and could build up substantially if rates decline 
significantly. Banks and finance companies are among the 
more eligible candidates lurking in the wings, and a large 
additional number of nonfinancial corporations may well 
seek to fund some part of their outstanding indebtedness.  
So far this year private placements have run far below 
the level of earlier years, but as insurance companies 
and other institutional investors rebuild liquidity some 
of the pressure may again be taken off the public market.  
The record March total of over $1.6 corporate bonds 
offered publicly was two to three times the level of 
offerings in March in recent years, and the first-quarter 
total reflects the same pattern. The heavy flotations 
appear the natural consequence of last year's squeeze on 
corporate liquidity, and of this year's extraordinary 
speedup in corporate tax payments to the Treasury.  

As you know, the Treasury will announce the terms of 
its May refunding on or about April 26, before the Com
mittee meets again. In addition to the $9.7 billion 
Treasury notes maturing May 15, the Treasury may well 
want to consider a prerefunding of June, August, and 
possibly November maturities. Public holdings amount 
to $2.9 billion of the May maturities, $1.3 billion of 
the June, $4.8 billion of the August, and $2.6 billion 
of the November maturities. A large prerefunding would 
require an even keel posture for the System through 
mid-May at least, and could add to downward pressure on 
short-term rates if a substantial volume of short-dated 
coupon issues are moved out into the 3-5 year maturity 
range. I should also note that the Export-Import Bank 
plans to offer $400 million or so participation certifi
cates within a few days. The Federal National Mortgage 
Association has about $900 million PCs to offer before

-24-



4/4/67

the end of the fiscal year in order to meet the budget 
target.  

As expected, the Treasury borrowed directly from the 
System over the weekend of March 10. Earlier the Treasury 
expected that a similar borrowing might be required in 
mid-April, but most recent estimates indicate that this 
will not be necessary.  

As the written reports emphasize, aggregate reserve 
and credit measures were exceptionally strong in March.  
The bank credit proxy rose at a 15 per cent annual rate-
compared with the 10 per cent estimated at the time of 
the last meeting. The rapid rate of growth of various 
reserve measures in recent months has, naturally, 
permitted banks to restore liquidity lost in 1966, and 
business loan expansion appears to have strengthened in 
March. With the tax speedup, loan demands should be 
strong in April, and the Board staff estimate of a 10-13 
per cent rate of growth of bank credit for April does 
not appear to be particularly disturbing. In fact, the 
New York Bank projection is for a 16 per cent growth 
rate. If the Committee should decide to include a two-way 
proviso clause in the directive it would be helpful to 
have the Committee's ideas on an appropriate range for 
bank credit growth. Let me note also that although the 
draft directives 1/ do not mention even keel considerations 
such considerations might have to override implementation 
of the proviso clause by late in the month.  

Mr. Daane asked what market reactions might be expected to 

reductions in the Federal Reserve discount rate of 1/2 and 1/4 per 

cent, respectively.  

Mr. Holmes said that a 1/2 per cent cut in the discount rate 

probably would be taken by market participants as a confirmation 

of their expectations that the System was moving to somewhat greater 

1/ Alternative draft directives submitted by the staff for Committee 
consideration are appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

-25-



4/4/67 -26

ease. A 1/4 per cent reduction probably would be taken as a 

cautionary signal, indicating that the market should not overestimate 

the System's intentions to ease. The latter action might cause some 

temporary backup of short-term rates and it perhaps would have some 

effect on longer-term rates as well. Over the long run, however, 

other factors were likely to lead to downward tendencies in short

term rates, as he had indicated in his statement.  

Mr. Brimmer asked what consequences a discount rate cut 

would have for rates paid by depositary institutions.  

In reply, Mr. Holmes noted that yesterday one large New York 

bank had lowered the rate it paid on certain consumer-type time 

deposits. A discount rate reduction probably would trigger similar 

actions by other savings institutions. Obviously the effect would 

be greater if the discount rate was reduced by 1/2 per cent rather 

than by 1/4 per cent.  

Mr. Daane commented that in a conversation yesterday a 

knowledgeable market participant had characterized the market for 

securities with maturities beyond five years as a "nothing" market.  

He asked whether that characterization was accurate.  

Mr. Holmes replied that municipal dealers were finding it 

very hard to place securities. However, the corporate market was 

handling a great volume of securities, and there was good demand 

for longer-term Governments, mostly in the bank maturity area.



4/4/67

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Gov
ernment securities and bankers' 
acceptances during the period March 7 
through April 3, 1967, were approved, 
ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement on economic conditions: 

The clues available to the Committee at the time of 
the last meeting, foreshadowing further weakening in the 
economy, have by and large been confirmed by data becoming 
available since then. Industrial production did decline 
substantially further in February, with the drop broadening 
out into many industrial sectors, and the odds are that 
another decline will be reported for March. Retail sales 
did fall off in February, and apparently showed little 
improvement in March. And on the employment front, we've 
seen reduced overtime followed by lay-offs--a classic 
cyclical pattern. After the sharp February drop in the 
workweek, the course of initial unemployment claims in 
March suggests that the unemployment rate rose last month.  

Before noting some of the other clouds on the horizon, 
let me be sure to note a few silver linings. Stabilization 
of prices of machinery and equipment and renewed weakening 
in some basic materials prices give hope for a slowing in 
wholesale prices of industrial commodities over-all. And 
with food prices declining recently, at both wholesale 
and retail, the consumer price index has been slowed to 
a small upward drift. Even if the decline in food prices 
has about run its course, the weakened demand situation 
should keep increases in other commodity prices on the 
moderate side in the months ahead. And, wonder of wonders, 
even the pace of advance in service prices seems to be 
slowing a bit. At least one source of upward pressure on 
wages and costs may turn out more moderate this year than 
feared earlier.



4/4/67

Another bit of comfort comes from the news that a 
start appears to have been made in reducing the overhang 
of excessive stocks in the hands of producers and 
distributors. Reports for February show a sharp drop 
in the rate of inventory accumulation in manufacturing, 
and although data for trade are not yet in, these may 
show some net reduction in stocks. Certainly, one can 
breathe a slight sigh of relief that an inventory adjust
ment is at last under way.  

But one cannot get much satisfaction from the fact 
that the adjustment is taking place through reductions in 
output, employment, and incomes, rather than from a 
rebound in sales. As one indication of the problem that 
may still lie ahead, the slowing in manufacturing inventory 
accumulation in February was more than offset by a drop 
in shipments, leaving the stock-sales ratio higher than 
before--indeed, as high as in the 1960-61 recession.  
Failing a pronounced pickup in final sales, more produc
tion cuts must lie ahead before inventories and sales 
get into a balance that businesses regard as viable.  

What are the prospects that the inventory problem 
will be eased by a revival in final sales this spring? 
Taking it category by category, the only sure source of 
expansion in the near-term appears to be in Government 
spending. Federal spending for defense is running a 
shade higher than in the budget estimates, and will 
probably continue to do so--as best as one can speculate 
on the course of military activity and needs. Indeed, 
defense orders have been holding up the whole new orders 

series. Federal spending for nondefense purposes is also 
moving up faster than anticipated earlier, in part because 
funds impounded at the height of inflationary worries 
are now being released. And State and local spending 

appears slated to continue to rise at least as rapidly 
as in recent quarters. All in all, it seems most likely 

that Government outlays will add from $5 to $6 billion 

to GNP in the spring quarter.  
Private spending for final product, however, doesn't 

seem to be going anywhere, on balance. While the longer

run housing picture still seems bright, the near-term 

picture is still uncertain. Funds are flowing into thrift 

institutions at a rapid pace, but thrift institutions 

are behaving thriftily, using their inflows in large 

measure to reduce indebtedness rather than to expand 

mortgage lending. It takes time to turn the housing

-28-



4/4/67

industry around, and although the turn will undoubtedly 
be more in evidence by summer and fall, the impact of 
easier credit conditions on construction is not likely 
to contribute significantly to a rise in GNP over the 
next few months.  

Nor is there much basis for expecting a significant 
contribution to rising GNP from business fixed investment 
over the near-term, even with easier credit conditions 
and restoration of tax incentives. Declining sales, 
profits, profit margins, and order backlogs, along with 
rising excess capacity, are countervailing considerations.  
We'd probably be doing well if investment spending just 
held its own over the next quarter or so, with rising 
construction spending offsetting a likely decline in 
plant and equipment outlays.  

It seems to me that if an orderly inventory adjust
ment is to continue without depressing levels of economic 
activity too much further, consumers will have to begin 
to spend more liberally, particularly for durable goods.  
It is not enough to pin one's hopes on a decline in the 
saving rate, which in any event usually occurs in reces
sions because income drops more rapidly than consumption 
patterns can be adjusted. Spending a larger share of a 
dwindling income can still mean declining markets for 
goods. We need a bulge in sales in absolute terms.  

Near-term resurgence in consumer spending for goods 
can't be taken for granted, however, just because the 
saving rate has already moved up to a relatively high 
level. After three years of a saving rate fluctuating 
between 5 and 6 per cent, we have tended to assume that 
a 7 per cent rate is unsustainable, even for relatively 
short periods. Yet it has held up before. For almost 
three years, from early 1956 to late 1958, the saving 
rate stayed in a 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 per cent range. Over 
this period, while spending for nondurable goods about 
kept pace with disposable income, outlays for durable 
goods fell far behind. In fact, there was a decline in 
the physical volume of durables purchased by consumers.  
And through this period, manufacturing capacity utilization 
rates fell, as the industrial plant planned and ordered 
in the 1955 environment of booming consumer expenditures 

came on stream at a time when consumer spending propen
sities were subdued.  

I'm not forecasting as long a drought in consumer 
spending ahead of us now. But I do emphasize that we

-29-



4/4/67

cannot be certain that the drought will end this quarter 
or next, no matter how much optimism the Survey Research 
Center at the University of Michigan reads into its 
surveys. Consumer attitudes are important, but the 
problem is more than psychological. Lay-offs and shortened 
workweeks bite into consumer capacity to undertake major 
expenditures.  

Further declines in retail sales may not be in prospect, 
but the basis for a turn-up in sales soon is not clear, 
either. To cite 1958 experience again, revival in con
sumer spending lagged the revival in incomes by roughly 
two quarters. Currently, we're expecting deceleration, 
rather than revival, in income growth this spring.  
Resumption of faster rates of advance in disposable income 
is not likely until expanding Government spending is 
supplemented by incomes generated through rising private 
spending. Even further and faster increases in construction 
activity may not be enough to spark a broad and substantial 
upturn in consumption without additional injections into 
the income stream, perhaps through enlarged social security 
benefits.  

For the near-term, then, our work seems cut out for 
us. We have to continue to make credit conditions even 
more conducive for consumers--and business and governments, 
also--to finance income generating expenditures, at least 
until the forces of expansion are firmly embedded. Much 
of our easing to date has been absorbed in restoring the 
liquidity wrung out of both borrowers and lenders last 
year, and this type of credit demand has kept the cost of 
financing long-term expenditures relatively high. Rates 
and terms on long-term debt have some way to go before 
they will reach levels that actually rekindle spending 
demands. It would appear premature, therefore, for the 
System to moderate its easing efforts at this stage.  

Mr. Ellis asked whether the staff had backed away from the 

projections for the second half of 1967 that-it had presented to 

the Committee in the course of the chart show given at the February 

meeting.  

Mr. Brill noted that the second-half projections included 

in the chart show were those of the Council of Economic Advisers;

-30-



4/4/67 -31

the Board's staff had not given any projections of its own for that 

period. The staff was now reevaluating the Council's projections, 

but was not yet ready to present its conclusions. Much would depend 

on the assessment of the outlook for the Federal budget, including 

the Administration's proposals for increased social security benefits.  

Mr. Hickman, after complimenting Mr. Brill on his presentation 

today, noted that the staff of the Cleveland Reserve Bank thought 

it could detect evidence of some leveling in durable goods sales in 

the Fourth District during March. He asked whether the Board's staff 

had the same impression for the nation as a whole.  

Mr. Brill replied that he had just received word that automo

bile sales did level off in March. However, it appeared that sales 

were not much different from production, which would suggest that 

there was little further reduction in inventories.  

Mr. Koch made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

Bank credit expansion and capital market flotations 
have been very large in recent months, and a question 
that has no doubt come to your minds is whether these 
large financial flows suggest that the process of gradual 
monetary easing begun last fall has gone far enough for 
the time being. It is to this question that I shall 
address most of my remarks this morning.  

We had been expecting strong demands for credit and 
capital this spring, but apparently the volume of financing 
has been somewhat larger than projected. This may strike 
one as odd in view of the fact that the nonfinancial 
situation in the economy has been weaker than had been 
contemplated.



4/4/67

Also, the decline in long-term interest rates has 
been smaller than projected, even though time and savings 
deposits have increased rapidly at both commercial banks 
and at nonbank financial intermediaries and the narrowly
defined money stock has increased fairly sharply.  

In the capital markets, the demand for financing 
has been particularly strong in the case of business 
corporations. Gross new corporate security flotations 
in the first quarter approached $6 billion.  

Businesses have been borrowing heavily in the 
capital markets in part in order to regain a more 
balanced maturity structure of their indebtedness and 
in part in order to rebuild their liquid assets, 
However, it is doubtful whether aggregate net corporate 
liquidity has been built up much yet, despite a sharp 
rise in corporate holdings of certificates of deposit.  
The rise in liquid assets has been matched by a sharp 
increase in accrued business tax liabilities.  

Also, business borrowing from banks in the first 
quarter was quite large, with demands concentrated in 
January and March, months of the heaviest tax payments.  
Borrowing will no doubt continue heavy this month--our 
staff estimates that corporate tax payments may total 
about $3-1/2 billion more than last year. Outstanding 
business loans are likely to rise in April even though 
a substantial amount of bank credit is expected to be 
repaid out of the proceeds of bond financing. In May 
and June taken together, though, corporate tax payments 
may only approximate those of last year. Thus, the crush 

of business financing demands on both the banks and the 
capital markets may be on the wane.  

Despite continuing large business demands for 

credit, commercial banks have also been able to begin 

to rebuild their liquidity by adding substantially to 

their holdings of short-term securities and money market 

loans. Reserves have been more readily supplied and 

deposit inflows have been substantial, first of large

denomination and consumer-type CD's, and more recently 

of demand deposits and, surprisingly, even savings 

deposits.  
Total bank time and savings deposits increased at 

an annual rate of 18 per cent in the first quarter, a 

rate that far exceeded the earlier projection, This 

growth included a rapid runup of large-denomination 

certificates of deposit to an outstanding volume of over 

$19 billion, about $1/2 billion above the earlier August 

peak.

-32-



4/4/67

The narrowly defined money supply has grown at an 
annual rate of 6 per cent in recent months. Much of this 
growth occurred in late February and March. It may have 
been due in part to increased corporate balances accu
mulated prior to tax payments and perhaps in part to 
increased consumer caution and decreased consumer spending 
on autos and other durable goods.  

As a result of these more favorable deposit inflows, 
on a daily-average proxy basis total bank credit rose at 
over a 15 per cent annual rate in the first quarter, and 
on an end-of-month basis at a little over a 12 per cent 
rate.  

The rise in business loans has occurred even though 
banks have not yet aggressively sought loans and have 
reduced their interest rates only with great reluctance 
and hesitation. Despite sharp increases in short-term 
security holdings in recent months, the loan-deposit 
ratio of the weekly reporting banks is still about 69 
per cent, as compared with the peak of 72 per cent 
reached last fall. Many banks, like businesses, apparently 
are not yet satisfied with their liquidity positions, 
particularly in view of their apparent general acceptance 
of the presumption that a brisk economic expansion will 
develop before the end of the year.  

The nonbank financial intermediaries, too, as 
Mr. Brill has suggested, have experienced very satis
factory fund inflows thus far this year. Like commercial 
banks, though, many of these institutions are also 
rebuilding their liquidity before they actively begin 
to beat the bushes for mortgage loans.  

As for interest rate behavior in recent months, 
the decline in short-term rates has been faster, and 
that in longer-term rates more sluggish, than projected.  
If, as an interim target, we are seeking to reattain 
the financial conditions prevailing around late 1965, 
we are already there in the case of, for example, the 
3-month Treasury bill rate, but still have perhaps a 
1/2 per cent to go in the case of the Aaa corporate 
bond yield. And, although mortgage yields have declined 
more promptly than in earlier periods of monetary easing, 
the extent of the decline has been inhibited by high 
and sticky rates on time deposits and savings and loan 
shareholdings.

-33-



4/4/67

What does all this mean for current monetary policy? 
I must confess that I began my preparation for today's 
assignment with some trepidation about the size of recent 
increases in such financial aggregates as total reserves, 
bank credit, and the money supply. The more I reviewed 
the situation, though, the more I began to realize not 
only that these increases were only a little larger than 
those we projected earlier, but also that they were 
needed to rebuild the liquidity of the economy. The 
liquidity positions of both business enterprises and 
financial institutions had fallen to exceptionally 
low levels last summer, and it is necessary to rebuild 
them substantially and promptly if businesses are to 
be encouraged to invest and institutions to lend.  

Finally, I feel that the current situation calls 
for a prompt reduction in the discount rate by 1/2 of 
1 per cent. The market has already more than dis
counted a 1/4 per cent decline and probably largely a 
1/2 per cent cut. If we do not go the whole 1/2 per 
cent, expectations will be disappointed and it might 
require large open market operations to keep another 
February-type reversal of credit market developments 
from occurring.  

A 1/2 point decrease in the discount rate would 
give the capital markets a needed shot in the arm. It 
would likely mean lower corporate bond yields and, hope
fully, would help to unstick the high rates on time 

deposits and shareholdings. As a result, it would 

contribute to a further reduction in the cost of mortgage 

credit, a development that is essential for a more 

adequate rate of over-all economic growth later in the 

year.  
Action decreasing the discount rate by 1/2 per cent 

would be most consistent with proposed alternative B of 

the draft directives. As the blue book suggests, this 

would no doubt mean some further easing through open 

market operations, illustrated by an increase in free 

reserves to, perhaps, the $300 - $400 million range.  

Mr. Ellis asked whether, if the market had already fully 

discounted a 1/2 per cent decrease in the discount rate, it would be 

necessary to buttress such action with open market operations to

produce free reserves in the $300-$400 million area,



4/4/67 -35

Mr. Koch said he did not think the market had fully 

discounted a 1/2 per cent decrease in the discount rate. In any 

case, the effect of a discount rate action was likely to be mainly 

psychological, and that effect probably would have to be backed up 

by open market operations to produce lasting easier conditions. The 

two actions need not be simultaneous, of course, since a discount 

rate cut would in itself have a temporary easing effect. He agreed 

with Mr. Holmes that it would be appropriate to provide reserves 

in part through operations in coupon issues.  

Mr. Hickman said he concurred in the view that further 

easing was necessary. He wondered, however, whether a 1/2 per cent 

cut in the discount rate might not trigger a flow of funds abroad.  

Mr. Koch replied that he had been addressing himself 

solely to domestic considerations. However, he thought Mr. Coombs' 

comments earlier today bore on the point in question.  

Mr. Swan referred to Mr. Koch's observation that recent 

high rates of bank credit growth were justified by the need to 

rebuild the liquidity of the economy. He asked how much longer such 

growth rates might be necessary before the desire for liquidity was 

satisfied, at least to some degree.  

Mr. Koch said that while he thought there was still some 

distance to go in meeting liquidity needs, he did not know how far 

that distance was. The growth rate of bank credit would have to be



watched, however, particularly if economic conditions improved and 

the demand for credit strengthened over the next few months.  

Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments and related matters: 

Large weekly deficits in March have made the over-all 
payments figures for the first quarter--so far as we 
know them--pretty gloomy. Through March 29, the liquidity 
deficit for the quarter approached $1 billion, seasonally 
adjusted, and the official reserve transactions deficit 
for the quarter exceeded $1-1/2 billion. Both figures 
are much larger than those published for the fourth 
quarter, and much larger than the quarterly averages 
that we have been expecting for the year 1967.  

The first quarter numbers do not represent any 
fundamental new deterioration from the fourth quarter.  
The increase in the liquidity deficit is wholly ex
plained by three special types of transactions, none of 
which is closely related to economic activity or monetary 
conditions. First, we received no debt prepayments in 
the first quarter, whereas we had received nearly $200 
million of such payments in the fourth quarter of 1966.  
Second, shifts of foreign official assets into nonliquid 
forms (at least through March 29) were about $200 million 
smaller than in the preceding quarter. Third, U.S. oil 
companies paid nearly $300 million equivalent to Libya 
for 1966 taxes in March of this year, whereas last year 
the corresponding payments were not made until April.  
(It may be that the seasonals--which are currently being 
revised--should be somehow adjusted for this.) On all 
other transactions than these, the deficit on the 
liquidity basis was roughly the same in the first quarter 

as in the fourth.  
Similarly, on the official settlements basis, the 

first and third of the special transactions mentioned, 
plus repayment of Euro-dollars during the early weeks of 

the year, in contrast to net inflows during the fourth 
quarter, explain the change in the balance. Since we 

argued last year that the Euro-dollar inflow should not 
be taken as representing a fundamental or lasting improve

ment, it would not be helpful now to treat the 
long-anticipated reversal of that flow as a fundamental 
deterioration.

4/4/67 -36-



4/4/67

But one can take only limited comfort from the fact 
that the bad first quarter was really no worse than the 
bad preceding quarter. We need to reassess future 
prospects in the light of these disappointing recent 
figures, of longer-run developments, and of the changing 
cyclical situation and associated changes in policy.  

Government analysts have been meeting during the 
past week to make such a reassessment. They incline 
to the view, which I share, that--leaving aside for the 
moment such special transactions as debt prepayments 
and shifts of foreign official assets--the liquidity 
deficit may come out between $2 billion and $2-1/2 
billion this year, down a little from last year's $2.8 
billion, reckoned on a comparable basis. If in addition, 
as the Treasury staff now supposes, new special trans
actions can be arranged this year in about half of 
last year's large volume, the published liquidity deficit 
for the year might not differ much from last year's 
$1.4 billion.  

This is roughly the same projection that the Board's 
staff has been giving you for several months. To cleave 
to it, despite the much worse figures of the past two 
quarters, is to project a considerable improvement in 
the quarters ahead. This may sound adventurous. But it 
is firmly rooted in the application of past relation
ships to recent and prospective economic developments.  

The details of the projection are about as before.  
A sharp drop in merchandise imports from recent levels, 
coupled with some further modest expansion in exports, 
seems likely to make the trade surplus and the surplus 
on all goods and services about $2 billion better this 
year than last. The import drop will reflect the lower 
rates of GNP growth and inventory accumulation, and 
especially--with some lag--the recent and prospective 
decline in the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing.  
Equations fitted to past experience suggest that the 
import decline should have begun in the first quarter.  
And indeed, imports did drop in February, although 2- and 
3-month averages did not yet show a significant decline.  

Partly offsetting the current account improvement, 
there is still expected to be some deterioration on 

capital account. Direct investment outflows are now 
expected to increase by about 10 per cent year to year, 
though not from the swollen fourth-quarter rate. U.S.  
corporations plan some further increase in foreign

-37-



4/4/67

spending, and will probably not increase their foreign 
borrowing.  

Some reversal of bank credit flows, from reflow to 
renewed outflow, is still anticipated. Through February, 
this had not happened. But Japanese borrowers will be 
seeking funds here later in the year.  

Finally, net outflow of Government grants and capital 
will also be larger, as a result mainly of military and 
civilian aircraft financing by the Export-Import Bank.  

Two aspects of the recent projection discussions are 
of particular interest to this Committee. First, it 
appears that any shortfall of GNP this year below about 
a $775 billion figure would not yield much net additional 
benefit to the current account. A deep recession would 
cut U.S. imports so sharply that it would probably have 
serious and early repercussions on activity abroad, and 
hence on U.S. exports.  

Secondly, the group did not feel it necessary to 
specify its assumptions about U.S. monetary conditions 
in detail in order to project capital flows. The feeling 
seemed to be that interest rates in Europe and Canada 
would continue to move generally parallel with U.S. rates, 
and that the limitations on U.S. capital outflows imposed 
by the IET and the voluntary programs would make outflows 
of U.S. capital relatively insensitive to moderate 
changes in rate differentials.  

Thus, so long as U.S. monetary policy is seen to be 
reasonably well suited to domestic requirements, so that 
confidence is maintained, the way in which policy unfolds 
in detail may not matter much for the balance of payments 
this year. This country has been placed in the position 
of taking the lead internationally in coping--or not 
coping--with world-wide recessionary tendencies. Britain, 
Canada, and probably other European countries (as 
Mr. Coombs has already suggested), are likely to follow 
that lead. Hence, although the payments position remains 
unsatisfactory, there seems to be little that U.S.  
monetary policy can do at this juncture either to help 
it or to harm it. * 

This is the case, I think, even with respect to 
Euro-dollar flows and the official settlements balance, 
for which the group of Government analysts makes no 
projections. Within wide limits, there may be little 
that this Committee can do, even if it wished to, to 
speed or retard a further reflow to Europe this year.

-38-



4/4/67

Clearly there will be a large official settlements 
deficit this year. Our February guess of $3 billion or 
more still seems valid, and more than a little disturbing.  
But so long as Britain and Germany are on the other end 
of it, we may not be confronted with large gold losses 
or the necessity of making large IMF drawings. And in 
a longer perspective, it will be right, I think, because 
of the ebb and flow of Euro-dollars, to average out the 
two years of 1966 and 1967 at a deficit of about $1-1/2 
billion a year. That is no better than 1965, but also 
no worse, despite the Vietnam war.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with 

Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

Nearly all of the business statistics in recent 
weeks have confirmed a further slackening of the 
economic expansion. Bad weather doubtless played a 
part, but it is not the whole story. The deterioration 
has been a bit more than I had expected a few weeks 
ago. I find the inventory situation disappointing, 
with evidence that the needed inventory adjustment 
is still in its early stages. A cautious attitude 
on the part of consumers has clearly contributed to 
the recent sluggish record.  

Despite all this, I hold to the view that what we 
are seeing is probably only a pause and that the economy 
is likely to become much stronger later in the year-
although the timing of this strengthening may have 
been somewhat deferred. In general, confidence remains 
high, and there are strong underlying forces in the 
economy--forces which have been strengthened by the 
further easing of fiscal and monetary policies in recent 
weeks. I am impressed by the important stimulative role 
being played by the Federal budget, particularly in 
the second half of calendar 1967. This stimulus will 
be substantial even with enactment of the proposed 
surtax as of July 1--and without enactment of the surtax 
at that time, which looks increasingly unlikely, the 
fiscal stimulus will be of near-record proportions.  
In fact I can see cause for concern over the possibility 
that the budget will be highly stimulative at a time,

-39-



4/4/67

later in the year, when private demand is expanding 
rapidly. These prospects underline the need for greater 
flexibility in the timing of fiscal actions.  

Meanwhile, although prices are now relatively stable 
because of the slackening in demand, we still face a 
serious threat of excessively generous wage settlements 
and resulting cost-price pressures. The need to take 
this threat seriously becomes all the clearer when we 
analyze the balance of payments statistics for 1967 to 
date. The liquidity and official settlements deficits 
for February and most of March indicate sharp further 
deterioration in our international accounts, despite 
an improvement of the trade surplus in February. It 
may well be that the worsening of our accounts reflects 
precautionary transfers of corporate funds to foreign 
affiliates in anticipation of new controls or taxes on 
direct investment outflows. Such anticipatory transfers 
apparently occurred already in substantial amounts in 
the fourth quarter of 1966.  

I would interpret the present state of the balance 
of payments as clearly deteriorating. The liquidity 
deficit in 1966 was $1.4 billion; in the fourth quarter 
of that year it was at an annual rate of $2-1/4 billion; 
and in the first quarter of 1967 it is estimated at an 
annual rate of about $4 billion. The balance on the 
official reserves transactions basis was in surplus in 
1966 as a whole, but it was in deficit at an annual rate 
of about $1 billion in the fourth quarter; and calcula
tions at the New York Reserve Bank suggest a first-quarter 
deficit at a rate of about $7 billion. These figures are 
decidedly disturbing and, as I will note later, I believe 
a reference in the directive to the balance of payments 
deterioration they reflect merits consideration.  

As for bank credit, it now seems clear that all 
three months of the first quarter showed a very rapid 
rise in bank credit; and a similar performance seems in 
the cards for April. Much of the expansion has been in 
investments, so that loan-deposit ratios have dropped 
substantially from their extraordinary peak. The money 
supply in March showed the largest monthly advance in 
the postwar period; and there have also been sizable 
gains in commercial bank time and savings deposits, as 
well as large savings inflows into the thrift institu
tions. These credit developments have been generally 
gratifying, following the shortfall of bank credit of

-40-



4/4/67

last autumn, and they appear appropriate in the light 
of the current state of the economy. Business loan 
growth in March seems to have been a good deal larger 
than anticipated, although a minor portion of it reflects 
the banks' endeavor to increase their liquidity by 
acquiring acceptances. Loan demand continues rather 
strong, in part perhaps because of the unusually heavy 
corporate tax payments due next month.  

It seems to me that monetary policy has been doing 
about all that could be expected of it, with open 
market operations contributing importantly to easier 
credit conditions over recent months, and with last 
month's reduction in reserve requirements lending further 
support to the policy of greater ease. In view of the 
very rapid increases we are witnessing in most of the 
monetary variables which we usually think of as "inter
mediate objectives," I think open market policy should 
remain essentially unchanged over the next four weeks.  
In view of the likelihood of a reduction in the discount 

rate in the near future, I do not feel that money market 
conditions should remain the principal policy criterion 
but would suggest rather that we try to maintain about 
the present degree of reserve availability. Free reserves 

fluctuating in the $200 to $300 million range will 

probably be consistent with the objective of keeping 
about the present degree of ease. The Federal funds 

rate should, of course, be expected to adjust to any new 

discount rate level. We should avoid placing excessive 

reliance on the Federal funds rate, since it is notice

ably affected by the prevailing spirit of reluctance 

among commercial banks to borrow at the discount window.  

Thus, reasonable fluctuations in the funds rate should 

be permitted.  
As for the directive, the first paragraph as drafted 

by the staff appears to be generally acceptable. As I 

mentioned earlier, however, a reference to the recent 

deterioration in the balance of payments might be useful.  

Accordingly, I would suggest replacing the sentence on 

the balance of payments in the staff's draft with the 

following sentence: "The balance of payments has been 

deteriorating despite some recent improvement in the 

foreign trade surplus." It seems to me that the second 

paragraph should call for "maintaining about the present 
degree of reserve availability." With this modification, 
I like alternative A and am glad to see inclusion of a

-41-



4/4/67

two-way proviso. This would give appropriate recognition 
to the fact that bank credit expansion has recently been 
running at what are historically very high rates. This 
was fine on a temporary basis, but a long-run continua
tion of a growth rate of some 15 per cent would certainly 
be excessive. For April, in view of the tax speed-up, 
I would not be unduly concerned if the credit proxy were 
to run somewhat above the current estimates, but I would 
expect the proviso to become operative if this difference 
were to become very wide.  

This brings me to the question of a possible discount 
rate reduction. There is much to be said for keeping all 
of the major instruments of monetary policy more or less 
in step when we have a significant change in business 
and credit conditions and a consequent change in policy, 
as has occurred over the past four or five months.  
Market rates have been moving down significantly, and 
some of them are of course well below the discount rate.  
It would seem to me highly logical to bring the discount 
rate now into better alignment, and, in so doing, minimize 
one element of uncertainty as to the intent of official 
credit policy. Since many of the Reserve Banks have 
directors' meetings this week, the question of timing 

presents no great difficulty. I find it a good deal more 
puzzling to decide whether the reduction should be by 
1/2 per cent or by 1/4 per cent.  

In favor of the smaller reduction of 1/4 per cent, 
one could point to the following arguments: 

(1) Since such a move has been fully 
discounted by the market, it would presumably 
not lead to further reductions in market rates.  

In fact, it might cause at least a temporary 
backing-up of rates from current levels.  

(2) The uncertainty in the business out

look might counsel a moderate move which could 

be reinforced or reversed in the light of 
further developments. It would leave us an 

opportunity for a further cut if business 

should turn out to be weaker than now seems 

likely or if knots should develop in the 

capital markets. At the same time it might 

make it easier for policy to turn around should 

this be necessary before the year is out.  

(3) There is some risk now, especially 
in view of the very large volume of corporate

-42-



4/4/67

bond offerings, that a larger reduction could 
trigger wrong expectations and eventually lead 
to serious congestion which could only be 
eliminated by substantial further easing of 
credit.  

(4) There may also be something to be 
said for accustoming the market to the use of 
smaller and more frequent changes in the dis
count rate than has been customary.  
I find at least as many arguments in favor of a 1/2 

per cent reduction: 
(1) The present rate of 4-1/2 per cent 

is quite high historically. Perhaps a change 
from such a level should not be too niggardly.  

(2) Historically, 1/2 per cent is the 
usual amount by which the discount rate has 
been changed in recent years.  

(3) A move by 1/2 per cent would avoid 
the uncertainty that might be caused if the 
market should remain poised in expectation of 
another reduction.  

(4) The larger cut would be more effective 
in nudging mortgage rates downward with con
sequent advantages of speeding recovery in the 
housing industry.  

(5) A 1/2 per cent reduction would place 
the System in a position to move more vigorously 
on the up side should that become necessary.  

(6) From an international standpoint, 
the present is probably a good time in which 
to make a decisive discount rate reduction if 
we plan to do so at all in the coming months.  
There have been a number of rate cuts abroad, 
and others might be encouraged by a move on our 
part, especially if it were a move of 1/2 per 
cent. There is a good deal to be said for 
staying "in phase" as much as possible with 
our foreign counterparts if economic conditions 
permit; and already there are some signs that 
European economies might gain renewed vigor a 
little later this year, and in such circum
stances occasions for foreign rate reductions 
would probably vanish.  

(7) In terms of our own balance of payments, 
a reduction at this time of 1/2 per cent in our

-43-



4/4/67

rate would probably have little adverse effect.  
For the time being, despite the disturbingly 
large size of the deficit, dollars are being 
accumulated largely in central banks, such 
as those of England and Germany, where they 
are not causing problems in terms of our gold 
stock. Later on, our room for maneuver might 
become much more limited if this geographical 
pattern should change.  

(8) A reduction of 1/2 per cent would be 
a clear-cut, strong move and would not give 
an appearance of uncertainty and hesitation in 
System policy.  
Last week I had an opportunity to discuss this whole 

matter in a preliminary way with our directors. There 
were divided views, with some of the directors reluctant 
to make any rate reduction at this time because of their 
belief that the economy would soon be expanding strongly 
again. In general, I think I could summarize their 
attitude as being one of caution. On balance, I would 
favor a discount rate reduction of 1/2 per cent. I 
believe, however, that such a move should be publicized 
as confirming the recent shift in market rates and as 
a means of bringing the discount rate into line with 
our other policy instruments, rather than as a signif
icant move of further ease. An approach along these 
lines might minimize excessive expectational effects 
on market rates.  

Naturally, I await with interest the views of the 
others at today's meeting.  

Mr. Ellis remarked that belatedly, and therefore fortunately, 

the New England economy was exhibiting those recessionary signs 

that had characterized the national economy for the last several 

months. The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for February 

remained unchanged at 3.3 per cent (the U.S. rate was 3.7 per cent) 

but initial claims for unemployment compensation, as of March 18, had 

for six weeks been exceeding such claims for the corresponding

-44-



4/4/67 -45

period of 1966., For the preceding five weeks they had trailed 

year-ago levels. District measures of factory output and average 

weekly hours of manufacturing both turned down slightly between 

January and February.  

Mr. Ellis reported that the Boston Reserve Bank had been 

watching the mortgage market closely to detect changes stemming from 

the shifting flow of funds through savings banks and insurance com

panies. A gradual decline had been recorded for January and February 

in the number of banks charging 6 per cent or more for residential 

mortgages. Bankers reported that the trend continued in March. It 

was interesting to note, however, that the number of savings banks 

offering higher rates on regular and special notice accounts was 

still increasing. Also, they were shifting to rates compounded and 

credited on a monthly rather than a quarterly basis.  

The Boston Reserve Bank's survey of the eight largest life 

insurance companies in New England revealed that policy lending by 

February had dropped more than half from its late fall peak rate, 

Mr. Ellis noted, but it remained about double the 1965 "normal 

level." Their new commitments of funds for real estate mortgage 

loans to business in February nearly matched the average monthly 

level for 1965. Their residential mortgage new commitments had 

risen slightly but were less than half their average in 1965. Of 

course, all those commitments were for 1968 projects. They had 

no money to commit for this year.



4/4/67 -46

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that two types 

of analysis--both present in the green book 1/ and staff comments-

defined a sort of Hobson's choice of monetary policy. The evidence 

was overwhelming that the economy was in a "recessionary" or "slow 

growth"--and therefore unsatisfactory--posture. Monetary 

stimulation--designed to stimulate housing--was an obvious need that 

the Committee had moved forcefully to provide. Its success since 

November was registered in the 6.8 per cent annual rate of increase 

in the money supply, the 15 or 20 per cent rates of increase in 

aggregate reserve measures, and the sharp increase in bank credit, 

based on sharp growth in both demand and time deposits.  

By the same token, Mr. Ellis continued, the evidence from 

the same sources was persuasive that the economy might be expected 

to be expanding quite acceptably in the last half of the year. By 

itself, that expectation would be quite reassuring were it not for 

the knowledge that monetary policy works with a lag--even though 

the extent of lag cannot be precisely defined. To the extent that 

the Committee was fighting short-run problems with long-run weapons, 

it was storing up problems to be combatted later. That was perhaps 

an unnecessarily long way to emphasize that the longer the Committee 

pursued a policy of continued easing the more carefully it should 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



4/4/67 -47

weigh prospective immediate gains against prospective future 

problems. His personal Hobson's choice arose when he tried to 

apply such a dictum in the context of policy for the next four 

weeks.  

Mr. Ellis said that the trend and existing level of bill 

yields, the widely reported market expectations, and the desirability 

of using the discount rate instrument in harmony with other monetary 

policy instruments all counseled reducing the discount rate prior 

to the Treasury's refunding action later this month. The only 

question was how much. As the Board members knew, a week ago the 

directors of the Boston Bank chose a 1/4 per cent reduction. In 

his judgment, the question of how much to lower the discount rate 

depended on the kind of signal the System wished to convey to the 

market. At present rate levels, a cut of 1/2 per cent would carry 

the connotation that the System encouraged and intended to support 

both lower rates and further reserve easing, as implied by the 

discussion in the blue book of the probable effects of such a discount 

rate action. A cut of 1/4 per cent would be more passive; it would 

reflect a desire to confirm continuation of monetary ease, but it 

probably would have a neutral effect on market rates and expectations.  

Equally important was the likelihood that such a change would avoid 

possible interpretation that the System's concern had increased to 

the point at which it was prepared to force monetary policy into



4/4/67 -48

a more aggressive posture. A move of 1/4 per cent would fit the 

established pattern of successive modest steps and avoid the "panic 

button" accusation. It would also minimize the exposure to flows 

of funds abroad.  

All of that, Mr. Ellis remarked, tied back to his earlier 

observations about achieving present objectives while minimizing 

further problems. He believed the policy actions the Committee had 

already taken might be expected to have substantial and extensive 

impact in the next three months. In particular, a slower rate of 

new corporate issues should allow long-term rates to reflect more 

of the movement that had occurred at the shorter end of the market.  

He was prepared to postpone the further easing of net reserve posi

tions that might be associated with a discount rate reduction of 

1/2 per cent.  

Within the alternatives outlined in the blue book, Mr. Ellis 

anticipated that a 1/4 per cent cut in the discount rate, supported 

by continuation of present efforts to preserve an easy money market, 

would continue but not accelerate the rapid growth in reserve 

aggregates, bank credit, and the money supply. In effect, he was 

in agreement with the last sentence in the full paragraph on page 8 

of the blue book, which said substantially that. In fact, that 

whole paragraph, with a change in title, outlined a course of policy 

he believed appropriate. The preceding paragraph was labeled



4/4/67 -49

"Further ease through open market operations alone." The paragraph 

on page 8 might be made parallel in concept and acceptable to him 

by adding a new final word to the title, to read "Further ease with 

discount rate cuts alone."1 / 

Mr. Ellis concluded by observing that for the second paragraph 

of the directive he would favor either alternative B, interpreted 

in terms of the blue book language he had cited, or alternative A 

amended in the manner suggested by Mr. Hayes.  

Mr. Irons reported that in the Eleventh District the adjust

ment in economic conditions that had been under way for some time 

was continuing, although it did not appear to be accelerating or to 

be causing much disturbance. The employment situation had changed 

1/ The paragraph to which Mr. Ellis referred reads as follows: 
"Further ease with discount rate cuts. A 1/4 point 

decline in the discount rate to 4-1/4 per cent would tend 
essentially to do little more than confirm current levels of 
security yields. It would become more likely that the Federal 
funds rate would move below 4-1/2 per cent, assuming free reserves 
in their recent range. It would also serve to lower dealer 
lending rates somewhat, and thereby take some potential upward 
pressure off bill rates in the longer run. Over the short-run, 
though, the 3-month bill rate may rebound from its very recent 
4 per cent level, and perhaps fluctuate in a 3.90 to 4.15 per 
cent range over the next four weeks. If accomplished soon, a 
small discount rate cut could also smooth market adjustments 
around the mid-April tax date. The expansion in reserve and 
monetary aggregates could very well remain within the ranges 
earlier indicated for an unchanged monetary policy since 
borrowers and banks have to a great extent already built in a 
discount rate reduction of at least this size into their 
decisions."



4/4/67 -50

relatively little recently; in fact, employment in manufacturing had 

shown the normal seasonal rise, and employment in services and govern

ment had increased more than seasonally. Some increase in total 

employment was expected during the current month. Industrial production 

was down, with decreases in various durable and some nondurable goods 

industries offsetting gains in transportation equipment and aircraft.  

Construction activity was perhaps showing some signs of increasing.  

Retail trade, as reflected by department store sales, was running 

about 7 per cent over a year ago, and cumulatively for the year to 

date was about 3 per cent over a year ago. The District had not 

felt the impact of the decline in automobile sales quite so much as 

the country as a whole.  

Mr. Irons said that there recently had been relatively strong 

demand for loans, reflected mostly in categories other than commercial 

and industrial loans. Banks had added to their investments as they 

sought to improve their liquidity positions, and their loan-deposit 

ratios were better than they had been a few months earlier. Borrowing 

from the Federal Reserve Bank continued to be negligible; in fact, 

it was less than $1 million yesterday, as low as it had been for 

some time. Looking beyond the next few months, bankers in the 

District generally were expecting a continuation of easy credit policy 

until a turn in the economic situation appeared.



4/4/67 -51

At the national level, Mr. Irons continued, the course of 

business activity continued to be characterized by adjustments that 

were leading to a degree of weakness in various sectors of the economy, 

as reflected in the green book. The most notable adjustments were in 

the inventory area. It was true that stock-sales ratios had not 

improved, but some encouragement was offered by the fact that in

ventories themselves were coming down. There had certainly been a 

sharp easing of bank reserve positions. As indicated in the blue 

book, the much easier credit policy was being reflected in marked 

reductions in short-term rates. There also had been some declines 

in long-term rates although, as would be expected, they were not as 

large as in the short-term area. During the past several months the 

System had injected a substantial volume of funds into the market 

and, in general, had eased conditions significantly. Those policy 

actions had at least partly succeeded in accomplishing their 

objectives; a large volume of reserves had been provided at low 

cost, and certainly the severe strains evident a few months earlier 

had been moderated.  

At present, Mr. Irons said, he would recommend maintaining 

about the same degree of ease as had characterized the money and 

credit markets during the past month. He did not think additional 

ease was needed at this time from the standpoint of either rates or 

availability. Recent growth rates in financial aggregates such as



4/4/67 -52

the bank credit proxy, while suitable for the short run, probably 

were excessive for a sustained period. He would prefer alternative A 

for the directive.  

Mr. Irons added that he personally would like to see no 

change in the discount rate at this time, although he knew that 

arguments could be arrayed against that position. He was concerned 

that a discount rate reduction, no matter how its purposes were 

described, would be taken as another clear and definite step in the 

direction of further ease, and would lead to further sharp declines 

in short-term rates and increases in the availability of funds at 

banks. However, if the rate were to be reduced, he would favor a 

cut of 1/2 per cent rather than of 1/4 per cent.  

Mr. Swan reported that the unemployment rate in the Twelfth 

District was unchanged in February after recording a sharp drop in 

January. Manufacturing employment showed virtually no change but 

total nonfarm employment edged up. It appeared from limited figures 

that average weekly hours of production workers in manufacturing in 

California decreased by only 0.1 in February, compared with a 

decline of 0.7 nationally. That difference perhaps was related in 

part to the smaller emphasis on production of automobiles and 

appliances in California than in the rest of the country.  

Credit extended by weekly reporting banks in the District 

grew quite rapidly in the four weeks ending March 22, Mr. Swan



4/4/67 -53

continued, in contrast to a decline in the corresponding period of 

last year. The increase in securities holdings was very large, and 

was about equally divided between municipals and Governments. From 

the first of the year through March 22, total credit rose more at 

weekly reporting banks in the District than at such banks elsewhere.  

Much of the rise was due to increases in loans to securities dealers, 

while business and real estate loans declined. There were indications 

from some banks that inquiries regarding real estate loans had 

increased substantially recently, but such interest was not yet 

fully reflected in loans extended and in some cases not even in 

commitments made. The credit expansion had been quite consistently 

supported, in part at least, by continued net purchases of Federal 

funds by the larger District banks. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank 

were higher in February than in any month since September 1966.  

Such borrowings declined in March, however, and in the week ending 

March 29 they were zero.  

Yesterday, Mr. Swan said, after a large New York bank reduced 

the rate it paid on certificates of deposit of less than $100 thousand, 

he had made a quick check with some of the District banks and learned 

that they did not contemplate taking similar action for the time 

being. Apparently, California savings and loan associations did 

not intend to lower their dividend rates at present, and the banks 

planned to maintain their time deposit rates at levels competitive 

with rates paid by the associations.



4/4/67 -54

In Mr. Swan's judgment, the Desk had carried out Committee 

policy extremely well over the past month. The developments that 

had occurred--including the decline in bill rates, the fact that 

the Federal funds rate was finally reduced below the 4-3/4 - 5 per 

cent area, the increase in net free reserves, and the growth in 

the bank credit proxy--were all quite satisfactory to him. The 

fact that the decline in longer-term rates was relatively limited 

was explainable in terms of the heavy volume of offerings in the 

bond market. He was not sure that the problem of "unsticking" 

long-term rates was a significant one at present; if there was 

some reduction in the demands made on capital markets soon, those 

rates would move down by themselves.  

In thinking about policy for the period ahead, Mr. Swan 

continued, like Mr. Koch he had started with the question of how 

long it would be necessary to maintain the rather substantial rates 

of increase achieved over the last several months in bank credit, 

money supply, and the like, and whether still larger increases 

would be desirable. The latter seemed quite doubtful to him. He 

thought a discount rate reduction would be appropriate for the sake 

of consistency with other recent policy actions of the System and 

possibly to provide further confirmation of the System's present 

policy posture. As to the size of the cut, like Mr. Ellis, he found 

the description on page 8 of the blue book of the probable results



4/4/67 -55

of a 1/4 per cent rate reduction quite satisfactory. It was 

difficult for him to believe that the discount rate could be 

reduced by 1/2 per cent without having that action interpreted 

as a significant further move toward greater ease. In general, 

he would question the desirability of the System's taking that 

kind of step at this point, whether by a discount rate change or 

otherwise. Consequently, he had been thinking in terms of a 

reduction of 1/4 per cent, with the thought in mind that, if 

economic conditions weakened to a greater extent than he considered 

likely, the System would not hesitate to make another reduction 

promptly.  

There were only two arguments that he could see on the other 

side, Mr. Swan continued. The first was Mr. Coombs' observation 

that a 1/4 per cent reduction in the Federal Reserve discount rate 

might lead to less widespread and smaller reductions by other central 

banks than a 1/2 per cent cut would. While he was not in a position 

to assess fully the effects on other countries, he suspected that 

some discount rate action by the System, even if not a 1/2 per cent 

reduction, would be sufficient to encourage rate reductions abroad.  

The other point that concerned him was that of timing of the second 

1/4 per cent reduction if it should prove necessary. Presumably the 

System would be precluded from acting in May by the Treasury financing, 

and action in June also might not be possible if there was another



4/4/67 -56

Treasury financing at that time. If further discount rate action 

was to be foreclosed for three months, there might be some question 

about the appropriate size of the initial action. On balance, however, 

he favored a 1/4 per cent reduction at this point. He had not had 

an opportunity to discuss the question with the full board of directors 

of his Bank, but the matter had been raised at a meeting of the 

executive committee, where mixed feelings had been expressed.  

Mr. Swan said he would have some difficulty in accepting 

alternative A for the directive, in light of the expected discount 

rate action. He could accept alternative B if it were interpreted 

to call for maintaining the slight further easing in money market 

conditions that would probably follow a 1/4 per cent discount rate 

reduction. It should be explicitly recognized that the Desk should 

try to offset any backup in interest rates that might result from 

market disappointment with the size of the reduction.  

Mr. Galusha reported that the Minnesota legislature had passed 

the par clearance bill yesterday, and that that might stimulate the 

South Dakota legislature to take similar action. Hopefully, within 

18 months non-par clearance would be a thing of the past in the Ninth 

District.  

Perhaps the most interesting bit of financial information 

gained in his usual pre-FOMC meeting queries, Mr. Galusha said, was 

the speedup reported in the time schedule of previous long-term



4/4/67 -57

commitments. In one instance a borrower was being urged to draw 

down immediately funds previously programmed for late 1968. In 

visiting with business leaders of the Twin Cities, he found a basic 

confidence in the ability of the economy to respond as the year wore 

on. Skilled labor continued in extremely short supply.  

Agricultural credit, though, was responding slowly, Mr. Galusha 

observed. In the Reserve Bank's latest survey of agricultural credit 

conditions, it received virtually no responses indicating an easing 

of loan rates, short- or long-term. Apparently there had been a modest 

increase in the number of country banks seeking new farm loans, though, 

so perhaps some reduction in rates would come along soon.  

According to the Reserve Bank survey, Mr. Galusha said, there 

was considerable pessimism among country bankers about farm incomes.  

A frequent opinion was that reports should be expected of more and 

more farmers who were unable to repay their loans on schedule and of 

further declines in spending by farmers on producer and consumer 

durables. Nor was there any indication that farmers generally would 

be availing themselves in any substantial measure of the opportunity 

to increase plantings. The U.S. Department of Agriculture would have 

to place their bets on the benevolence of God and the weather instead 

of the farmer for increased production this year. The mood of agricul

ture seemed rather dark. With holding actions and farmer boycotts, 

the midwest was hardly waking joyously to spring.



4/4/67 -58

Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Galusha said he continued to 

be a crepe-hanger. He had to report growing concern among city bankers 

about their being, as they put it, returned to the circumstances of 

November 1965 and before. In those areas, like the Twin Cities, where 

the competition for consumer CD's was intense among all financial 

institutions, the first to move might be severely penalized. The move 

yesterday by a New York bank to lower the rate paid on consumer-type 

CD's might be infectious but he was afraid it might be something less 

than contagious. The president of one of the District's large banks 

had argued that the Board would have to change Regulation Q to correct 

the increasing imbalance between bank lending and borrowing rates.  

He (Mr. Galusha) found it distasteful even to contemplate the Board 

taking on the task of assuring a profitable spread between those 

rates. But, at the same time, he did believe that District banks were 

going to go through agonies in getting their consumer deposit rates 

down and, in that connection, that a half-point reduction in the 

discount rate would be quite helpful. It might even be that, if 

Reserve Banks generally and the Board decided on a discount rate 

reduction, in announcing the change the Board should indicate an 

expectation that lower consumer deposit rates would follow.  

Were there to be a discount rate change soon, Mr. Galusha said, 

he would favor holding free reserves within a $250-$300 million range.



4/4/67

But, again, he would suggest that whatever the free reserve target, 

it should be qualified by an insistence that money market rates not 

rise--except perhaps in slight, brief flurries.  

Mr. Galusha said that the proviso clause in alternative A of 

the draft directives would seem to give the Desk sufficient latitude 

to cope with whatever conditions might arise from a discount rate 

change. However, he had no preference between the two alternatives.  

Mr. Scanlon said that in the interest of time he would 

summarize the remarks he had prepared and submit the full statement 

for the record. He then summarized the following statement: 

With March and a period of relatively favorable weather 
behind us, we see no evidence in the Seventh District of 
renewed strength in business activity. Increasingly, the 
situation resembles the latter portion of 1957 when produc
tion of both producer and consumer durable goods was 
declining.  

Retail sales have remained sluggish, judging by trends 
in bank debits, savings, consumer credit, and trade reports.  

Periodic reductions have been made in forecasts of 
near-term output for steel, autos, trucks, furniture, and 
appliances.  

The effort to reduce inventories is widespread. Many 
bankers find that the need of customers to carry larger 
than expected inventories is playing a significant role in 

recent strong loan demand. Virtually all types of materials 
and components that were in short supply during most of 
1966 now are readily available. Lead times on aluminum and 

brass products have shortened dramatically and prices have 

softened. Forgers and most types of foundries now are 
actively seeking new business.  

All District States reported new claims for unemployment 

compensation to be substantially above a year ago in the 
first three weeks of March. For Wisconsin and Michigan

-59-



4/4/67

these claims are the highest for any comparable period since 
1961. For Illinois, Iowa, and Indiana, claims, although 
above the year-ago levels, are still low in comparison with 
the early 1960's.  

While mortgage terms have eased somewhat, scattered 
evidence shows building permits issued in January and February 
to be at very low levels. Sales of existing homes are said 
to be improving. The preponderant view in our area continues 
to be that no substantial gain in residential construction 
will occur until after midyear, with new apartments likely 
to be especially slow. The need to arrange financing, prepare 
sites, and assemble work staffs will take time.  

The banking figures for March continue to reflect 
relatively weak credit demands by consumers. The growth 
in loans to business at District banks, on the other hand, 
was even more rapid than for the U.S. and exceeded the pace 
set in any of the past three years. For the first quarter 
through mid-March, business loans of District weekly reporting 
banks, excluding acceptances, were up 4 per cent, compared with 
a 2 per cent nationwide gain. However, there are reasons for 

attributing a considerable portion of the demand for bank 
credit to temporary factors such as tax payment needs, as well 
as the financing of exceptionally large inventories. Much of 

the rise during March was attributable to manufacturing industries.  
While the Chicago banks' needs for funds prior to April 1 

were of about the usual magnitude, they were able to cover these 

needs without much difficulty and with relatively little resort 

to the discount window. These banks have acquired more than 

$180 million of funds in the CD market in the past month 

compared with a decline in March 1966.  
The money supply--the only aggregate monetary series which 

did not increase sharply in January and February--rose rapidly 

in March. In large measure the failure of the money supply 

to rise concurrently with reserves in the earlier months may 

be attributed to the strong demand for CD's as market rates 

of interest declined sufficiently to permit banks to again 

market CD's successfully. The acceleration in the growth of 

money supply in March may reflect satisfaction, at current rates 

of interest, of the pent-up demand for CD's by business firms 

and for CD funds by banks. If this is the case the money supply 

could be expected to increase more nearly in line with the rate 

of growth of total reserves in coming weeks, except as offset 

by changes in Treasury deposits.



4/4/67

The failure of interest rates to decline as sharply 
since their peaks of last Autumn as in either 1958 or 1960 
in light of strongly expansionary policy probably reflects 
both a strong desire of business and consumers to rebuild 
liquid assets and the very moderate softening of business 
activity thus far.  

In considering the proper stance of monetary policy, 
one's judgment of the magnitude of the current adjustment 
in the economy is critical. If we expect only a slight 
weakening, then the very stimulative measures recently 
taken may be setting the stage for excessively strong rise 
of demand several months hence. On the other hand, if 
economic activity is expected to decline or move sideways 
for a considerable period, continuation of the current 
expansionary policy would seem appropriate.  

It appears to our staff that the current adjustment 
probably will be moderate, largely because of expansionary 
monetary and fiscal actions already taken. It appears 
also that recent rates of expansion of reserves, money, 
and credit are excessive from any long-term point of view.  
Since it seems that monetary policy affects employment, 
production, and income with considerable lag, it is 
possible that large and extended swings in reserve growth 
may have an unstabilizing effect on activity. Nevertheless, 
because of the possibility that the current active demand 
for credit reflects largely needs associated with past 
rather than future activity, I would favor continued rapid 
expansion of total reserves and/or money supply until we 
see some additional readings on business indicators.  

Mr. Scanlon added that it was difficult for him to look upon 

a discount rate change as being urgent at a time when the monetary 

indicators were expanding as rapidly as they had been recently.  

However, he joined those who favored the approach on page 8 of the 

blue book involving a 1/4 per cent reduction in the discount rate.  

Believing that a 1/4 point decline would be a confirmation of what 

the market had already discounted, he would not oppose such a move.



4/4/67 -62

He would regard the action as just getting the discount rate more 

in line with other rates, possibly to be followed soon by another 

change of 1/4 point if needed. That would emphasize rate flexibility 

on the downside, hopefully paving the way for flexibility on the 

upside when appropriate.  

Mr. Scanlon noted that he had had some difficulty in deciding 

which alternative he would prefer for the directive. Since the 

explanatory material characterized alternative A as being consistent 

with no discount rate change, however, he favored alternative B, as 

interpreted by Mr. Ellis.  

Mr. Tow reported that moisture conditions were below normal 

in most of the Tenth District, and a severe drought continued in a 

substantial part of the winter wheat belt. Over the last five days 

considerable rain had fallen along the eastern part of the District, 

with variable amounts ranging up to five inches at Kansas City. As 

that region also was dry, those rains were beneficial. The real 

drought area, which involved central and southwestern Kansas, western 

Oklahoma including all of the Panhandle, northern New Mexico, and 

southern and southeastern Colorado, was not included in the area 

of rainfall. Much of the wheat in the drought area could not be 

saved now even by rain, but moisture would be helpful to some of the 

wheat and also for pasture and feed crops. Because of the lack of



4/4/67 -63

moisture and the lower level of agricultural prices this year, farm 

income in the Tenth District probably would be distinctly lower in 

1967 than in 1966.  

Turning to the national economy, Mr. Tow said that both 

current and prospective economic developments called for a continuation 

of an expansive monetary policy. Most of the evidence concerning the 

private sector of the economy pointed in that direction. As was frequently 

the case, the appropriate degree of such monetary easing was not equally 

clear.  

Evidence had to be given to the market that pursuit of such a 

policy remained a System objective, Mr. Tow continued. That did not 

mean that any dramatic action was required, but it did mean that there 

should not be any reasonable basis for assuming at this juncture that 

the System had ceased to pursue that course. The main objective should 

be to encourage a further but moderate easing of interest rates, 

particularly with a view to encouraging lower long-term rates. In 

the process of carrying out such a policy, member bank credit expansion 

probably would continue in line with that of recent months.  

Mr. Tow thought that the instruments used should be both the 

Federal Reserve discount rate and open market operations. Although 

some persuasive arguments had been made today for a 1/2 per cent 

reduction in the discount rate, he still felt--as he had before today's 

meeting--that the reduction should be 1/4 per cent, so that it would



4/4/67 -64

be a confirming rather than a leading action. In his opinion, despite 

the levels to which Treasury bill rates had declined, a reduction of 

1/2 per cent would definitely be a leading action. Open market operations 

should be the instrument used to assure a moderate degree of further 

easing of interest rates. The aim would be to go somewhat beyond the 

confirming action as suggested by the 1/4 per cent discount rate 

reduction, but to stop considerably short of the degree of ease, as 

described in the blue book, that would be associated with a 1/2 per 

cent discount rate reduction. It did not seem to him that that would 

involve an acceleration in the rate of expansion of reserves and bank 

credit; it would probably result in expansion rates essentially in 

line with those of the recent past. Alternative B of the draft 

directives would be consistent with the policy course he favored.  

Mr. Wayne reported that business activity in the Fifth District 

continued to weaken. A special survey of the Richmond Reserve Bank's 

regular business panel showed that finished inventories had increased 

in the past three months and were above desired levels, especially in the 

textile and furniture industries. Collections on accounts receivable 

were also slower than six months ago. Some marginal textile plants 

had been closed and it was reported that more might follow if present 

softness continued. The Reserve Bank's regular survey showed continuing 

declines in new and unfilled orders, hours worked, and prices received 

for finished goods. Nonagricultural employment increased slightly in



4/4/67 -65

February, but factory employment declined. Factory payrolls also 

were down significantly. Except for West Virginia, insured unemploy

ment rose in all District States in February, but remained below the 

national average. The only bright spot in the District economy was 

a slight rise in the construction index in February. In agriculture, 

the entire District peach crop was seriously damaged by frost, but 

1967 planting intentions for principal crops were above those of a 

year ago.  

At the national level, it was clear to Mr. Wayne that the 

economy was in the middle of a significant adjustment. Whether or 

not that was a "recession", it seemed clear to him that the present 

trends of the economy would produce a substantial amount of idle 

resources in the near future. Policy over the past three months had 

recognized that fact and in that period reserves had been pumped into 

the banking system at a rate that was impressive by any standards.  

Free reserves showed a $350 million swing for the period, from minus 

$100 million to plus $250 million, and projections of total reserves 

through March indicated a quarterly increase larger than in any other 

quarter in the past ten years. In addition, over $800 million of 

reserves had been made available by the reduction of reserve requirements.  

As for policy, Mr. Wayne felt that in the past three months the 

Committee had supplied reserves at a rate which could be justified only



4/4/67 -66

on grounds of a transitory effort to change market sentiments. As 

he viewed the market today, the Committee's lavish provision of 

reserves lately had been only partially successful in producing the 

desired result. The heavy buildup in the calendar of corporate and 

municipal offerings had held up the long end of the rate structure 

and had prevented the ease that had been generated in some parts of 

the market from reaching that end. Yet it seemed to him that it was 

precisely in the long end of the market that more ease was needed.  

Rate reductions there, coupled with the prospective reinstatement of 

tax incentives, were the best hope for cushioning the weakness in 

business capital investment and for speeding up recovery in mortgage 

markets and in housing.  

It seemed to Mr. Wayne that over the next few weeks credit 

policy could make a further contribution only to the extent that it 

could break the log jam in the long end of the market. For that 

reason he would like to see open market purchases shifted, whenever 

feasible, to the coupon area or to agency issues. To the same end, 

he would like to encourage some shifting of capital market borrowing 

to the banking system. The recent reduction in the prime rate was a 

welcome move in that direction but his own feeling was that that rate 

should come down further. He was encouraged also by the declines in 

CD rates in the past week. It seemed to him highly desirable to



4/4/67 -67

maintain downward pressure in those areas, but without increasing 

the rate of reserve creation. In any event, a reduction in the 

discount rate struck him as an especially appropriate step to take 

at the present juncture. Such a move would consolidate the System's 

recent easing action and at the same time it would promote desirable 

adjustments in the rate structure.  

Mr. Wayne found himself in general agreement with Mr. Hayes 

and, on balance, favored a reduction of 1/2 per cent in the discount 

rate. However, he would prefer, until the next meeting of the 

Committee, the open market posture suggested by alternative A of 

the draft directives, especially with the double-proviso clause.  

Despite comment to the contrary, he did not find those two proposals 

inconsistent.  

Mr. Shepardson remarked that at this meeting of the Committee, 

probably the last that he would attend, he would note that his service 

with the System had been a most challenging and rewarding experience.  

He was grateful for the opportunity to serve on the Board and the 

Committee, and he wanted to express to everyone present his appreciation 

for the friendships held out to him.  

As to policy, Mr. Shepardson's views were similar to those of 

Mr. Wayne. Certainly the System had been providing reserves at a 

very ample rate. The recent rates of expansion in both bank credit



4/4/67 -68

and the money supply, while desirable in a transition period, were 

too high to be sustained for long. As Mr. Ellis had suggested, by 

pushing too far toward ease now the Committee very likely would be 

building up problems for the future. Accordingly, he favored alter

native A of the draft directives, modified as Mr. Hayes had suggested 

to call for maintaining the present degree of reserve availability.  

Such a course would make it less likely that open market operations 

would push the expansion in money and credit to rates higher than 

those recently prevailing.  

With respect to the discount rate, Mr. Shepardson said that 

he would be averse to taking any action that might be considered a 

leading action. He thought, however, that a reduction of 1/2 per cent 

would be desirable at this time in view of the levels to which some 

rates--particularly bill rates--had fallen in recent days, and in view 

of the stickiness of other rates, which perhaps reflected psychological 

factors more than credit availability. A reduction of 1/2 per cent 

now also would make it more feasible to raise the discount rate later 

in the year if that became necessary.  

Mr. Mitchell said he also favored a 1/2 per cent decrease in 

the discount rate. As Mr. Hayes had suggested, that action should be 

accompanied with no fanfare. With respect to the financial aggregates, 

he wondered whether the satisfaction some had expressed this morning



4/4/67 -69

regarding what had been achieved in the recent transition period 

was wholly warranted. GNP in the first quarter of 1967, as 

projected by the staff, was 6 per cent higher than a year earlier, 

but in February the money supply was only 1.4 per cent above 

February 1966. Money supply expansion accelerated in March, but 

growth in the twelve months ending then was still only 2 per cent.  

It was clear that there still was some catching up to be done, and 

he saw no reason to be alarmed about the pace at which the money 

supply and bank credit had been growing recently.  

Mr. Mitchell then referred to Mr. Hayes' proposed replacement 

for the statement on the balance of payments in the first paragraph 

of the draft directive. He (Mr. Mitchell) had understood Mr. Reynolds 

to say that there had not actually been any significant change in the 

over-all payments position, at least relative to the fourth quarter, 

and that real improvement was occurring in the trade balance. In 

view of Mr. Reynolds' analysis, he would not favor the language 

Mr. Hayes had proposed.  

Mr. Mitchell concluded by noting that he preferred alter

native B for the second paragraph of the directive.  

Mr. Daane commented that economic conditions certainly 

warranted the System's continuing an ease policy and continuing to 

make that policy clear, but how much ease should be sought was to



4/4/67 -70

him a much more difficult question. One problem he had with the 

blue book analysis--and with the comments of a number of speakers 

today--was that, in a sense, too sharp a separation was made among 

the System's instruments. Thus, the blue book first discussed 

seeking further ease through open market operations alone, and 

translated that into a free reserve target range of $300-$350 

million. It said little about open market operations in discussing 

the implications of a 1/4 per cent reduction in the discount rate.  

It then indicated that a 1/2 per cent discount rate cut "would 

probably require a follow through over the weeks ahead in the form 

of somewhat larger free reserve positions," which might be taken 

to imply the $300-$350 million range mentioned earlier as consistent 

with further ease in the absence of a discount rate change. He 

would approach the problem from the other direction, by saying he 

favored somewhat greater reserve availability; that, to him was 

the key. He agreed with the view that it was necessary to go 

somewhat further in providing liquidity to the economy.  

It was less easy to say by how much the discount rate should 

be reduced, Mr. Daane continued. A week ago he had thought that a 

1/4 per cent cut would be consistent with somewhat greater reserve 

availability and would confirm to the market the viability of current 

interest rate levels. But as he sensed more recent developments in



4/4/67 -71

the market, that was no longer true. His present view, based partly 

on conversations with several market participants, was that a 1/4 

per cent cut would be interpreted more as a cautionary signal than 

as a stimulative one. As one market participant had put it, market 

expectations had already placed the System in the position of having 

to make a 1/2 per cent change if it were to take a meaningful action.  

He was a little unhappy about being led by the market in that manner; 

he would have much preferred a 1/4 per cent reduction now, to be 

followed at a later point by a similar reduction if it was decided 

that continued easing was desirable. He was not sure that the course 

Mr. Hayes advocated--of reducing the discount rate by 1/2 per cent 

and standing pat on reserve availability--was a consistent one. A 

1/2 point reduction in the discount rate was likely to generate 

market expectations that would outrun the reserve availability 

conditions the Committee would be seeking if it adopted alternative A 

with the amendment suggested by Mr. Hayes.  

In sum, Mr. Daane said, he would favor somewhat greater 

reserve availability and whatever discount rate change would be 

consistent with that goal. He felt that a 1/2 per cent cut was more 

likely to be consistent, but he would not be averse to 1/4 per cent 

cut if it would not produce undesirable reactions. He was inclined 

toward alternative B for the directive, but would amend it to call



4/4/67 -72

for operations "with a view to attaining somewhat greater reserve 

availability." 

Mr. Maisel said he would discuss two separate questions 

today. First, he would urge that more operations take place in 

the longer end of the coupon market; and, secondly, he would comment 

about open market operations and the proper level of the discount 

rate.  

Mr. Maisel thought the Desk was to be congratulated for its 

greater recent activity in coupon issues. It would be useful over 

the next two months to concentrate still more of the Committee's 

efforts in coupon issues, preferably with maturities of over five 

years. Interest rates on longer-term bonds and mortgages--the 

areas in which monetary policy was expected to do the most good 

in the coming year--had lagged abnormally behind short-term rates.  

Concentrating more purchases in the longer area might aid in cutting 

that lag.  

Mr. Maisel said he was not suggesting an "operation twist." 

In order to avoid any assumption that the Committee was attempting 

to hold short-term rates up, coupon issues should not be bought 

when it was necessary to sell bills. In the past year, except for 

its most recent operations, the Committee had been relatively 

inactive in the coupon market. Considerably larger transactions



4/4/67 -73

could be undertaken without causing the Committee to move outside 

the pattern of previous years. The System's portfolio also showed a 

considerable scope for coupon purchases in terms of past traditions.  

In addition to narrowing the lag between current Committee policy 

and the desired monetary objectives, action in the coupon area might 

aid in maintaining expectations and thus might slow somewhat the 

rush to get into the long-term market.  

With respect to current policy and the discount rate, 

Mr. Maisel believed the alternative directives offered were not 

achievable in terms of their stated objectives. Alternative A, 

with its related discount prescription, could not "maintain 

prevailing easier conditions." Assuming it were tied to a "no-change" 

policy for the discount rate, it would mean that in the attempt to 

maintain current, ease, far more total reserves and marginal reserves 

would have to be furnished than under alternative B; and, even then, 

interest rates would back up a good deal.  

In the past four months, Mr. Maisel continued, the amount 

of ease in the market with respect to rates, and also with respect 

to bank credit expansion, had occurred only partly through the 

Committee's own action. Much more of existing market conditions 

had been brought about by the expectational forces in the market.



4/4/67 -74

Mr. Maisel reported that last week he spent three days 

talking to over 50 officers of about 10 bank and nonbank dealers.  

While their statements clearly were partly self-serving, their 

general views of the market and their conclusions seemed to make 

sense and to agree with the logic of the current situation. All 

agreed that current market rates and activity assumed that the 

discount rate would be changed. All agreed that there would be 

a sharp reaction in expectations and rates if the discount rate 

were not changed prior to the announcement of the next Treasury 

operation. In the midst of such a reaction, any attempt to 

maintain "prevailing easier conditions," as directed by alternative A, 

would require an exceedingly large injection of reserves.  

The people with whom he had talked, Mr. Maisel continued, 

also agreed virtually unanimously that a 1/4 per cent change in the 

discount rate would be construed as indicating that the System 

believed that it might have to reverse monetary policy sharply in 

the near future and thus was reluctant to go to 4 per cent. As a 

result, more than half felt that a 1/4 per cent change in the 

discount rate would also cause a downward shift in expectations.  

It was too late to think the System could make two separate 1/4 per 

cent rate changes. Again, far more reserves would have to be furnished 

in order to maintain the current amount of ease and the current interest



4/4/67 -75

rate pattern. Banks could not be expected to continue to buy 

securities with their reserves if they felt the System was 

uncertain about the near future. They also indicated that a 

1/2 per cent change would be interpreted as reflecting a System 

desire for further ease, but the reaction might not be great 

because expectations had already been at work.  

Mr. Maisel concluded that only a 4 per cent discount rate 

would enable the System to maintain prevailing easier conditions 

without a massive infusion of reserves. Either no change in the 

rate or the smaller change would mean that the System would have 

to furnish reserves both to take the place of the forces arising 

from current expectations and to offset the effect of a sharp 

reversal in expectations. Either alternative A or B for the 

directive might well require much larger reserves than indicated 

unless the discount rate were reduced by 1/2 per cent.  

As a result, Mr. Maisel said, he supported alternative B 

and a full 1/2 per cent decline in the discount rate. With such 

a combination, he thought slightly lower short-term rates would 

result, although developments in the last day or two clearly 

indicated that even the 1/2 per cent decrease had been almost 

fully discounted by the market.



4/4/67 -76

With the discount change and more operations in coupon 

issues, Mr. Maisel observed, greater impact on long-term rates 

also could be expected. That might be possible without any 

near-term increase in the marginal reserve measures compared to 

the present. That policy would probably give a rate of expansion 

in bank credit and the money supply close to recent rates and 

that, too, he would find acceptable.  

Because of his feelings, Mr. Maisel concluded, he would 

prefer to see alternative B reduced one degree in wording, by 

changing the phrase "attaining somewhat easier conditions" to 

read "maintaining the prevailing easier conditions"; and by 

changing the proviso clause to call for "attaining somewhat 

easier conditions" if bank credit was expanding less than expected, 

rather than calling for "still easier conditions" in that eventuality.  

Mr. Brimmer said he would urge the Reserve Banks to consider 

reducing the discount rate by 1/2 per cent. He thought that somewhat 

greater reserve provision would be required in conjunction with that 

action if the Committee was to achieve the objectives the members 

had in mind. Accordingly, he preferred alternative B for the 

directive, perhaps with changes along the lines suggested by Mr. Maisel.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that he favored a 1/2 per cent cut in the 

discount rate partly because he would like to avoid a need for the 

Board to change Regulation Q at this time to force deposit interest



4/4/67 -77

rates down, in the manner Mr. Galusha had indicated one banker 

recently suggested. The way in which Regulation Q had been used 

in 1966 was not, in his judgment, the most desirable; while deposit 

rates tended to be sticky, the System should not put itself in the 

position of manipulating Regulation Q ceilings as an alternative 

to relying on the workings of market forces. A discount rate 

reduction of 1/2 per cent would be helpful in persuading depositary 

institutions to lower the rates they paid. It also would be helpful 

in encouraging European central banks to take similar action. Even 

if the System had a second opportunity to lower its discount rate 

later in the year, he would hope that it would not plan now on two 

1/4 per cent reductions, since the second action might have little 

effect on foreign central bank actions.  

Mr. Brimmer also favored encouraging the Manager to take 

advantage of opportunities to buy coupon issues, in order to help 

overcome stickiness in long-term rates. At the same time, he was 

not recommending an "operation twist"; he was not disturbed by the 

fact that short-term rates had been going down.  

Mr. Brimmer said he shared Mr. Mitchell's concern about 

the appropriateness of the statement on the balance of payments 

that Mr. Hayes had proposed for the directive. The statement would



4/4/67 -78

imply that the improvement in the trade surplus had been more than 

offset by deterioration on capital account, and he questioned 

whether that could be demonstrated.  

Mr. Hayes commented that his purpose had been to make a 

broad statement on the balance of payments situation, without 

pinpointing particular figures, such as those for the liquidity or 

official settlements deficits before or after seasonal adjustments.  

While the official settlements balance in particular had worsened 

drastically, considering the various measures together it seemed 

to him that the over-all picture was clearly one of deterioration.  

Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Solomon had an alternative 

suggestion, which read: "The balance of payments remains a serious 

problem despite some recent improvement in the foreign trade surplus." 

Mr. Daane said he would not favor that language because it 

conveyed some implication of an improvement in the payments balance.  

Certainly there had been no improvement; it would be more accurate, 

in his judgment, to convey the sense of some deterioration.  

Mr. Brimmer said he was giving special weight to Mr. Reynolds' 

comments about the new projections by Government analysts. He 

recalled that Mr. Reynolds had said that, leaving aside the various 

special transactions, it appeared as if the liquidity deficit would 

be somewhat smaller in 1967 than in 1966; and if one assumed that the



4/4/67 -79

special transactions would have a favorable effect this year about 

half as great as they had last year, the published liquidity deficit, 

including such transactions, would be about unchanged. On the other 

hand, the balance on the official reserve transactions basis probably 

would deteriorate this year, primarily because of the reflow of 

funds from U.S. banks to their foreign branches. Accordingly, the 

language suggested by Mr. Solomon might be better than that in the 

staff draft.  

Mr. Hayes referred to Mr. Brimmer's comment that he was 

giving special weight to the projections that Mr. Reynolds had 

mentioned. In his (Mr. Hayes') judgment, those projections con

tained a large element of hope. The Committee traditionally had 

based the statements in the first paragraph of the directive on 

developments actually observed rather than on hopes or expectations, 

and he thought it should continue to do so.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed with Mr. Hayes' comment on the directive, 

but added that it was his impression that the projections took into 

consideration all of the available evidence, including the latest 

figures.  

Mr. Hayes then noted that he would not favor Mr. Solomon's 

proposed language since the only detail mentioned was the improve

ment in the foreign trade surplus. If there had been any change in



4/4/67 -80

the over-all situation it had been for the worse rather than for 

the better.  

Mr. Hickman observed that the economy apparently continued 

to slide in March, so far as could be determined from available 

data. As the Committee knew, it was sometimes possible to detect 

early changes in direction from the statistics for the Fourth 

District because of the dominant role of durable goods manufacturing 

in that District. While it was necessary to guard against being 

too bearish, the latest signals provided little indication of a 

turnaround. Latest District data on manufacturing employment and 

payrolls, as well as steel production, nonresidential construction, 

and car sales, all showed significant declines. Insured unemploy

ment increased in March in ten of the fourteen major labor market 

areas of the District, and the over-all increase was sharper than 

in the nation.  

The regular quarterly meeting of Fourth District business 

economists was held at the Cleveland Reserve Bank in mid-March, 

Mr. Hickman noted. The group's latest forecasts of industrial 

production and of GNP were almost uniformly lower than they had 

been three months earlier. Three months ago, the median forecast 

for industrial production showed quarterly increases throughout 

1967 for an over-all gain of about 3 per cent; at the latest meeting,



4/4/67 -81

the group expected no change from the reduced first-quarter level 

until the fourth quarter, and then a slight rise, for an over-all 

gain of about 1-1/2 per cent. The general tone of the discussion 

at the meeting was even gloomier than the numbers would indicate, 

as evidenced by frequent reports of declining orders and an end to 

increasing backlogs. Softness was indicated in orders for trucks, 

electrical machinery, aluminum, and flat-rolled steel products.  

His staff was even more bearish than the Fourth District economists; 

the staff expected a further decline in production in the second 

quarter, along with rising unemployment.  

Mr. Hickman felt that the System had accomplished much since 

the last meeting of the Committee, and the Manager was to be con

gratulated for his skillful execution. More of the same was clearly 

needed. Some of the things he would like to see the System accomplish 

in April were: (1) a continuation of the recent rate of expansion 

of money and credit; (2) a 91-day bill rate around 4 per cent, and 

a Federal funds rate below the discount rate; (3) continued downward 

pressure on intermediate- and long-term rates to encourage an 

enlarged flow of funds to the mortgage market; and (4) net free 

reserves about $300 million.  

That list was consistent with the staff's alternative B, 

Mr. Hickman said. In addition, he thought the time was now ripe for 

a discount rate reduction--the stage had been set internationally,



4/4/67 -82

domestic money market participants expected it, and the economy 

needed it. His directors were ready to act on a recommendation, 

either this Thursday or next. Should the reduction be 1/4 per cent 

or 1/2 per cent? Before today's meeting he personally had favored 

the smaller move, to conserve ammunition. But, after hearing the 

discussion around the table today, he was inclined toward a 

reduction of 1/2 per cent. In any event, he would like to move 

as soon as possible in view of the impending Treasury refunding.  

The important thing was to move as closely together as possible.  

Mr. Hickman thought the System should seek at all costs 

to prevent the type of backup in interest rates and bond yields 

that occurred in February, since that might interrupt the smooth 

flow of funds through financial markets. The Manager should move 

promptly through open market operations to prevent any signs of 

congestion from developing in the bond market, even if free 

reserves might rise temporarily to very high levels. The present 

situation in the bond market contained elements of instability 

caused by the buildup of the Blue List, the continued heavy 

corporate calendar, and the possible reversal of some long positions 

by free riders and speculators.  

Mr. Bopp remarked that the debate about whether the economy 

was in a recession still went on at the Philadelphia Reserve Bank,



4/4/67 -83

just as it did elsewhere. There was agreement, however, that the 

economy was continuing to slow down and that gloomy expectations 

were spreading.  

That was apparent from an informal survey of Third District 

businessmen the Reserve Bank had just completed, Mr. Bopp continued.  

The canvass was a resurvey of a group with whom the Bank had been 

in touch about two months ago in an effort to get an up-to-date 

picture of the inventory situation. At that time many of the 

businessmen had felt that inventories were relatively high, but 

they expected that an upturn in sales would help them adjust 

inventories without significant cuts in production or employment.  

Now, however, half of those companies reported that the expected 

sales had failed to materialize and that they had cut production.  

A number planned further cuts. Some of those who planned no 

immediate change said they would need signs of renewed strength 

soon to justify the current level of operations. None of them 

felt conditions would improve before summer. However, none 

expected an actual downturn in business this year, and most looked 

for new strength by the fourth quarter.  

Mr. Bopp found confirming developments in Third District 

banking. Tax borrowing in March was very light and prepayments 

had been picking up, although some of that reflected funding through



4/4/67 -84

capital market financing. Faced with waning loan demand, a 

majority of the large banks were revising their growth projections 

downward.  

Sentiment was becoming weaker and more uncertain, Mr. Bopp 

continued, but there still was an underlying confidence in the 

economy. There was a question of how much more monetary policy 

could do to keep that confidence alive. Nevertheless, at this 

critical phase, policy might help to determine whether there was 

mainly an inventory adjustment or a cumulative downturn. The 

impact of the adjustment on employment and incomes already had 

become apparent, and the adjustment still had a way to go. It 

was desirable to continue to minimize those adverse secondary 

effects on employment and income.  

Given those developments, Mr. Bopp said, it would be well 

for the Federal Reserve to confirm its intention to continue ease.  

The easiest way to accomplish that was by an early reduction of 

1/2 per cent in the discount rate. A smaller reduction might have 

little easing effect because the market had already discounted 

some reduction. In fact, because in recent history rate changes 

had usually been in 1/2 per cent steps, a smaller reduction could 

have an adverse effect on business sentiment.  

The recent increases in money and credit had been all to 

the good and should be continued, Mr. Bopp thought, particularly



4/4/67 -85

since some rates had been sticky. Net free reserves running at 

$300 million or above would seem appropriate in order to accomplish 

that and to bring about a further decline in rates. He favored 

alternative B of the staff draft directives, although in light of 

the discussion today he did not feel strongly on the point.  

Mr. Patterson said that since recent economic developments 

in the Sixth District were generally similar to those for the 

country as a whole that had already been reported, he would not 

take the time to review them. Looking at the national banking 

figures, he came to the conclusion that credit was readily 

available. Banks evidently had accumulated enough securities by 

now to satisfy even an upsurge in loan demand, although he would 

concede that many were still rebuilding their liquidity. Therefore, 

he wondered if the point had not come to take a hard look before 

inundating the economy with reserves. If a recession were around 

the corner, that would be the correct path to follow. But, as of 

now, he still saw too many inconsistencies in the economic indicators, 

such as rising incomes, on the one hand, and sluggish retail spending, 

on the other.  

It used to be said that monetary policy was determined by 

what was going on currently and never by prospects for the future, 

Mr. Patterson observed. The Committee had come a long way from that,



4/4/67 -86

as the use of the green book testified, and he might add that it 

was a good thing it had. Personally, however, he found that future 

developments in two of the most important sectors in the economy-

inventories and defense--were extremely unclear. Because of that 

poor visibility, it seemed to him that right now the best policy 

to follow was to wait until the Committee was more certain of the 

future before easing further. For those reasons, he believed that 

the Committee should not try to push rates down further at this 

time.  

On the other hand, Mr. Patterson said, this was hardly a 

time at which a rise in interest rates was wanted. Perhaps one of 

the best ways to avoid such a rise would be to lower the discount 

rate. Otherwise, there might be a risk of misleading the market 

regarding the System's policy posture and seeing a possible 

repetition of the interest rate reversal of early February. It 

was largely with those considerations in mind that the executive 

committee of his Bank's board of directors, with his endorsement, 

voted in favor of a 4-1/4 per cent discount rate last week. In 

his opinion, such a modest move would give the necessary flexibility 

for whatever discount rate action the System might want to undertake 

in the future.



4/4/67 -87

Mr. Patterson favored alternative A for the second paragraph 

of the directive, with one amendment. Following the opening phrase 

reading "To implement this policy," he would insert the phrase 

"against the background of a small cut in the discount rate." 

Mr. Francis commented that it had been adequately pointed 

out this morning that spending and production growth rates had 

slowed in recent months. To date, however, data did not indicate 

a serious economic contraction but rather the kind of adjustment 

that the Committee sought last spring and summer. Despite the 

softening in demand, employment and personal incomes had continued 

to rise at high rates. At the same time, upward pressures on 

prices had desirably lessened; goods were more readily available, 

and bottlenecks had been reduced. In general, the economy was 

probably healthier than it was last summer.  

There were, to be sure, some disconcerting developments 

in the economy which could lead to an undesirable economic con

traction, Mr. Francis said. The high inventory-to-sales situation, 

the underemployment of workers at some firms, and the relatively 

high burden of consumer debt repayments were examples of those 

drags. However, economic conditions were being stimulated by 

Government stabilization actions which could more than offset the 

dampening forces. According to commonly used measures, the budget



4/4/67 -88

had been very stimulative, and indications were that it would 

become more expansionary in the quarter just commencing. In the 

last two or three months, monetary actions shifted markedly from 

restraint to ease.  

Mr. Francis thought that recent monetary expansion had been 

desirable in view of current economic conditions and outlook. From 

what was known about the lags with which monetary expansion affected 

the economy, that expansion should have a desirable stimulative 

effect late this spring and in the summer. What was done in the 

immediate future might have most of its effect in late summer and 

early fall.  

Mr. Francis believed the Committee should continue to assure 

monetary expansion. Since the imperfections of data were so great 

and the knowledge of linkages and lags was so limited, it was very 

difficult to judge whether the rate of monetary expansion in the 

last two or three months had been too great, too limited, or about 

right. At the last meeting of the Committee it was apparent that 

monetary expansion had occurred. Yet, past experience with those 

data left room for doubt as to whether adequate expansion would be 

sustained. Now, however, it seemed to him that there was little 

doubt that monetary expansion had been achieved at a very rapid 

rate. Over the past three months total reserves had gone up at a



4/4/67 -89

17 per cent annual rate, bank credit at a 15 per cent rate, and 

money supply at a 5 per cent rate.  

In considerable measure, Mr. Francis continued, the 

expansion of bank credit had reflected reintermediation and 

further intermediation by the commercial banking system. That 

aspect of recent bank credit growth and its accompanying expansion 

of total reserves probably had a neutral effect on the economy.  

Therefore, he thought the 15 per cent rate of increase of total 

bank credit and the 17 per cent rate of increase of reserves 

overstated the degree of monetary stimulus. However, quite aside 

from the bank intermediation factor, bank reserves had been 

expanded sufficiently to allow the money supply to increase at 

a 5 per cent annual rate in the last three months. That was a 

very high rate, historically, and suggested that the Committee 

should consider the possibility of excessive expansion as well 

as the possibility of inadequate expansion, as provided in 

alternative A of the staff draft directives. Overreacting to 

the monetary contraction of last summer and fall would create 

future problems.  

To that end, Mr. Francis suggested that the Committee 

provide for maintaining the same money market conditions as those 

of the past two weeks and include a double-edged proviso clause;



4/4/67 -90

namely, if the pertinent intermediate objective appeared to be 

expanding inordinately, the money market be permitted to tighten; 

if the intermediate measure appeared to be expanding too slowly, 

market conditions be eased.  

If the Committee selected the rate of increase of member 

bank deposits as its operating guide and used the staff's projected 

pattern of data for April and May, Mr. Francis would suggest a 

target growth range of 10 to 13 per cent per annum from March to 

April compared with the 15 per cent rate since December. Assuming 

that time deposit growth slowed to about a 12 per cent rate from 

the 18 per cent rate of the past three months and that other 

factors moved as expected, there might be no increase of the money 

supply from March to April. That would be appropriate in view of 

the anticipated extraordinary transfer of funds to the Treasury in 

April and a return flow in May. That would give the Committee 

about a 5 per cent rate of increase of money for the February-May 

period as a whole.  

As to the discount rate, Mr. Francis preferred to leave it 

unchanged for a while longer, partly because of difficulties the 

System might face if it had to raise it later. Open market operations 

could inject an adequate supply of bank reserves, and there did not 

appear to be any need to give the market a psychological jolt at this



4/4/67 -91

time. Also, it was not yet clear that market interest rates 

would continue to decline more than a month or two. Thereafter, 

if spending and demands for credit accelerated, as he envisaged, 

market interest rates were apt to rise again. Hence, a discount 

rate decrease now might have to be quickly followed by an increase.  

In Mr. Francis' opinion the System's decision about the 

discount rate should not be affected by the market's expectations.  

The System should fix the discount rate on its own merit. Last 

summer the System operated for a time with the discount rate far 

below the bill rate yet was able to limit monetary expansion. Now 

he thought monetary expansion could be adequately stimulated even 

though the bill rate was below the discount rate. Combining that 

procedure with the experience of last summer, possibly the System 

could get away from using the discount rate as a necessary indicator 

or confirmation of monetary policy and action. If the discount rate 

was to be changed at this time, however, he would prefer a 1/2 per 

cent reduction to one of a 1/4 per cent.  

Mr. Francis favored alternative A of the draft directives.  

Mr. Robertson presented the following statement: 

The evidence before us indicates that the economy 
is in the midst of a necessary transition, and that what 
is called for on our part is the provision of an accommo

dative credit atmosphere to insure that the economic 
adjustment is both brief and constructive.



4/4/67

As I read the financial figures, it seems clear that 
we have made very substantial progress in this direction.  
Certainly the data bearing on flows of funds suggest that 
credit supplies are becoming ample. At commercial banks, 
both time and demand deposits are climbing about as 
briskly as in the most stimulative periods in the years 
1961-1965. And this is not a case of "robbing Peter to 
pay Paul"--banks are not simply taking these funds away 
from other lenders. On the contrary, reports suggest 
large inflows of funds are also accruing to other savings 
intermediaries and even to the long-term bond markets 
directly.  

Some observers have been unhappy at how little in the 
way of interest rate declines, in the longer-term area, has 
accompanied this resurgence of flows. I, myself, am more 
concerned with flows than with rates, but I recognize that 
there can be times and places when a sticky interest rate 
structure is indicative of a problem of restricted flows 
that the System ought to be taking into account. What 
might be appropriate System action in such circumstances, 
however, is open to debate.  

Suggestions have been made that we should revive an 
"Operation Twist" for this purpose, which moves me to say 
a few words on that subject.  

Quite aside from whether any real economic advantage 
flowed from Operation Twist, which is questionable, the 
part actually played in the Operation by Federal Reserve 
purchases of longer-term securities in the open market 
has been grossly exaggerated. On the record, it is 
greatly overshadowed by such influences as sharply 
increased commercial bank intermediation, under the 
liberalized Regulation Q ceilings that were provided.  
Furthermore, a considerable portion of official purchases 
of coupon issues, by the Federal Reserve as well as the 
Treasury, served essentially to mop up the overhang of 
securities in the market that resulted from aggressive 
Federal debt-lengthening activities on the part of both 
the Treasury and its underwriters.  

Any use of this twisting path will jeopardize, and 
continued use will extinguish, the traditional "independence" 
of the System, which I, for one, would like to avoid. If 

the impact of Federal debt lengthening needs to be moderated, 
I would prefer doing it by means of a judicious tailoring of

-92-



4/4/67

debt management operations themselves, rather than using 
the Federal Reserve to pick up the pieces. (I am aware, 
of course, that this has not been a problem recently, but 
I also am aware that before this Committee meets again 
the Treasury will have faced a major quarterly refunding 
decision that may make these comments timely once again.) 

Most important from a longer-run point of view, 
however, is what Federal Reserve purchases aimed at a 
particular objective can do to the effective functioning 
of the private market mechanism. I remain persuaded that 
such System operations can easily lure private market 
participants into depending upon System buying power and 
quickly conforming their pricing to System rate goals, 
without ever giving the kind of "feedback" signals of the 
changing intensity of private market supplies and demands 
that are so essential to effective dealer operations, and 
also to good and timely monetary policy formulation. I, 
for one, therefore, am opposed to Federal Reserve inter
vention in the market for longer-term securities at this 
juncture as part of a new application of Operation Twist.  

If this is one of those times when longer-term bond, 
mortgage, and deposit rates are proving so sticky as to 
inhibit free and accommodative credit flows, then I favor 
dealing with the problem by increased reliance on those 
instruments of monetary policy that tend to exert more 
downward pressure upon interest rates per dollar of 
reserves released than typically results from an analogous
sized open market operation. I refer to changes in discount 
rates and reserve requirements. Either one of these instru
ments can exert an interest rate influence quickly and with 
less debilitating effects upon private market mechanisms 
than outright open market purchases of long Governments.  

We used a reserve requirement cut very effectively in 

early March to achieve both timely reserve injection and a 
rally in market rates. I think we can use a discount rate 
cut now with equal effectiveness. And because I would 
prefer to see Federal Reserve downward rate pressure on 
some of the sticky loan and deposit rates applied through 

this indirect means, I would favor a full 1/2 point cut in 
the discount rate as soon as it can be done. (A 1/4 point 
change might seem equivocal to the markets, and I would like 

for us to be in an unequivocal position. Money market rates 
have now declined enough so that a 1/2 point cut would not 
appear extreme, and I believe credit conditions generally 

would be benefited by such a step.)

-93-



4/4/67 -94

With these thoughts in mind about the uses of other 
policy instruments, I would favor directing the Manager 
to conduct open market operations in such a way as to 
bolster and sustain the easier money market conditions 
that might be expected to emerge with a discount rate cut.  
Specifically, I would vote in favor of alternative B as 
drafted by the staff. I could accept some of the changes 
that have been suggested, but so many changes have been 
proposed that it might be best to stay with the staff 
language. I must say that I would still prefer the kind 
of proviso clause construction that I advocated at the 
last meeting, namely, two-way proviso language but with 
the understanding that deviations of bank credit on the 
upside would have to be a good deal larger to be inter
preted as "significant" than would deviations on the 
downside. I still think it represents good economics, 
in a period when we have more cause to be worried about 
economic contraction than about exuberance.  

Chairman Martin said he did not think the members of the 

Committee were as far apart in their thinking today as might appear 

from some of the comments that had been made. At the same time, it 

seemed to him that the spectrum of views presented in the go-around 

was particularly helpful in contributing to constructive thinking 

about the problems currently facing the System.  

Before today's meeting, the Chairman continued, he had thought 

that he could accept either a 1/4 or 1/2 per cent reduction in the 

discount rate. However, certain comments in the go-around had 

convinced him that a 1/2 per cent reduction would be the right action 

now. If there was any likelihood that a 1/4 per cent cut would be 

followed by another similar reduction soon, to establish a 4-1/4 per 

cent discount rate would be confusing to the market in a period just



4/4/67 -95

before a Treasury financing. That struck him as a highly persuasive 

argument for a 4 per cent discount rate.  

Chairman Martin favored alternative B for the directive, 

although he thought the Committee might want to consider the amend

ments to the staff draft that Mr. Maisel had proposed. He doubted 

that a two-way proviso clause was necessary or desirable at this 

time.  

Mr. Koch observed that it seemed clear from what Mr. Holmes 

and others had said that there would be some easing in money market 

conditions, viewed broadly, if the discount rate was reduced by 1/2 

per cent. That raised a question of consistency if, as Mr. Maisel 

had proposed, the directive called for "maintaining the prevailing 

easier conditions in the money market." He would suggest using the 

language of the staff's alternative B, calling for "attaining 

somewhat easier conditions," on the understanding that the easing 

envisaged was expected to be brought about by the discount rate 

action rather than through open market operations.  

Mr. Maisel commented that the understanding Mr. Koch had 

mentioned was what he had had in mind in making his suggestions for 

the directive.  

Mr. Holmes remarked that while there might be some problem 

in finding the appropriate language for the directive, he thought the



4/4/67 -96

Committee's intent was quite clear: if discount rate action tended 

to produce easier market conditions, that tendency should not be 

offset by open market operations. On the other hand, easier conditions 

should not be actively sought by open market operations independently 

of the effects of the discount rate change.  

Mr. Hayes said he thought Mr. Koch's point was well taken.  

As he understood the Committee's intent, the discount rate change 

should be the main source of easing. Open market operations would be 

used to back up the effects of the discount rate action, but would 

not be employed in themselves to achieve further ease.  

Chairman Martin said he was agreeable to accepting the language 

of the staff's alternative B on that basis. Several other members 

expressed agreement with the Chairman's statement.  

Mr. Hayes asked whether the Committee would be averse to 

employing a two-way proviso in alternative B, to be interpreted in 

the manner Mr. Robertson had suggested. In his judgment that would 

result in a much better directive. While he doubted that the upper 

side of the proviso would be called into play in the coming period, 

to include it would indicate that the Committee was aware of the 

possible problem of excessive bank credit growth.  

Chairman Martin said he thought it would be clear that the 

Committee was aware of that problem in any case.



4/4/67

Mr. Swan remarked that a two-way proviso, even if interpreted 

as Mr. Robertson had suggested, would seem to him to change the whole 

tone of the directive. He would much prefer the language of the 

staff's draft.  

Mr. Daane observed that while in general he was sympathetic 

with the use of a two-way proviso, he did not think one was needed 

at this particular juncture.  

Mr. Hickman concurred, noting that if bank credit appeared 

to be rising excessively the Committee could hold a special meeting 

to consider a possible change in its instructions.  

Chairman Martin then referred to the earlier discussion of 

the balance of payments sentence in the first paragraph of the 

directive, and indicated that Mr. Reynolds now suggested the following 

language: "The balance of payments deficit increased in the first 

quarter despite some improvement in the foreign trade surplus." 

There was general agreement on the language Mr. Reynolds 

had proposed.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the following 
current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 

this meeting support earlier indications of a marked 
slowing of expansion in over-all economic activity. Retail

-97-



4/4/67

sales have continued sluggish and curtailment in the rate 
of business inventory accumulation is in process. Average 
commodity prices have changed little recently, but unit 
labor costs in manufacturing have risen further. Bank 
credit expansion has remained vigorous, short-term 
interest rates have declined markedly further, and long
term rates have moved down somewhat despite very heavy 
securities market flotations. The balance of payments 
deficit increased in the first quarter despite some 
improvement in the foreign trade surplus. In several 
important countries abroad, monetary and fiscal policies 
have eased further in response to slackened economic 
activity. In this situation, it is the Federal Open 
Market Committee's policy to foster money and credit 
conditions, including bank credit growth, conducive to 
combatting the effects of weakening tendencies in the 
economy, while recognizing the need for progress toward 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to attaining somewhat easier conditions in the 
money market, and to attaining still easier conditions if 
bank credit appears to be expanding significantly less 
than currently anticipated.  

Chairman Martin then said that he would like to add a few 

words on the subject of the discount rate. He thought it should be 

recognized that responsibility for initiating discount rate actions 

lay with the Federal Reserve Banks. If the directors of any Bank 

felt strongly that the rate should be established at 4-1/4 per cent, 

he personally would not be inclined to vote to disapprove such a 

rate. He saw no harm in having a discount rate of 4 per cent at 

some Banks and 4-1/4 per cent at others, at least temporarily.  

Mr. Brimmer noted that while several Reserve Bank Presidents 

had expressed a preference for a 4-1/4 per cent discount rate in the

-98-



4/4/67 -99

course of today's discussion, he had not detected much evidence 

that they felt strongly. On the other hand, at least one President 

had indicated that he had favored a 4-1/4 per cent rate earlier but 

now preferred a 4 per cent rate. He personally would hope that the 

Reserve Banks would think carefully about the possible disadvantages 

of announcing a split discount rate in the existing environment.  

Messrs. Mitchell and Hickman indicated that they also 

thought it was important to have a uniform discount rate.  

Chairman Martin agreed that it might be best if all Reserve 

Banks moved to a 4 per cent rate. But to make that statement was 

not the same thing as insisting on uniformity, which he was not 

inclined to do,, 

Mr. Ellis said that he would prefer to have the Board defer 

action with respect to the 4-1/4 per cent rate established last 

week by the directors of the Boston Reserve Bank until the directors 

could meet again and consider the matter further.  

In response to a question by Mr. Wayne, Chairman Martin said 

that he would not consider it necessary for all Banks to move 

together. The Board's present thinking on timing was that if three, 

four, or five Banks had established new discount rates by Thursday 

of this week it would approve those changes, and plan on acting 

promptly with respect to new rates established subsequently by other 

Banks. In any case, the Board would not take any action on discount



4/4/67 -100

rates before Thursday. In that connection, it was important that 

the discussion of discount rates at today's meeting be held in 

confidence until the action was announced.  

Mr. Robertson then reported that the "eligible paper" bill, 

which would permit member banks to borrow from the Reserve Banks 

on any sound asset without paying a penalty rate of interest, 

probably would be passed by the Senate shortly and then would be 

taken up by the House of Representatives. One of the first ques

tions likely to be raised in the House was whether the System was 

prepared to deal with the wide range of collateral that would be 

eligible under the bill; it had been suggested that System personnel 

might be relatively inexperienced in appraising mortgages, municipal 

securities, and the like. Consequently, it seemed desirable for 

the System to launch a program to provide any necessary training 

for its personnel. He would suggest setting up an ad hoc committee 

with Reserve Bank and Board representation to assess existing train

ing needs and to develop a program for dealing with them. If the 

Reserve Bank Presidents and Board members thought such a course 

would be worthwhile, initiating actions could be taken immediately.  

Mr. Hayes noted that the Presidents' Conference Committee 

on Discounts and Credits had an interest in this area and would be 

glad to work on implementing a program such as Mr. Robertson had 

suggested.



4/4/67 -101

No objection was raised to instituting a program of the 

type Mr. Robertson had proposed.  

Chairman Martin then noted that the Committee had planned 

to continue its discussion today of the implications of the "Freedom 

of Information Act" for the Committee's procedures. In that 

connection, memoranda from the General Counsel and the Secretariat, 

making certain recommendations, had been distributed on March 29, 

1967.1/ In view of the lateness of the hour, however, he suggested 

that the planned discussion be postponed until the next meeting.  

There was no disagreement with the Chairman's suggestion.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 2, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

1/ Copies of these memoranda have been placed in 
the Committee's files.



ATTACHMENT A 

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) April 3, 1967 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on April 4, 1967 

FIRST PARAGRAPH 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting support earlier indications of a marked slowing of expansion 
in over-all economic activity. Retail sales have continued sluggish 
and curtailment in the rate of business inventory accumulation is in 
process. Average commodity prices have changed little recently, but 
unit labor costs in manufacturing have risen further. Bank credit 
expansion has remained vigorous, short-term interest rates have 
declined markedly further, and long-term rates have moved down some
what despite very heavy securities market flotations. Recently there 
has been some improvement in the foreign trade surplus but none in 
the over-all balance of payments. In several important countries 
abroad, monetary and fiscal policies have eased further in response 
to slackened economic activity. In this situation, it is the Federal 
Open Market Committee's policy to foster money and credit conditions, 
including bank credit growth, conducive to combatting the effects of 
weakening tendencies in the economy, while recognizing the need for 
progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

SECOND PARAGRAPH 

Alternative A 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to maintaining the prevailing easier conditions in the money 
market, but operations shall be modified as necessary to moderate 
any apparently significant deviations of bank credit from current 
expectations.  

Alternative B 

To implement this policy, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to attaining somewhat easier conditions in the money market, 

and to attaining still easier conditions if bank credit appears to 

be expanding significantly less than currently anticipated.


