











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 18, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 18, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.

Hayes, Vice Chairman, presiding 
Brimmer 

Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 

Wayne 
Patterson, Alternate for Mr. Francis

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Galusha, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 

Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Garvy, Hersey, 
Jones, Koch, Partee, and Ratchford, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors



7/18/67

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lewis, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Brandt, 
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 20, 1967, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 20, 1967, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on June 29, 1967, approving an amendment to 

paragraph 2 of the Committee's Authorization for System Foreign 

Currency Operations, effective June 30, 1967, to change the maximum 

period authorized for the reciprocal currency arrangement with the 

Netherlands Bank from 3 months to 6 months, was ratified.



7/18/67 -3

By unanimous vote, paragraph 2 of the Authorization for 

System Foreign Currency Operations was amended, effective immediately, 

to delete therefrom the column headed "Maximum period of arrange

ment (months)" and to incorporate in the text of the paragraph 

provision for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain 

reciprocal currency arrangements with specified foreign banks for 

periods up to a maximum of 12 months.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 20 through July 17, 1967, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, increases of $50 million each, from $200 

million to $250 million, in the swap arrangements with the Swiss 

National Bank and the Bank for International Settlements (System 

drawings in Swiss francs) were approved.  

By unanimous vote, an increase from $200 million to $300 

million in the swap arrangement with the Bank for International 

Settlements involving System drawings in authorized European cur

rencies other than Swiss francs was approved.  

In consequence of the foregoing actions authorizing increases 

in the swap arrangements with the Swiss National Bank and the Bank for 

International Settlements, there was also approved by unanimous vote, 

effective immediately, the necessary amendment to paragraph 2 of the 

Authorization for System Foreign Currency Operations. With this



7/18/67

and other amendments approved at this meeting, the paragraph read 

as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System 
Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 
months with the following foreign banks, which are among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements on 
maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 100 
National Bank of Belgium 150 
Bank of Canada 500 
National Bank of Denmark 100 
Bank of England 1,350 
Bank of France 100 
German Federal Bank 400 
Bank of Italy 600 
Bank of Japan 450 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 150 
Bank of Norway 100 
Bank of Sweden 100 
Swiss National Bank 250 
Bank for International Settlements 

System drawings in Swiss francs 250 
System drawings in authorized European 
currencies other than Swiss francs 300 

By unanimous vote, the renewal, on their existing maturity 

basis, of the following swap arrangements, which were to mature on

the dates indicated, was approved:



7/18/67 -5

Maturity of 
latest authorized 

Foreign bank renewal 

Bank of Sweden July 19, 1967 
Swiss National Bank July 20, 1967 
Bank for International Settlements 

System drawings in Swiss francs July 20, 1967 
System drawings in authorized European 
currencies other than Swiss francs July 20, 1967 

Austrian National Bank July 26, 1967 
Bank of Japan July 28, 1967 
German Federal Bank August 9, 1967 
Bank of France August 10, 1967 

With Mr. Mitchell dissenting, the Special Manager of the 

System Open Market Account was authorized to explore the possibility 

of placing all of the System's swap arrangements on a 12-month basis, 

with maturities at year end.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period June 20 through July 17, 1967, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

With Messrs. Brimmer, Maisel, and Mitchell dissenting, the 

Committee decided to omit from the current economic policy directive 

to be issued at this meeting the reference to utilization of opera

tions in coupon issues in supplying part of reserve needs that had 

appeared in the directives issued at the meetings on May 23 and 

June 20, 1967.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee,



7/18/67

to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that economic activity has been 
rising modestly and that prospects are for further 
expansion. Output is still being retarded by adjustments 
of excessive inventories, but growth in final demands 
continues strong, reflecting some strengthening in con
sumer expenditures for durable goods and housing, and 
also further increases in Government outlays. The over
all indexes of both wholesale and retail prices have 
risen further, although wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities have remained stable. Bank credit expansion 
has been large in recent weeks. Most short- and long-term 
interest rates, after reaching advanced levels under the 
influence of heavy public and private securities market 
financing, have declined somewhat recently. The balance 
of payments deficit has remained substantial despite 
some improvement in the foreign trade surplus. In this 
situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to foster money and credit conditions, including 
bank credit growth, conducive to continuing economic 
expansion, while recognizing the need for reasonable 
price stability for both domestic and balance of 
payments purposes.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
forthcoming Treasury financing activity, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the 
prevailing conditions in the money market; but operations 
shall be modified insofar as the Treasury financing permits 
to moderate any apparent tendency for bank credit and 

money to expand more than currently expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 15, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


