









































FOMC Meeting Minutes


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 7, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Francis 

Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Scanlon 
Mr. Shepardson 
Mr. Swan 
Mr. Wayne 

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Patterson, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay and Irons, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Dallas, 

respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Garvy, Hersey, Jones, 
Koch, Partee, and Solomon, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors



3/7/67

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hilkert and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Taylor, 
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Haymes, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Geng, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Minneapolis 

In the agenda for this meeting, the Secretary reported that 

advices had been received of the election by the Federal Reserve 

Banks of members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market 

Committee for the term of one year beginning March 1, 1967, and that 

it appeared that such persons would be legally qualified to serve 

after they had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President of 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Edward A. Wayne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Richmond, with George H. Ellis, President of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate;



3/7/67

Charles J. Scanlon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Chicago, with W. Braddock Hickman, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

Darryl R. Francis, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis, with Harold T. Patterson, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate; 

Eliot J. Swan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, with Hugh D. Galusha, Jr., President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the following 
officers of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee were elected to serve until the 
election of their successors at the first 
meeting of the Committee after February 29, 
1968, with the understanding that in the 
event of the discontinuance of their 
official connection with the Board of 
Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, 
as the case might be, they would cease to 

have any official connection with the 
Federal Open Market Committee:

Wm. McC. Martin, Jr.  
Alfred Hayes 
Robert C. Holland 
Merritt Sherman 
Kenneth A. Kenyon 
Arthur L. Broida 
Charles Molony 
Howard H. Hackley 
David B. Hexter 
Daniel H. Brill 
Ernest T. Baughman, J. Howard Craven, 
George Garvy, A. B. Hersey, 
Homer Jones, Albert R. Koch, 
J. Charles Partee, Benjamin U.  
Ratchford, and Robert Solomon

Chairman 
Vice Chairman 
Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 

Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 

Economist 
Associate Economists

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 

and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was selected to execute



3/7/67

transactions for the System Open Market 
Account until the adjournment of the 
first meeting of the Federal Open Market 
Committee after February 29, 1968.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes 
and Charles A. Coombs were selected to 
serve at the pleasure of the Federal Open 
Market Committee as Manager of the System 
Open Market Account and as Special Manager 
for foreign currency operations for such 
Account, respectively, it being understood 
that their selection was subject to their 
being satisfactory to the Board of Directors 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice subsequently 
was received that Messrs. Holmes and 
Coombs were satisfactory to the Board 
of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York for service in the respective 
capacities indicated.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on February 7, 1967, were 
approved.  

Consideration then was given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, according to the customary practice of reviewing 

such matters at the first meeting in March of every year, and the 

actions set forth hereinafter were taken.  

Upon motion duly made and seconded, 
and by unanimous vote, the following pro
cedures with respect to allocations of 

securities in the System Open Market 
Account were approved without change:



3/7/67

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account 
shall be reallocated on the last business day of each 
month by means of adjustments proportionate to the 
adjustments that would have been required to equalize 
approximately the average reserve ratios of the 12 
Federal Reserve Banks based on the most recent available 
five business days' reserve ratio figures.  

2. The Board's staff shall calculate, in the 
morning of each business day, the reserve ratios of 
each Bank after allowing for the indicated effects of 
the settlement of the Interdistrict Settlement Fund 
for the preceding day. If these calculations should 
disclose a deficiency in the reserve ratio of any 

Bank, the Board's staff shall inform the Manager of 

the System Open Market Account, who shall make a 
special adjustment as of the previous day to restore 

the reserve ratio of that Bank to the average of all 

the Banks. However, such adjustments shall not be 

made beyond the point where a deficiency would be 

created at any other Bank. Such adjustments shall be 

offset against the participation of the Bank or Banks 

best able to absorb the additional amount or, at the 

discretion of the Manager, against the participation 

of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Board's 

staff and the Bank or Banks concerned shall then be 

notified of the amounts involved and the Interdistrict 

Settlement Fund shall be closed after giving effect 

to the adjustments as of the preceding business day.  

3. Until the next reallocation the Account shall 

be apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined 

in paragraph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as 

provided for in paragraph 2.  

4. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 

from the Account shall be allocated on the day of 

delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 

Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 

that day.  

A proposed list for distribution of periodic reports prepared 

by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the Federal Open Market

Committee was presented for consideration and approval.



3/7/67

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
authorization was given for the follow
ing distribution: 

1. The Members of the Board of Governors.  
2. The Presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks.  
3. Officers of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

*4. The Secretary of the Treasury.  
*5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary 

Affairs and the Deputy Under Secretary for 
Monetary Affairs.  

*6. The Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury 
working on debt management problems.  

*7. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.  
8. The Director of the Division of Bank Operations of 

the Board of Governors.  
9. The officer in charge of research at each of the 

Federal Reserve Banks not represented by its 
President on the Federal Open Market Committee.  

10. The alternate member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee from the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York; the Assistant Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York working under 
the Manager of the System Account; the Managers 
of the Securities Department of the New York 
Bank; the Vice President of the Foreign Function 
having supervisory responsibility for operations; 

the Senior Foreign Exchange Officer of the 
Foreign Function; the Managers of the Foreign 
Department; the officer in charge, the Assistant 

Vice President, and the Adviser of the Research 
Department of the New York Bank; and the confiden

tial files of the New York Bank as the Bank 

selected to execute transactions for the Federal 

Open Market Committee.  

11. With the approval of a member of the Federal Open 

Market Committee or any other President of a 

Federal Reserve Bank, with notice to the 

Secretary, any other employee of the Board of 

Governors or a Federal Reserve Bank.  

* Weekly reports of open market operations only.



3/7/67

The Committee reaffirmed by 
unanimous vote the authorization, 
first given on March 1, 1951, for 
the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank to operate the System 
Open Market Account temporarily in 
case the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York is unable to function.  

The following resolution to 
provide for the continued operation 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 
during an emergency was reaffirmed 
by unanimous vote: 

In the event of war or defense emergency, if the 
Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or in the event of the unavailability 
of both of them, the Secretary or Acting Secretary of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) 
certifies that as a result of the emergency the available 
number of regular members and regular alternates of the 
Federal Open Market Committee is less than seven, all 
powers and functions of the said Committee shall be 
performed and exercised by, and authority to exercise 
such powers and functions is hereby delegated to, an 
Interim Committee, subject to the following terms and 
conditions: 

Such Interim Committee shall consist of seven 
members, comprising each regular member and regular 
alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee then 
available, together with an additional number, suffi
cient to make a total of seven, which shall be made up 
in the following order of priority from those available: 
(1) each alternate at large (as defined below); (2) each 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank not then either a 
regular member or an alternate; (3) each First Vice 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank; provided that (a) 
within each of the groups referred to in clauses (1), 

(2), and (3) priority of selection shall be in numerical 
order according to the numbers of Federal Reserve 
Districts, (b) the President and the First Vice President 
of the same Federal Reserve Bank shall not serve at the 
same time as members of the Interim Committee, and (c) 
whenever a regular member or regular alternate of the



3/7/67

Federal Open Market Committee or a person having a 
higher priority as indicated in clauses (1), (2), and 
(3) becomes available he shall become a member of the 
Interim Committee in the place of the person then on 
the Interim Committee having the lowest priority. The 
Interim Committee is hereby authorized to take action 
by majority vote of those present whenever one or more 
members thereof are present, provided that an affirm
ative vote for the action taken is cast by at least 
one regular member, regular alternate, or President of 
a Federal Reserve Bank. The delegation of authority 
and other procedures set forth above shall be effective 
only during such period or periods as there are available 
less than a total of seven regular members and regular 
alternates of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

As used herein the term "regular member" refers to 
a member of the Federal Open Market Committee duly 
appointed or elected in accordance with existing law; 
the term "regular alternate" refers to an alternate of 
the Committee duly elected in accordance with existing 
law and serving in the absence of the regular member 

for whom he was elected; and the term "alternate at 
large" refers to any other duly elected alternate of 
the Committee at a time when the member in whose absence 
he was elected to serve is available.  

The following resolution authorizing 

certain actions by the Federal Reserve 
Banks during an emergency was reaffirmed 

by unanimous vote: 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes 

each Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions 

set forth below during war or defense emergency when such 

Federal Reserve Bank finds itself unable after reasonable 

efforts to be in communication with the Federal Open 

Market Committee (or with the Interim Committee acting 

in lieu of the Federal Open Market Committee) or when 

the Federal Open Market Committee (or such Interim Com

mittee) is unable to function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light 

of economic conditions and the general credit situation 

then prevailing (after taking into account the possibility



3/7/67

of providing necessary credit through advances secured 
by direct obligations of the United States under the 
last paragraph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), 
such Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and sell obligations 
of the United States for its own account, either outright 
or under repurchase agreement, from and to banks, dealers, 
or other holders of such obligations.  

(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations 
of the United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable 
to tender the actual securities representing such obliga
tions because of conditions resulting from the emergency, 
such Federal Reserve Bank may, in its discretion and 
subject to such safeguards as it deems necessary, accept 
from such seller, in lieu of the actual securities, a 
"due bill" executed by the seller in form acceptable to 
such Federal Reserve Bank stating in substantial effect 
that the seller is the owner of the obligations which are 
the subject of the purchase, that ownership of such obliga
tions is thereby transferred to the Federal Reserve Bank, 
and that the obligations themselves will be delivered to 
the Federal Reserve Bank as soon as possible.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretion 
purchase special certificates of indebtedness directly 

from the United States in such amounts as may be needed 

to cover overdrafts in the general account of the 
Treasurer of the United States on the books of such 

Bank or for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, 

but such Bank shall take all steps practicable at the 

time to insure as far as possible that the amount of 

obligations acquired directly from the United States 

and held by it, together with the amount of such 

obligations so acquired and held by all other Federal 

Reserve Banks, does not exceed $5 billion at any one 

time.  

Authority to take the actions above set forth shall 

be effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve 

Bank is able again to establish communications with the 

Federal Open Market Committee (or the Interim Committee), 

and such Committee is then functioning.  

By unanimous vote the Committee 

reaffirmed the authorization, first



3/7/67

given at the meeting on December 16, 
1958, providing for System personnel 
assigned to the Office of Emergency 
Planning, Special Facilities Branch, 
on a rotating basis to have access 
to the resolutions (1) providing for 
continued operation of the Committee 
during an emergency and (2) authorizing 
certain actions by the Federal Reserve 
Banks during an emergency.  

There was unanimous agreement 
that no action should be taken to 
change the existing procedure, as 
called for by resolution adopted 
June 21, 1939, requesting the Board 
of Governors to cause its examining 
force to furnish the Secretary of the 
Federal Open Market Committee a report 
of each examination of the System Open 
Market Account.  

Reference was made to the procedure authorized at the 

meeting of the Committee on March 2, 1955, and most recently 

reaffirmed on March 1, 1966, whereby, in addition to members 

and officers of the Committee and Reserve Bank Presidents not 

currently members of the Committee, minutes and other records 

could be made available to any other employee of the Board of 

Governors or of a Federal Reserve Bank with the approval of a 

member of the Committee or another Reserve Bank President, with 

notice to the Secretary.  

It was stated that lists of currently authorized persons 

at the Board and at each Federal Reserve Bank (excluding secretaries 

and records and duplicating personnel) had recently been confirmed

-10-



3/7/67 -11

by the Secretary of the Committee. The current lists were 

reported to be in the custody of the Secretary, and it was 

noted that revisions could be sent to the Secretary at any 

time.  

It was agreed unanimously that 
no action should be taken at this 
time to amend the procedure authorized 
on March 2, 1955.  

Chairman Martin then noted that a memorandum from the 

Account Manager had been distributed under date of February 28, 

1967, regarding the continuing authority directive relating to 

transactions in U.S. Government securities and bankers' accept

ances.1/ He invited Mr. Holmes to comment.  

Mr. Holmes said that three of the recommendations in his 

memorandum involved keeping as permanent features of the continuing 

authority directive changes that had been made during the past 

year, and the fourth involved a minor language clarification.  

First, with respect to section 1(a) of the directive, on July 26, 

1966, the Committee had increased from $1.5 billion to $2.0 billion 

the limit on the amount that the aggregate Account holdings of 

Government securities could be increased or decreased during the 

interval between Committee meetings as a result of open market 

activity, and he suggested retaining the $2.0 billion figure.  

1/ A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the Committee's 

files.



3/7/67 -12

Secondly, he suggested clarifying the language in section 1(b) 

describing the two limits specified on aggregate Account holdings 

of bankers' acceptances, in line with the manner in which that 

language had always been understood, by adding the phrase "which

ever is the lower." The affected clause would then read: 

"provided that the aggregate amount of bankers' accept
ances held at any one time shall not exceed (1) $125 
million or (2) 10 per cent of the total of bankers' 
acceptances outstanding as shown in the most recent 
acceptance survey conducted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, whichever is the lower." 

Third, Mr. Holmes continued, section 1(c) had been revised 

on June 28, 1966, to remove the previous 24-month limit on the 

maturity of Government securities that could be acquired under 

repurchase agreements at times other than during Treasury financings.  

That action had been intended as a temporary measure. However, 

because the ability to buy securities of any maturity under RP's 

had proved, and was likely to remain, helpful, he recommended 

continuing it as a permanent feature of the directive. Finally, 

with respect to section 2 of the directive, he would recommend 

retaining the limit of $1 billion on special short-term certificates 

of indebtedness that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York could 

buy directly from the Treasury, in view of the possibility that 

the Treasury might have difficulty in managing its cash balances 

for some time to come. The limit in question had been increased 

to its present level from $500 million on November 22, 1966.



3/7/67

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Open Market Account in accordance with 
the following continuing authority 
directive relating to transactions in 
U.S. Government securities and bankers' 
acceptances: 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to 
carry out the most recent current economic policy directive adopted 
at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities in 
the open market, from or to Government securities dealers 
and foreign and international accounts maintained at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or 
deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market Account 
at market prices and, for such Account, to exchange matur
ing U.S. Government securities with the Treasury or allow 
them to mature without replacement; provided that the 

aggregate amount of such securities held in such Account 
at the close of business on the day of a meeting of the 
Committee at which action is taken with respect to a 
current economic policy directive shall not be increased 

or decreased by more than $2.0 billion during the period 

commencing with the opening of business on the day follow
ing such meeting and ending with the close of business on 

the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' acceptances of 

the kinds designated in the Regulation of the Federal Open 

Market Committee in the open market, from or to acceptance 

dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred 

delivery basis, for the account of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York at market discount rates; provided that 

the aggregate amount of bankers' acceptances held at any 

one time shall not exceed (1) $125 million or (2) 10 per 
cent of the total of bankers' acceptances outstanding as 

shown in the most recent acceptance survey conducted by 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, whichever is the 

lower.

-13-



(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the U.S., 
and prime bankers' acceptances with maturities of 6 months 
or less at the time of purchase, from nonbank dealers 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates not less than (1) the discount rate of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time such agree
ment is entered into, or (2) the average issuing rate 
on the most recent issue of 3-month Treasury bills, 
whichever is the lower; provided that in the event 
Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant 
to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be 
sold in the market or transferred to the System Open 
Market Account; and provided further that in the event 
bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement are 
not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be 
held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the 

open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase directly from 
the Treasury for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York (with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to 

issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such 
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may 

be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommondation of 

the Treasury; provided that the rate charged on such certificates 

shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, 

and provided further that the total amount of such certificates 

held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed 

$1 billion.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members 

of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System 

Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on 

Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies

3/7/67 -14-



3/7/67 -15

for the period February 7 through March 1, 1967, and a supplemental 

report for March 2 through 6, 1967. Copies of these reports have 

been placed in the files of the Committee.  

Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that 

it was indeed a pleasure to report that conditions in the gold 

and foreign exchange markets had taken a turn for the better during 

the past month. The Treasury gold stock would be unchanged again 

this week and, perhaps more importantly, there had been some wel

come relief from pressure on the London gold market. While 

speculative demand for gold remained at high levels, the flow of 

South African gold to London had been running 30 to 50 per cent 

above normal and a sale of nearly $30 million of gold by another 

country on the London market had further improved the supply 

situation. As a result, the market price had declined to $35.14 

this morning, and the Pool took in $47 million in February and a 

further $10 million so far in March. That meant that the Pool 

now had $96 million on hand, which was the most comfortable margin 

it had had for a long while. How long the present situation would 

last depended upon balance of payments developments in South 

Africa; if they moved back into surplus from their present deficit 

they would withhold gold, and a gap in the supply would develop.  

On the exchange markets, Mr. Coombs continued, sterling 

suffered a sinking spell during the middle of February, mainly



3/7/67 -16

owing to announcement of some very high Government spending 

figures for the coming fiscal year, but it recovered strongly 

at month-end. The consequent inflow of dollars to the Bank of 

England had enabled the British to clean up early in March the 

last remaining $100 million due to the Federal Reserve under 

the swap line, while short-term debt to the U.S. Treasury had 

also been completely liquidated.  

As the Committee might recall, Mr. Coombs said, last 

July such short-term borrowing by the Bank of England rose to a 

peak of $1.5 billion. It had subsequently been reduced to a 

residual of $450 million still due to the Bank for International 

Settlements and the European central banks included in the 

sterling balance credit package negotiated last July. The British 

were hoping that March would be another good month, and if so they 

might succeed in cleaning up completely all of their short-term 

debt sometime this spring.  

Mr. Coombs remarked that the French had moved back into 

small surplus during February. There might be some likelihood, 

however, that the Bank of France would rebuild its dollar balances 

to the extent of roughly $200 million before coming to the U.S.  

for gold.  

More generally, Mr. Coombs said, he would like to note 

that at present, close to the end of the fifth year that the



3/7/67 -17

System's swap network had been in existence, there were no draw

ings outstanding on either side of the ledger. He hoped it would 

be possible to maintain that situation for at least a few months.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the System open market transactions in 
foreign currencies during the period 
February 7 through March 6, 1967, were 
approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the 

members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the 

System Open Market Account covering open market operations in 

U.S. Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the 

period February 7 through March 1, 1967, and a supplemental 

report for March 2 through 6, 1967. Copies of these reports 

have been placed in the files of the Committee.  

In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmes 

commented as follows: 

As the written reports to the Committee indicate, 

the interval since the last meeting was characterized 

first by a period of rising interest rates and a money 

market atmosphere that was surprisingly taut in light 

of reserve availability, followed by a period of more 

comfortable money market conditions and generally 

declining interest rates. Shifting market expectations, 

as is so often the case, played a major role in deter

mining the characteristices of each subperiod.  
At about the time of the last Open Market Committee 

meeting a more cautious note was beginning to develop 

in the securities markets as many participants began to 

conclude that the earlier sharp decline in interest rates 

might have gone too far. Given the size of underwriter



3/7/67

inventories and the steady stream of announcements 
adding to the calendar of new corporate and municipal 
issues, some technical market adjustment was inevitable 
and, indeed, needed if inventories were to be cleaned 
out to make room for the new issues coming to the 
market. In addition, however, market participants 
began to reappraise the future prospects for monetary 
policy in light of Congressional testimony pointing 
to the likelihood of a strong economy in the second 
half of the year. Unfortunately, a firmer money market 
tone strengthened the belief that further monetary ease 
was unlikely, and some market participants even felt 
that the System might already have let monetary 
conditions begin to tighten in the light of prospective 
credit demands.  

Open market operations attempted to head off the 
tauter money market conditions in line with the policy 
adopted at the last meeting, but were not notably suc
cessful in doing so until just before the Washington's 
Birthday holiday. This was so despite massive reserve 
injections, and a rapid rise in aggregate reserve 
measures. Actual reserve availability consistently 
fell short of projected levels; in each of the two 
weeks following the last Committee meeting we went 
over the weekend anticipating free reserves ranging 
from $80 to $200 million, only to see the estimates 
revised sharply downward after new data were received.  
The money market itself proved hard to judge as the 
funds rate on several occasions declined in response 
to open market operations only to snap back again after 
it was too late for us to supply additional reserves.  
It is perhaps small consolation, but many money market 
participants were as puzzled as we about the behavior 
of the market. After publication of a free reserve 
figure of over $100 million for the week ending 

February 22 many of the money market banks were asking 
themselves why they had been willing to bid up the 
funds rate in light of the availability of reserves 
in the banking system.  

The securities markets, already reassured that 
the Federal Reserve intended to maintain comfortable 
money market conditions, were given further psycholog

ical impetus on February 24 by heavy Government trust 
fund purchases of securities, as the Treasury had to 

forestall a rise in the debt over the ceiling. And the

-18-



3/7/67

Board's action on February 28 to reduce required 
reserves then generated expectations of some moderate 
further easing of monetary policy.  

The failure of Congress to act before March 1 
on an increase in the temporary debt ceiling to $336 
billion left the Treasury with the prospect that the 
public debt would be $1.5 billion over the ceiling on 
February 28. In order to avoid this the Treasury 
redeemed special nonmarketable debt held by the 
Civil Service Retirement Fund, the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, the Home Loan Banks, and the 
Exchange Stabilization Fund. In order to keep the 
trust accounts and the Home Loan Banks fully invested, 
$700-$800 million of marketable issues were purchased, 
including $233 million of coupon issues bought by the 
Trading Desk for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora
tion and Social Security accounts. The details of 
these operations were spelled out in the written 

reports, and I would only comment here that they were 
carried out without causing undue repercussions in 
either market prices or expectations. This was mainly 
due to the Treasury's willingness to have us tell the 
market more about the size and character of the opera
tion than normally has been done.  

The Board's action on February 28 to lower 

reserve requirements added further to the stronger 

market tone and encouraged a better flow of funds in 

the capital markets. The move was generally interpreted 

as confirming the System's desire for continued monetary 

ease in light of the current slowdown of economic 
activity and, to most market participants, it indicated 

some further ease, designed to see the capital market 

through its peak pressure in March. It also eased 

concern about the possibility of market pressure in 

April when the speed-up of corporate tax payments occurs.  
The timing of the reserve injection through lower reserve 

requirements was well designed to coincide with expected 

reserve needs and so far has not complicated open market 

operations in the least.  
After all the gyrations that took place during the 

interval between Committee meetings, the three-month 

Treasury bill rate wound up about 20 basis points below 

the level prevailing at the time of the last meeting.  

In yesterday's regular weekly auction there was some 

bidding for new three- and six-month bills at rates as

-19-



3/7/67

low as 4.29 per cent, but average issuing rates were 
established at about 4.34 per cent for both issues, as 
tenders were cautiously spread over a wider than normal 

range in the wake of recent rate declines. Yields on 
most coupon issues maturing within 6 years were down 2 
to 6 basis points over the interval, reflecting recent 
market strength. Longer-term Governments have also 
fallen about 15 to 20 basis points since February 23, 
but are about 4 to 6 basis points above their levels at 
the time of the last Committee meeting. I should also 
note, parenthetically, that the System was able last 
Friday to purchase $50 million coupon issues maturing 
within 5 years without much impact on market rates or 
market expectations.  

Prices of corporate and municipal obligations 
declined quite sharply in response to the heavy demands 
placed upon those markets by heavy current offerings 

and a steadily mounting calendar of prospective flota
tions. New issues moved slowly in this environment, 
and upward yield adjustments of 20 to 40 basis points 
were made on most new issues before any significant 
demand emerged. Both markets improved fairly sharply 
in the wake of the change in reserve requirements, with 
corporate issues recovering about one-third of earlier 
price declines. A heavy supply of new issues is still 
scheduled for the month ahead, however, including about 
$1.1 billion corporates and $750 million municipals, 
and a sizable backlog of tax exempts remain in dealer 
inventories.  

As the blue book 1/ notes, the bank credit proxy 
and reserve aggregate measures were very strong over 

the past four weeks. The credit proxy expanded at a 
15 per cent annual rate compared with the 9 - 11 per 

cent rate expected at the time of the last meeting.  
For March the Board staff anticipates a 6 - 8 per cent 

average rise in the credit proxy and a 10 - 12 per 
cent rise from the beginning to the end of the month.  
Projections at the New York Bank center near the upper 

end of these ranges.  
Looking into the period ahead, I would agree 

wholeheartedly with the blue book statement that 

1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," 
prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.

-20-



3/7/67

"the difficulties in specifying consistent money 
market relationships are compounded by the uncertain 
effects of the reserve requirement reductions." And, 
it should be added, by the uncertainties involved in 
individual interpretations of current economic and 
credit developments, by the state of mind of various 
classes of market participants, and by international 
developments. I would agree that substantial free 
reserves may be needed at times to keep the funds 
rate averaging a little under 4-3/4 per cent, unless 
country banks put the funds released by the reserve 
requirement change to work more quickly than normally 
would be the case. But I expect that persistent free 
reserves, even of moderate size, will be interpreted 
as confirming the reserve requirement change as a 
moderate move towards further ease. Expectations may 
consequently play a major role in determining the 
course of interest rate developments, and also the 
rate of growth of bank credit. I am afraid that we 
will have to wait and see how these variables interact 
on a continuing basis. While I am by no means sure 
that it is possible to predict the relationships among 
reserves, credit, and interest rates over the next 
month, I have nothing constructive to add to the 
thorough discussion in the blue book. Open market 
operations will undoubtedly have to be flexibly 
adapted to emerging developments, and I hope that 
members of the Committee will indicate the priorities 
they would attach to the different variables with which 
we are usually concerned.  

The Treasury is auctioning today $2.7 billion June 
tax anticipation bills, its last cash financing of the 
fiscal year. There should be few problems with the 
issue, and last night the market was anticipating an 
average issuing rate of about 4.30 per cent, with the 
50 per cent tax and loan credit estimated to be worth 
about 15 basis points to commercial banks. Because the 
issue had to be postponed until Congress acted on the 

debt ceiling and since the Treasury lost cash as the 
result of the switch of trust funds out of special 
issues into market issues, the Treasury's cash balance 

is at a low ebb, and some borrowing from the System 

appears likely over this coming weekend and perhaps 
before. Additional borrowing from the System may be 
necessary in early April. While infrequent Treasury 

borrowing should not be a major cause of concern to

-21-



the System, more frequent recourse to Federal Reserve 
credit could, if it occurs, be a source of trouble in 
managing the reserve supply. One can only hope that 
the next round of Congressional action on the debt 
ceiling, which will have to take place before June 30, 
will give the Treasury greater flexibility in managing 
its cash position than it has had in the past several 
months. I should also note that the Federal National 
Mortgage Association is expecting to announce tomorrow 
morning an issue of participation certificates, of which 
the bulk will mature within 5 years and only a modest 
amount will be long-term.  

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances 
during the period February 7 through 
March 6, 1967, were approved, ratified, 
and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and 

financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been 

distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed 

in the files of the Committee.  

Mr. Partee made the following statement on economic condi

tions: 

Last Friday's Wall Street Journal reported 
optimistically that Government analysts see "silver 
linings in [the present] economic storm clouds." But 
I, for one, must admit to failure on this score. It 
seems to me that virtually all of the economic news 
that has become available since the last meeting of 
the Committee is bearish--ranging from moderately to 
substantially so. And I do not think that recent 
unfavorable developments can be accommodated within 
the Administration's economic model described in some 
detail to you four weeks ago. In my view, if the 
economy is not now in an actual downturn, it very 
soon will be.

3/7/67 -22-



3/7/67

That is also the implication of the staff GNP 
projection for the first half contained in the green 
book.1/ A current dollar GNP expansion of $5 billion 
per quarter would bring almost no further gain in 
real output of goods and services, and would be 
consistent with a decline in industrial production 
over the period of around 5 per cent. With continued 
substantial expansion in industrial facilities, the 
factory utilization rate could drop below 85 per cent 
by midyear; and unemployment, despite slower growth 
in the labor force, could show an appreciable rise.  

In this situation, some dampening in the upward 
movement of prices and wages certainly would be 
expected. But existing pressures to obtain higher 
wage rates are exceptionally strong and, given the 
unfavorable impact of declining output on productivity, 
unit labor costs in manufacturing would be likely for 
some time to show substantial further increases. Under 
these conditions, a sharp decline in corporate profits 
would be probable. In turn, lower profits and reduced 
operating rates could soon take the steam out of 
business capital spending plans. Thus, in the private 
sectors, we seem to have all of the ingredients of a 
full-fledged business recession.  

It may be that my gloomy prognosis is exaggerated, 
but the signs of recessionary tendencies in the economy 
over recent weeks are unmistakable. Of greatest concern 
to me is the continuing dramatic weakness in consumer 
goods demand. Total retail sales were essentially 
flat from June through January; and allowing for 
price increases, there was a decline in physical volume.  
February appears to have shown a further drop, judging 
from the weekly figures, although unusually bad weather 
undoubtedly was a factor. The most pronounced weakness 
has been in new car sales, which declined sharply further 
to a 7 million annual rate in February, but many other 
retail lines have also shown declines or little growth.  
Excluding autos, the balance of retail trade increased 
very little after mid-1966; dollar volume in January was 
no higher than last June.  

Personal income has continued to expand rapidly 
thus far, on the other hand, so that the rate of personal 

1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," 

prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.



3/7/67

saving appears to have moved sharply upward. Such a 
sharp adjustment in the savings rate is unusual but not 
unprecedented; a similar rise occurred in 1956, when 
new car sales dropped back from the 1955 high. Then, 
as now, a sizable part of the savings increase was 

reflected in reduced use of instlament credit. Neverthe
less, the 7 per cent savings rate projected for the first 

half looks high relative to other recent years. Perhaps 
consumers will spend more freely in the months ahead, 
although if the environment is one of layoffs and 
shortened workweeks, one would not expect a buoyant 

buying psychology. And it should be noted that, even 
with the expectations of substantial future income gains 
shown in recent consumer surveys, buying intentions have 
not been strong.  

The slackness in retail sales has extended and 
accentuated the problem of accomplishing needed adjustments 
in business inventories. Despite a one point drop in 
industrial production, manufacturers' inventories increased 
further in January, by about the same high $12 billion 
annual rate that characterized the last half of 1966.  
Over the past nine months, such stocks have increased by 
one-eighth while shipments have shown only modest further 
growth. Much of the increase in stocks--over 40 per 
cent--is accounted for by the defense and business equip
ment industries, but here too inventories have risen much 

more sharply in recent months than have order backlogs 

and shipments. The remainder of the inventory expansion 
had centered in other durable goods lines until recently, 
but in December and January there were substantial increases 
in holdings of nondurable goods.  

The result of the inventory buildup has been a sharp 

rise in manufacturing stock-sales ratios, to the highest 

levels since 1961. As an indication of the dimensions of 
the problem, restoration of the ratios prevailing during 
1965 and early 1966--given continuation of recent levels of 

shipments--would require an actual cutback in manufacturing 

inventories--not just reduced accumulation--amounting to 
$7 billion. In wholesale and retail trade, also, inventories 

have increased considerably more rapidly than sales over 

the past year; to restore the relationship between distri
butors' stocks and retail sales that prevailed in late 
1965 would have required, as of year-end, an inventory 
liquidation of $2-1/2 billion. It seems unlikely that 

reductions of these magnitudes are in prospect. Inducements

-24-



3/7/67

to hold inventories may well be greater now than before, 
and any future increases in sales will, of course, reduce 
the size of needed corrections. But it also seems 
unlikely that the corrections can be made without major 
production cutbacks. In sum, I believe that these figures 
indicate that the potential is there for a much larger 
and more extended inventory adjustment than is contem
plated in most current GNP projections.  

There are, of course, major prospective supports for 
the economy that should help keep an inventory adjustment 
from getting out of hand. State and local expenditures 
and consumer outlays for services continue to rise at a 
rapid rate. Residential construction shows every 
prospect of increasing as the year progresses, though 
the recent pickup in housing starts probably should be 
discounted in view of the very large seasonal adjustment 
factors applied at this time of year. And the recent 
surveys of business capital spending plans, although 
showing a leveling off in outlays, hold out some hope 
that a substantial decline will not develop. We have 
just learned, on an extremely confidential basis, that 
results of the latest Government survey indicate a 
smaller year-to-year increase than do recent private 
surveys, and with no further gain during the first half 
from the fourth quarter 1966 rate.  

The major factor offsetting developing weaknesses 
in the private economy, however, continues to be the 
prospect of rising Federal outlays for defense, There 
is already some speculation that defense spending may 
rise more than projected in the January budget, although 
I have nothing new to offer on this score. But we have 
estimated the full employment fiscal implications of 
existing budget projections, taking fourth-quarter 
unemployment and a 4 per cent real growth rate as the 
basis for our calculations. This shows a rise in the 
full employment deficit from an annual rate of about 
$5 billion in fourth quarter of 1966 to an average of 
nearly $7 billion in the first half of this year. If 
the tax increase goes through, there would be a marked 
drop in the full employment deficit in the second half.  
But if the tax increase is not approved, and assuming 
an increase in social security benefits only about half 
that proposed--both seem increasingly likely prospects-
the full employment deficit would rise slightly further 
in the second half, to $8 billion or a little more.

-25-



Continuation of a deficit even of this size 
probably would not fully counterbalance weaknesses 
in the private sector--certainly it has not offest 
the recessionary tendencies of recent months--but 

it should provide important stimulus once the major 
impact of the inventory adjustment has been absorbed.  
Further, the automatic stabilizing features of the 

tax system will be cushioning any slowing in income 

flows; past relationships suggest that one-third to 

one-half of the shortfall in incomes below full 

employment levels will be compensated for by lower 

Federal tax accruals. Finally, the cumulative impact 

of easier money will serve to bolster the economy, 

not only through its effect on construction but also 

by tipping the scales in favor of marginal spending 

decisions in a wide variety of markets.  

These considerations lend strong support to the 

view that any downward movement in the economy will 

be relatively shallow and short-lived. Nevertheless, 

near-term prospects for the next six months or so are 

distinctly unfavorable, and it must be recognized--as 

Mr. Mitchell commented at the last meeting--that there 

is usually more certainty in a short-term forecast 

than when we look further ahead. Accordingly, I would 

recommend a fully accommodative monetary policy for 

the present--one that is easy enough to assure the 

ready availability of funds at gradually falling 
interest rates in all sectors of the credit markets.  

Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial 

developments: 

The turbulence in financial markets over the past 

four weeks has been pretty thoroughly reviewed in the 

green book, the blue book, and the Manager's report; 

I'll resist the temptation, therefore, to indulge in 

additional post-mortems. By and large, we've gotten 

back to, or a shade easier than, the money market condi

tions prevailing at the time of the last meeting, but 

we still have some distance to go in restoring the 

capital market conditions of early February. Long-term 

market rates are still higher than at that time--some 

significantly so--and the prospective volume of private 

and public demands for long-term funds is larger. And 

while expansion of reserves and bank credit in February

3/7/67 -26-



3/7/67

was greater than anticipated earlier in the month, 
banks have used the reserves provided to increase 
liquidity rather than to encourage expansion of 
customer loans.  

As we look to the weeks ahead, the question 
confronting monetary policy formulation is less one 
of the appropriate direction of policy than of the 
extent to which this direction should be pursued.  
The near-term economic outlook, as Mr. Partee's 
analysis makes clear, is bleak. Prospects are not 
only weaker than the sluggish pattern projected in 
the Administration's model, but even weaker than the 
staff's own earlier projection. Disquietingly, this 
let-down in the pace of U.S. expansion comes at a 
time when several other countries are already in, or 
seem headed for, economic slowdown.  

It seems doubtful to me that we can bank on self

correcting forces to forestall or curtail a downturn 
here at home. A resurgence of consumer spending may 
be a possibility, but--along with Mr. Partee--I 
wouldn't rate the odds very high in an atmosphere of 
declining production, reduced workweeks, and rising 
unemployment. And while the possibility of additional 
fiscal stimulation probably deserves higher odds, until 

fiscal talk is translated into specific expenditure and 
tax programs, such a possibility must remain--as it did 

most of last year--too weak a reed on which to base 
current monetary policy decisions. At the moment, then, 
there doesn't seem much alternative to continuing to 

press for easier financial conditions.  

In deciding just how much easier, the first task 

is to assess what's been accomplished to date. Clearly 

the turn in policy last fall was timely, but we must 

guard against indulging in self-congratulation just 

because bank credit expansion over the past three months 

has proceeded at an annual rate of between 11 and 12 

per cent. You will recall that the staff's projection 

of a bank credit growth rate consistent with the Council 

of Economic Advisers' model of GNP averaged about 9 per 

cent over the whole of 1967. Within that average, it 

was expected that credit expansion would be larger in 

the first half of the year than in the second, since we 

anticipated very large financing demands from business 

to restore depleted liquidity and to meet heavy tax pay

ments. And within the first half, we suspected that

-27-



3/7/67

financial flows would be large but would taper off 
before mid-year.  

I won't pretend that we had any specific numbers 
in mind for bank credit expansion on a month-to-month 
basis, since our analytic tools are still far from 
competent to project for such short periods the 
expansion rate required to move back toward a full
employment economy. On balance, however, the order 
of magnitude of bank credit expansion since November 
does not seem far out of line with our chart show 
specifications as to what would have to accompany 
the CEA's model of GNP.  

But since the economy is moving much more slug
gishly than the CEA model, it may well be that what 
we've accomplished so far in the way of providing 
bank credit is barely adequate--and possibly inadequate-
to provide the financial stimulation the economy needs.  
Certainly it does not seem to have achieved as yet what 
the economy needs in the way of borrowing terms and 
conditions to finance a really vigorous housing recovery; 
the results of the Reserve Banks' survey of mortgage 
flows indicate some general loosening of fund availability, 
but no gushing of credit into the housing area such that 
would suggest an acceleration of housing activity beyond 
that built into our model. And corporate borrowing 
costs--at banks and in the capital markets--are still 
high at a time when business capital spending and 
capital spending plans are being pared. Overall, then, 
I'm not so impressed by two-digit bank credit growth 
numbers as to feel that we've done all we can or all 
we have to do.  

In determining how much further we might have to go, 
let me raise another warning signal--this against the 
danger of misconstruing the staff's projections of bank 
credit expansion, as given in the blue book and in our 
weekly perspective tables. It should be emphasized that 
these projected rates of bank credit growth are not 
"full-employment" estimates. Rather, they are crude 
estimates of the results for bank credit of a short-run 
interaction between a specified monetary policy and the 
real economy as projected in the green book. When we 
project, as we did in the current blue book, that 
unchanged money market conditions would likely accompany 
an increase in the credit proxy in March at an annual

-28-



rate of 6 to 8 per cent with real expansion in GNP 
running at a negligible rate, we are not suggesting 
that this is the appropriate bank credit increase to 
help restore the economy to a 4 per cent rate of real 
growth. Nor are we suggesting that the somewhat 
easier money market conditions called for in alter
native B of the directives 1/--conditions we estimate 
could result in a bank credit expansion rate of at 
least 10 per cent in March--are sufficient in themselves 
to stimulate return to target rates of growth in real 
GNP.  

We recognize that the appropriate course for the 
staff would be to specify both the credit conditions 
and the rate of credit expansion needed to help turn 
the economy away from an impending recession and put 
it back on a path toward full employment. The sad fact 
is that we can't--at least not on a 3 or 4 week basis.  
It would be silly for us to pretend that our knowledge 
of the interaction of financial variables with non
financial developments is as yet adequate to such an 

assignment.  
The best we can do at the moment is to advise the 

Committee--as we do in the blue book--that maintaining 
present money market conditions, with long-term rates 
still undesirably high, would likely be associated with 
a bank credit expansion of about 6 to 8 per cent, and 
that pressing toward somewhat easier financial market 

conditions should be accompanied by a larger bank credit 

expansion, on the order of 10 per cent or more. But if 
somewhat easier market conditions do not result in a 

more vigorous credit expansion, we would construe this 

as a signal of greater than expected weakness in the 

economy, calling for even easier market conditions.  
In choosing among these policy alternatives, let 

me suggest that it is not too soon for the Committee 

to index its concern for the softening economic situation, 

and to act thereon. First, I would propose for Committee 

consideration a change in the wording of the first 

paragraph of the draft directive, substituting, in the 

last sentence of that paragraph, some alternative wording 

1/ Alternative draft directives submitted by the staff 

for Committee consideration are appended to these minutes 

as Attachment A.

3/7/67 -29-



3/7/67

which recognizes sagging economic prospects. Instead 
of ". . . fostering . . . conditions conducive to non
inflationary expansion .. ." we might consider language 
such as " . . . fostering . . . conditions to combat 
recessionary tendencies . ." 

Next, I would recommend adoption of alternative B 
for the second paragraph, or some variant that left 
room for prompt action by the Desk to accelerate reserve 
provision if bank credit expansion appeared to be falling 
short of projections over the next 4 weeks, but indicated 
less concern if expansion should exceed the projections.  
The guide to reserve provision should in the first 
instance come from the market, and in particular from 
an objective of achieving money market conditions that 
permit and encourage a continuing declining trend in 
long-term rates, even in the face of the prospective 
volume of public and private capital market financing.  
A "one-way" proviso such as in alternative B would guard 
against an arbitrary limitation on the Manager's latitude 
to take the steps necessary in achieving the desired 
rate trends. An asymmetrical proviso is not unprecedented; 
the Committee operated with such a directive--then pointed 
toward the possibility of greater restraint--on a number 
of occasions last spring and summer.  

Finally, after a decent interval--so as not to 
imply a sense of panic at the Fed--I would suggest the 
desirability of considering a reduction in the discount 
rate. Perhaps the next reduction should be only 1/4 of 
1 per cent, which would leave financial market partic
ipants fully aware of the possibility of more to come 
if and when needed, rather than suggesting that the Fed 
had moved to another frozen position. Such a package 
of System actions seems to me appropriate to the emerging 
economic situation.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether Mr. Brill would explain what 

timing he had in mind in connection with his comments on possible 

discount rate action. In particular, was he suggesting a change in 

the discount rate between now and the next meeting of the Committee?

-30-



3/7/67

In reply, Mr. Brill said he did not have a specific recom

mendation on the timing of a discount rate change in mind. A 

number of factors would have to be considered: one concerned the 

way in which developments in short-term markets proceeded; the 

three-month bill rate recently had dropped below the discount rate, 

but not by as much as 25 basis points as yet. Another factor was 

the desirability of avoiding undue rapidity in a sequence of 

Federal Reserve actions, since that might lead to more widespread 

concern than desirable about the System's assessment of the 

economic outlook. Perhaps a change some time around or after the 

next Committee meeting would be appropriate.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that the GNP projections in the green 

book suggested that disposable income was rising rapidly in the 

first quarter and that the personal saving rate would reach the 

abnormally high level of 7 per cent and remain at that level in 

the second quarter. While he agreed that the kind of economic 

environment described was not one in which an upsurge in consumer 

spending could be expected, he wondered whether there was not 

significant doubt about the projection that so high a rate of 

personal saving would be sustained for two quarters.  

Mr. Partee agreed that it required some stretching of the 

imagination to expect the savings rate to remain at 7 per cent for 

two quarters. Of course, personal income might well rise less

-31-



3/7/67 -32

than projected in the second quarter and the savings rate go down 

on that account. The staff had estimated the income increase at 

the rather low annual rate of 4 per cent, allowing for no appreci

able increase in employment and only the normal rise in wages and 

salaries, but it was possible that actual income growth could be 

still weaker. He pointed out, however, that there had been periods 

in the past in which the savings rate had remained at a high level 

for some time. In particular, the rate had been stable at a level 

above 7 per cent from the second quarter of 1953 through the first 

quarter of 1954--a period leading into and encompassing the early 

part of the 1954 recession. In 1957 and 1958 also, the savings 

rate fluctuated around 7 per cent, although it was not as stable 

then as in 1953 and 1954. There was a sharp rise in the savings 

rate in 1956 much like that in recent quarters, followed by two 

years of little change--first because spending was weak and then 

because income was weak.  

Mr. Brill added that in his judgment the odds favored a 

lower savings rate than projected, but it was more likely to 

result from weaker performance of income than from a rise in 

spending.  

Mr. Maisel asked whether the expectation of little further 

increase in plant and equipment spending might not imply an actual



3/7/67 -33

reduction in the capital spending components of GNP, since producers' 

durable equipment included autos.  

Mr. Partee replied that it probably did. He added that the 

producers' durable equipment item included certain other outlays 

not included in the plant and equipment figures--such as oil-well 

drilling--and he did not know whether the expansion expected there 

was strong enough to offset the automobile decline. In any case, 

the latest plant and equipment estimates showed no increase from the 

fourth quarter of 1966.  

Mr. Swan referred to Mr. Brill's suggested change in the 

first paragraph of the draft directive, and asked what implications 

the change might have for the last clause of the affected sentence, 

relating to the balance of payments.  

Mr. Brill replied that he thought the Committee still had 

to recognize that the balance of payments deficit remained a problem.  

Mr. Hersey then presented the following statement on the 

balance of payments and related matters: 

The news on the balance of payments that has devel

oped since the Committee's last meeting can be quickly 
summarized. Disappointingly, in view of the behavior of 

U.S. industrial production, imports were still rising 

through January though less rapidly than up to the middle 

of last year. Gratifyingly, outstanding bank credit to 

foreigners declined considerably in January. U.S. banks' 

borrowings from the Euro-dollar market have not changed 

much in the past few weeks, and so they still stand at a 

level about $1 billion below the mid-December peak.



3/7/67

None of these bits of news calls for revaluation of 
the outlook ahead. We are still projecting an absolute 
decline in imports during coming months as domestic 
inventory accumulation slows. On the other hand, the 
January reflow of bank credit and the February stability 
in use of Euro-dollar money by U.S. banks are by no means 
inconsistent with the possibility that later we may see 
outflows of both sorts.  

The balances owed by U.S. banks to their branches 
abroad, after dropping by $1 billion from mid-December to 
the end of January, still stood last week at a level 
$1-1/2 billion higher than a year ago. Last summer and 
autumn when these balances were rising rapidly, Euro
dollar rates moved up a good deal more than British and 
German money market rates, under the pull of the bidding 
by American banks. Then when the American banks let a 
sizable chunk of the money they had taken from their 
branches run off, Euro-dollar rates fell sharply, and in 
fact moved down relative to sterling money rates enough 
to stimulate a considerable flow of funds into sterling.  
During February the movement of funds was small and rates 
were level or rising a bit. Now, with Federal funds 
easier in our markets than they were two weeks ago, we 
may see a further return of money from U.S. banks to the 
Euro-dollar market.  

I will come back later to the policy implications of 
this outflow. I should like first to make some comments 
on recent monetary policy developments in Germany and 
Britain, the second and third largest economies of the 
Western world.  

At this distance it is difficult to judge whether 
these two economies, after half a year or so of declining 
industrial production, are already getting in position 
for an upturn or not. British monetary policy remains 
cautious.  

The British Government is planning on a considerable 
increase in government expenditures, but private investment 
prospects are so weak that most people predict only a slow 

recovery this year from the recession Britain has been 

having since last summer. The British may reasonably hope 

to keep their import growth slow, and they will try to get 

some benefit in export growth out of hoped-for economic 
expansion in the rest of the world.  

German policy also looks pretty cautious still, though 
it has eased a great deal since last summer. To the

-34-



3/7/67

outsider, this caution looks misplaced, with Germany's 
export surplus shockingly large by now, while excess 
pressures on German resources are probably less now than 
at any time in the last ten years, and prices are 
virtually stable.  

Can we learn any policy lesson from British and 
German caution? If the United States were another middle
sized country, instead of having a GNP six times Germany's 
and more than double the whole Common Market Community's, 
we ought to be following their examples. A country with 
as serious a drain on its gold and IMF reserves as we 
will probably be having this year ought to be moving 
cautiously in monetary policy, letting other countries 
take the lead in promoting expansion. We might hope, for 
example, that a new advance in Germany would add momentum 
to European expansion in general and in that way foster 
continuing growth of world trade. But the size and 
predominance of the United States impose on it a responsi
bility to maintain its own economic growth, in a 
noninflationary way, in the world's interests as well as 
its own.  

This being so, what can be said about using monetary 
policy in one way or another to help ease our balance of 
payments problem? There are various prescriptions to 
choose from, all palliatives, not cures.  

The first prescription is to be as cautious as 
possible about letting interest rates decline, with the 
justification that we may thus stave off as long as 
possible large gold drains or the necessity of drawing on 
our credit line with the IMF. Under present circumstances, 
this seems to me wrong advice, not only because this policy 
might put undue limitations on domestic monetary action, 
but also because it is not the course of true prudence 
internationally. The main issue involved, given the 
existence of the IET and the voluntary programs, is 
whether monetary policy should try to postpone what may 
well be an inevitable reflow of more of the Euro-dollar 
funds U.S. banks have been using. My own view is that the 
course of wisdom is to let this reflow of Euro-dollars 
proceed sooner rather than later. We ought to be taking 
some of the pressure while seasonal factors are favorable 
in the first half of the year, while imports are falling off 
as we hope they will be soon, and while we are still many 
months away from the necessity of changing the Federal 
Reserve note gold reserve requirement. The balance of

-35-



3/7/67

payments is still sick, and Administration policy makers 
should not have that fact disguised from them. We should 
be spreading out our reserve losses, not piling up IOU's 
to the future, lest some day an overwhelming mass of 
claims be thrown at us all at once and bring a crisis of 
confidence in the dollar. For such reasons as these a 
policy of inhibiting declines in U.S. interest rates now 
ought to be unacceptable as a balance of payments 
palliative.  

An alternative prescription for how to live through 
a time of difficulties in the balance of payments can be 
written in various ways. The advice might be to avoid 
so much bank credit expansion that barriers to outflows 
set up by the voluntary program would break down. Or, 
with a strongly expansionary monetary policy, the advice 
might be simply to slow down as soon as signs appear of 
new inflationary pressures. What advice can be given 
depends on what monetary policy is adopted. No quick 
solution of the balance of payments problem is available 

to this Committee, and its decision today should be based, 
I submit, solely on appraisal of the current domestic 
situation and judgments about the strategy and tactics 

best suited to fostering renewed economic expansion of a 
noninflationary character. I could not play down 
immediate balance of payments considerations in this way 
if a crisis of confidence in the dollar were already 
blowing up. I would not play them down if the domestic 

economy were heading toward a new boom, with growing 
pressures on capacity. But that is not the situation 
now.  

Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments 

and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning 

with Mr. Hayes, who made the following statement: 

When we met four weeks ago I commented on the low 
"visibility" of the business situation and especially on 
the apparent sharp contrast between shorter-term and 
longer-term prospects. Nothing has happened in the 

interim to diminish the uncertainties, and the contrast 
in question is, if anything, even sharper. The expansion 
appears to have slowed somewhat more than had been 
expected, probably in large part because consumer

-36-



3/7/67

spending has been even less buoyant than seemed probable 
a month ago. The January survey of consumer buying 
intentions does not suggest an early upsurge in consumer 
outlays--although it should be added that it also does 
not point to any further significant weakening.  

There is, of course, still a risk that the recent 
weakening might cumulate and bring about a general 
deterioration in the business climate. Indeed, the fact 
that inventory accumulation continued strong in January 
and that inventory-sales ratios rose is one element that 
I find worrisome. But I think the more likely develop
ment is a gradual return to more rapid economic growth 
later in the year. General business sentiment has not 
deteriorated. It seems probable that residential 
construction, which already appears to have turned the 
corner, will revive strongly. At the same time I believe 
it likely that fixed investment spending will not turn 
down but will continue to grow slowly, the uptrend of 
Government spending will continue, and consumption 
outlays will regain some of their earlier vigor, helped 

by the sizable current and prospective gains in personal 

income.  
Unemployment has remained close to its recent low 

point. There may be a tendency for corporations to hold 
on to their workers in the expectation that output will 

soon be moving up again. There is every likelihood that 

we shall be confronted with excessive wage settlements in 

the coming months, even if productivity gains should 

recover somewhat from their recent slow pace. And while 

price pressures have subsided with the slackening of 

aggregate demand, any resurgence of demand pressures in 

the fall, coupled with a cost push, could provide a climate 

conducive to renewed sharp price gains.  

Balance of payments developments, though not as 

unfavorable as in the fourth quarter of 1966, continue to 

give cause for serious concern. Excluding special trans

actions, the January liquidity deficit was possibly at a 

seasonally adjusted annual rate of nearly $2 billion, and 

preliminary February data indicate a worsening of the 

deficit. The trade surplus remains far below what is 

needed to take care of our various obligations abroad.  

We should not lose sight of the great risk to our payments 

position that would result from any resurgence of 

inflationary pressures.

-37-



3/7/67

On the credit front, I am impressed by the strong 
growth in total bank credit of the past three months. It 
has, of course, been a useful development, coming on top 
of the stagnation or decline in credit in the September
November period. While further growth would be welcome, 
there could be some risks in a long-continued expansion 
at the recent rapid pace. Much of the expansion has oc
curred in bank investments rather than loans. While the 
banks have been able to rebuild their liquidity to some 
extent, I think that most banks hope to progress further 
in this direction and therefore tend to retain a cautious 
attitude toward lending. The sluggishness of aggregate 
bank loans in February as compared with January may be 
attributable in part to the January tax speed-up 
program. Most banks in our District seem to feel that 
underlying loan demand remains quite strong, except in 
the consumer loan area; and of course current credit 

demands in the capital markets are at a very high level.  
Since our last meeting market interest rates have 

swung rather widely in response to changing expectations.  
The unwarranted fear that Federal Reserve policy might be 
tightening was pretty well dissipated about ten days ago, 
and the reversal was clinched by the announcement of the 
reduction in reserve requirements for savings and certain 

time deposits. Not unexpectedly, the latter development 
was regarded rather widely as a significant move toward 

easier money; and the effects in the capital markets were 
quite pronounced. Feeling as I do about the likelihood 
of an acceleration of economic expansion later in the 
year, with a probable intensification of inflationary 
pressures, I would hope that we would not give these 

market interest rate declines a strong further push 

through open market operations. I would like to regard 

the reserve requirement reduction as in large part a 

substitute for open market purchases that would otherwise 

have been required--although, as I have already indicated, 
it has inevitably had important psychological effects.  

I have no objection to such effects, provided they don't 

generate excessive expectations of still further easing.  
For the next four weeks I think we would do well to 

maintain about the present degree of ease in money market 

conditions, with a Federal funds rate of 4-1/2 to 5 per 

cent and a bill rate probably fluctuating somewhat under 

the discount rate. In terms of the reserve figures it is 
hard to predict what will be needed; but many of the

-38-



3/7/67 -39

reserves released by the requirement reduction may tend 
to pile up in the form of excess reserves, so that a 
moderate free reserve figure--say $50 to $150 million-
may be consistent with the money market objectives I 
have suggested. However, there are enough uncertainties 
so that the Manager will need at least the usual degree 
of flexibility. I think he should resolve doubts on the 
side of ease; but I would like to see the directive include 
the existing two-way proviso and would not push credit 
expansion too rapidly--say at anything close to the 15 per 
cent February rate--even if market interest rates should 
show signs of moderate firming.  

The staff's draft directive with alternative A as 
the second paragraph seems satisfactory. However, I think 
I could also accept alternative B if "somewhat" were 
changed to "slightly" and if the proposed one-way proviso 
were replaced by the two-way proviso of alternative A.  
I would suggest that the first paragraph include the 
clause "to combat weakening tendencies in the economy." 
Use of the term "recessionary tendencies," as Mr. Brill 
proposes, might be somewhat too alarmist under present 
circumstances.  

Mr. Francis commented that economic activity had been on a 

plateau in recent months. Government outlays, both Federal and 

local, continued to grow while the private sector recorded some 

declines. Retail sales, industrial production, and construction were 

down from their 1966 peaks, and real incomes had been rising at a 

reduced rate. Although total employment had continued to rise, the 

average workweek had declined. The situation of shortages, bottle

necks, and speculative purchases of last summer had been replaced 

by rapid involuntary buildup of inventories threatening to cause 

further cutbacks in production. Demand-pull influence on prices had

declined.



3/7/67 -40

With the advantage of hindsight, Mr. Francis said, it 

appeared that restrictive monetary actions were appropriate from 

the spring of last year to the fall. Demands for goods and 

services were in excess of the economy's ability to produce, and 

there was a pronounced rise in prices. From April to November, 

member bank reserves, demand deposits, and money declined; interest 

rates rose on balance, and the growth in the demand for goods and 

services slowed to a more nearly sustainable rate.  

In November, Mr. Francis continued, the Committee became 

concerned that monetary conditions might become too restrictive, 

especially since monetary action has a lagged effect, and a policy 

was adopted to relax the monetary restriction. At subsequent 

meetings policy resolutions moved toward greater ease. It had now 

been three months or more since the Committee undertook to achieve 

an easier policy, but it was not yet certain that it had been able 

to put such a policy into effect.  

It was true that total bank credit had increased rapidly 

since November, Mr. Francis said. But bank credit had been a very 

unreliable measure of Federal Reserve policy during the past year.  

Bank credit increased rapidly, at a 10 per cent annual rate, last 

summer from May to August. It then declined in the fall, from 

August to November, at a 2 per cent rate. But that did not mean 

that monetary policy was tighter in the fall than in the summer.



3/7/67 -41

The change reflected primarily the inability of commercial banks 

to hold large certificates of deposit after August when the rates 

they could pay were below open market rates.  

Similarly, Mr. Francis observed, the shift of bank credit 

from declining in the fall to rising in the winter was not, in and 

of itself, a measure of easier monetary policy in the winter than 

in the fall. Rather, the shift in December reflected the fact 

that with lower open market interest rates the banks were again able 

to attract and hold large certificates of deposit. In view of that 

evidence, the rate of increase of bank credit recently had not been 

a useful indicator of monetary policy or of the direction of 

monetary influence. Interest rates had declined markedly since 

November, but that might reflect a decline in the demand for loan 

funds and expectations of lower rates rather than any real 

influence on the Committee's part.  

When one deducted the increased reserves required for the 

reintermediation of the banks and for Treasury deposits, Mr. Francis 

said, one found that there had been no increase of bank reserves 

for net credit expansion from the second week of December to the 

present time. By that measure reserves were now a little higher 

than they were in last November, about the same as they were late 

last summer and early fall, and less than they were last April to 

June. The money supply did rise in the past month, but possibly



3/7/67 -42

the Committee should not give much weight to that upturn of the 

money stock if it could not see anything to support it in "reserves 

available for private demand deposits." He noted that the recent 

increase of money supply reflected in part a decrease in Treasury 

deposits and he noted that the staff expected no increase of money 

supply during March.  

Mr. Francis believed the Committee should make a concerted 

effort to get the effective bank reserves measure moving ahead 

somewhat more than was necessary to accommodate the bank reinterme

diation. That would be something the Committee had not succeeded 

in doing in the past two-and-one-half months. To that end, it 

seemed to him the Committee had to let some of the current reduction 

of reserve requirements have some real stimulative effect. The 

Committee's net dealings in Government securities should be such 

that net reserves might be as much as $300 million, the top figure 

mentioned by the staff. A bill rate substantially below the 

discount rate should be looked on with favor--possibly one as low 

as 4.15 per cent, the bottom interest rate mentioned by the staff.  

So far as total bank credit was concerned, that was so much a 

function of the varying intermediation role of the banks that the 

Committee should let it go where it would, keeping its eye on total 

reserves, net of those required for time deposits and for Treasury 

deposits.



3/7/67 -43

Mr. Francis favored alternative B of the staff's draft 

directives with the change that had been suggested in the first 

paragraph.  

Mr. Patterson reported that in the Sixth District the 

effects of the turn toward an easier monetary policy showed up more 

in evidence that the availability of funds was improving than that 

the pace of economic activity was quickening. District member banks 

were now in a substantial free reserve position and had sharply 

reduced their reliance on the discount window and borrowing from 

the Federal funds markets. Their deposits, because of growth in 

time deposits, had been rising on a seasonally adjusted basis, and 

that growth had occurred in practically all sub-areas of the 

District. However, the banks were apparently concentrating on 

rebuilding their liquidity rather than on building up their loans.  

The major exception was in construction lending, which 

picked up sharply in February at the large banks, Mr. Patterson 

said. Funds were becoming more available to mortgage bankers and 

other mortgage originators, and the net savings flow into savings 

and loan associations had improved markedly. An eventual stimulus 

to public works construction might result from the successful 

marketing of several municipal issues that had previously been 

postponed. What the latest data for the District seemed to 

indicate was that there was a strong chance that the weaknesses



3/7/67

would eventually be overcome if there was no sudden cut-off in 

the availability of funds.  

On the national scene, Mr. Patterson continued, interpreting 

the economic and financial indicators was extremely difficult, as 

the Committee knew; and, because of special circumstances, the 

Desk had had a very difficult job. Despite all the complications, 

however, the final result was an increase in bank credit, something 

that the Committee had wanted. The bank credit growth that occurred 

seemed especially appropriate in the light of the further weakening 

in private demand discussed in the current issue of the green book.  

The lowered projections of GNP discussed in the current 

green book certainly implied that conscious or unconscious tightening 

of policy was inappropriate, Mr. Patterson said. A "wait-and-see" 

policy, he was afraid, might lead to the kind of unconscious 

tightening the Committee wanted to avoid. Steps toward further 

ease seemed to be in order now. How great those steps should be 

and the way they should be measured were perplexing problems.  

Treasury financing might preclude action for a short time. However, 

by the next meeting of the Committee he would like to see that open 

market operations, together with the reduction in reserve require

ments, had supported a bank credit growth in March higher than the 

6 to 8 per cent projected in the blue book, and on the order of the 

average annual rate that had occurred since last November. He

-44-



3/7/67 -45

would hope also that there would be no upward movement in the 

structure of rates. Under those conditions, he favored alternative 

B for the directive.  

Mr. Hilkert remarked he was in the same boat with many 

observers of the economic scene who found the current and prospec

tive situation especially difficult to evaluate. That was less 

true of the Third District economy than of the national economy.  

Following a year of strong pressure on economic resources, there 

were increasing signs of slack in the economy of the Third District.  

Demand for labor had eased, resulting in a greater-than-seasonal 

increase in unemployment in the majority of the labor market areas.  

Manufacturing output and employment had dropped from fall peaks, 

and final demand showed little signs of new strength. Construction 

contracts awarded, auto registrations, and the net change in con

sumer credit outstanding were considerably below comparable periods 

of the previous year.  

In studies the Philadelphia Reserve Bank had made of the 

behavior of the local economy over the 1950's, Mr. Hilkert said, 

there was some indication of a lag behind the national economy at 

cyclical peaks, With all the attention being given currently to 

leading and coincident indicators, recent behavior of that lagging 

indicator suggested the rather frightening conclusion that the 

economy had been in a recession for some time. Although statistics



3/7/67 -46

on the national economy did not bear that out, they were not 

encouraging. The Bank's informal survey a month ago indicated 

that manufacturers were not cutting back the rate of inventory 

accumulation substantially because they expected rising sales to 

take care of excessive stocks. Data for January indicated that 

manufacturers, in fact, added to inventories at a faster rate than 

in the fourth quarter. There was now increasing doubt whether the 

expectation of rising sales would materialize. The results of the 

survey now appeared in a different light, therefore, and suggested 

that the longer the adjustment was postponed, the more serious it 

would become.  

On the other hand, Mr. Hilkert continued, information about 

a second key uncertainty--housing--led him to a position of mild 

optimism. Lenders in the Third District believed that the supply 

of money for mortgages would increase somewhat within the next 

ninety days. Commitments had been worked off, so most institutions 

were in a relatively strong position to expand mortgages if 

demand picked up and if the trend of current savings flows continued.  

But although lenders' attitudes had improved in the past few weeks, 

a watch-and-wait attitude still prevailed.  

Because information on demand was not best gathered from 

lenders, Mr. Hilkert said, the Bank had extended its inquiries to 

realtors and builders. Here the response had been more encouraging.



3/7/67 -47

A number of realtors had indicated that demand was stronger than 

usual for this time of year. New listings were still low, however, 

possibly because potential sellers were discouraged by costs to 

them and recent terms of sale. Realtors believed more listings 

would come quickly once sellers learned about the demand.  

Of course, Mr. Hilkert added, the sample was small and it 

was still very early in the season. But the results suggested that 

pressures of demand might become strong enough to overcome lenders' 

caution. Given an ample supply of savings--and the selective 

nature of the reduction in reserve requirements should help in that 

respect--the outlook for housing was brighter.  

Mr. Hilkert thought the heavy flow of new issues in the 

corporate and municipal markets--despite the problems it had caused 

in the past few weeks--was also a favorable sign, even though watered 

by the greatly reduced volume of private placements. To the extent 

such financing needs could be accommodated easily, the possibilities 

that an inventory adjustment would have serious repercussions on 

capital spending might be reduced. Again, the reduction in reserve 

requirements should help in easing congestion in those markets.  

In Mr. Hilkert's judgment, open market policy for the next 

four weeks should reinforce and sustain the effects of the reduction 

in reserve requirements. Expectations had been altered substantially 

and open market policy should confirm those changes in expectations.



3/7/67 -48

If that should require fairly liberal net free reserves, he would 

have no objection. If it should mean permitting another strong 

increase in bank credit, that would be all to the good. And if, 

as he would hope, market rates continued to decline, it might 

later be necessary to make a technical adjustment in the discount 

rate.  

Mr. Hilkert favored alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Hickman recalled that at the Committee's last meeting 

he had voted for a policy of "no change," shaded toward ease, partly 

because of the imminence of Treasury financing and partly to give 

the economy time to catch up with financial developments. He 

agreed fully with the directive as adopted, and with the intent 

to resolve doubts on the side of ease.  

Having said that, Mr. Hickman continued, he had to say that 

market developments following the meeting departed sharply from 

what he thought was the Committee's intent, although in the last 

few days the market had again moved in the intended direction. In 

fact, the reaction to the reduction in reserve requirements demon

strated that the market was waiting for a signal from the System, 

which up to that point it had failed to provide. The tighter 

money market that developed throughout most of February upset the 

capital market, and largely reversed the easier tone that the 

Committee had sought to foster in preceding months.



3/7/67

There was a growing awareness that the economy was in a 

precarious situation, Mr. Hickman said. As the green book noted, 

and as he had been attempting to convey to the Committee for 

several months, weaknesses and imbalances in the economy were 

pervasive and deep-seated. Indeed, it was now an open question 

whether the economy was approaching--or had already past--the 

upper turning point in the business cycle. At the present juncture 

it was imperative that the Committee do all that it could promptly 

to prevent weakening tendencies in the economy from cumulating 

into a general downward spiral. Heavy inventories, coupled with 

the unfavorable outlook for consumer takings and business spending, 

increased the likelihood of sizable inventory adjustments in the 

near term. Thus far, inventory adjustments had been minimal--but 

the portents were ominous.  

Mr. Hickman went on to say that it was thus clear, to him 

at least, that the Committee had to try to make up for lost time, 

and do more than it had done to stimulate final demand. Because of 

distributed lags in the effects of monetary policy on output and 

employment, the Committee knew only too well that the economy could 

not be turned on a dime. If it hoped to achieve anything like the 

second-half gains in economic activity envisaged by the Council of 

Economic Advisers, additional monetary stimulus should have been 

provided in February, and had to be provided now. If the Committee

-49-



3/7/67 -50

failed to head off weaknesses in the economy, it would be faced with 

a massive, and perhaps unmanageable, task later on.  

Thus, Mr. Hickman supported alternative B of the staff's 

draft directives with the first paragraph modified as proposed by 

Mr. Brill. That alternative clearly called for greater ease. As 

for the targets, he would move fairly promptly towards free reserves 

of between $200 and $300 million, as suggested in the blue book, 

which presumably would keep the bill rate and Federal funds rate 

at or below the discount rate most of the time. He would also 

attempt to nudge long-term bond yields downward, in an effort to 

enlarge the flow of funds to the mortgage market, although that 

would be difficult because of the large calendar. If the System 

had any influence in the area of fiscal policy--which he doubted-

he thought it should press for prompt reinstatement of both the 

investment tax credit and accelerated depreciation, and should 

encourage an early announcement that the proposed surtax on cor

porate and personal incomes would be dropped until such time as 

the economy appeared to be overheating.  

Mr. Brimmer commented that he would like to endorse much of 

what Mr. Hickman had said. He had followed open market operations 

in the past month on almost a day-to-day basis and, while he certainly 

would want to commend the Manager's vigorous efforts to cope with 

market pressures, he thought that the outcome for much of the period



3/7/67 -51

was opposite to that which the Committee had intended to encourage.  

At the previous meeting he had joined the majority in voting 

favorably on the directive after the staff's original draft was 

modified to indicate an intention of leaning toward ease, and he had 

hoped that market conditions would become somewhat easier. Now, 

with the unfortunate outcome, he thought the Committee had to make 

up the ground that had been lost.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed completely with Mr. Hersey's remarks on 

the balance of payments. The payments problem was serious and, if 

anything, it was likely to get worse. The question facing the 

Committee was how to mesh appropriately its international and 

domestic objectives, and he saw nothing in the short run that would 

suggest a course of action with respect to the balance of payments 

other than that Mr. Hersey had suggested. It appeared that the 

voluntary foreign credit restraint program had been making a useful 

contribution and would continue to do so. There seemed to be little 

prospect for a rapid revival of direct investment outflows. The 

current reflow of bank credit to foreigners was not indicative of 

what could be expected over the course of the year, and he would 

not be averse to the System's looking at its program in that area 

to see what might be done to dampen a later outflow of bank credit 

if that should prove necessary. The outlook for Congressional 

approval of the proposed extension and strengthening of the interest



3/7/67 -52

equalization tax appeared promising, and he thought that such a 

strengthening could be counted on for help. He certainly would 

not like to see the Committee try to head off the reflow of 

funds from American banks to the Euro-dollar market. That reflow 

had been expected, and it would be undesirable to hamper domestic 

policy by an effort to head it off.  

With respect to the domestic situation, Mr. Brimmer 

continued, the only question in his mind was when, in retrospect, 

the National Bureau of Economic Research would date the downturn.  

They might decide that the turning point occurred late in the 

first quarter or early in the second. He agreed completely with 

Mr. Brill that it was time for the Committee to take note of 

recessionary tendencies, and he would endorse Mr. Brill's proposed 

language for the first paragraph of the directive. He saw nothing 

to indicate remaining autonomous strength in the private sector.  

Plant and equipment spending might, in fact, be lower than 

Mr. Partee had suggested; at this stage of the cycle successive 

revisions of capital spending estimates were likely to be down

ward, not upward as during an expansion. The earlier private 

surveys suggesting increases in fixed investment in 1967 on the 

order of 6 or 8 per cent should be discounted. He agreed with 

the staff's expectations for consumer spending, and he did not 

think the Committee should count on growth in defense spending to



3/7/67 -53

compensate for the weakening in the private sector. Personally, 

he foresaw a plant utilization rate in the low 80's, and an 

unemployment rate possibly as high as 4.5 per cent. In sum, he 

felt that expansion was not simply weakening, but that the economy 

was probably on the verge of a recession if not already in one.  

As to the discount rate, Mr. Brimmer favored encouraging 

the Federal Reserve Banks to consider possible action. He agreed 

with Mr. Brill that the discount rate should be reduced soon and 

that the problem was primarily one of timing. He favored alter

native B of the staff drafts for the directive, with Mr. Brill's 

suggested change in the first paragraph.  

Mr. Maisel commented that he fully agreed that the economy 

was at a point of weakness. It was clear that the almost flat 

trend in real GNP projected for the first half of the year would 

mean a decrease in industrial production and an increase in 

unemployment. If such developments occurred they were almost 

certain to result in lower spending and production than the 

Council had projected for the second half of the year, and a 

further increase in unemployment. That meant that monetary policy 

should be more aggressive, particularly to permit long-term 

interest rates, including mortgage rates, to fall toward their 

levels in previous years.



3/7/67 -54

Mr. Maisel said that he would not engage in additional 

post-mortems on market developments since the preceding meeting.  

The main lesson was that the kind of market move that had devel

oped three weeks ago should not recur in the coming period; 

market expectations of easing had to be confirmed.  

Mr. Maisel thought that reserves should be furnished 

aggressively. Given the country-wide distribution of the effects 

of the reduction in reserve requirements, he would assume there 

was a need for large net free reserves--in the $200-$300 million 

range. He favored a Federal funds rate fluctuating below the 

discount rate, and continued declines in the bill rate. He 

agreed with Mr. Brill that the rate of expansion of bank credit 

projected under those conditions was not unduly high; in fact, 

the growth in required reserves projected for the next six weeks 

was a good deal lower than experienced earlier. He would like 

to see bank credit continue to rise at a rate at or above the 

average rate since last November, and he assumed that that might 

be possible as a result of the increase in free reserves that he 

favored.  

Mr. Maisel concluded by saying he thought that a discount 

rate change should be considered. However, he would hope that a 

reduction would be delayed until the bill rate had moved lower, so 

that the action would confirm rather than lead market developments.



3/7/67 -55

That condition might well be fulfilled by the time of the Committee's 

next meeting. He supported alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Daane said he hoped the Committee would not undertake 

to tilt against windmills. He thought that monetary policy at 

this juncture could not stem a wage-cost push reflecting the 

inadequacies of fiscal and incomes policies of the previous period.  

Secondly, he thought the Committee could not stem an inventory adjust

ment that reflected the backwash from the earlier overheating of 

the economy. Whatever one might wish, he did not think that was 

feasible--certainly not in a short period. Third, he thought that 

at this juncture the Committee should not try to tilt quixotically 

against a sick balance of payments; monetary policy alone could 

not effect a cure, 

However, Mr. Daane continued, he agreed with Mr. Brill 

that the Committee certainly should do all that it could do, and 

had to do, with the instruments at its disposal at this juncture.  

The main problem, as he saw it, was to sort out the psychological 

and expectational aspects of both the economic and financial envi

ronments. It was particularly necessary to aid in restoring 

confidence in economic prospects.  

Mr. Daane said that, like others, he had been disturbed 

by the fact that market developments in the recent period had led 

observers to conclude that monetary policy had stopped trending



3/7/67 -56

toward ease. It was important that the market should not again 

have any doubt about the posture of System policy; it should be 

made perfectly clear, as it had been in recent days, that the 

System's posture was one of continuing ease. As Mr. Brill had 

noted, however, the key question concerned the rate at which the 

Committee should move toward ease. He (Mr. Daane) thought the 

Committee also had to guard against the risk of deluding the 

market and generating expectations that outran the Committee's 

intentions, as had occurred earlier in the year.  

On that basis, Mr. Daane said, he would go along with 

much of Mr. Brill's analysis. He was disturbed, however, by the 

latter's suggestion that the phrase "to combat recessionary 

tendencies" be included in the first paragraph of the directive, 

because it suggested that monetary policy alone could stop an 

inventory recession in its tracks. He would prefer instead to 

say that it was the Committee's policy "to foster such money and 

credit conditions, including bank credit growth, as may contribute 

to a continuation of economic expansion and help to prevent any 

weakening tendencies in the economy from cumulating." That 

objective was one the Committee could accomplish; he did not 

think it should imply in its directive that it could do something 

it could not.



3/7/67

Mr. Daane leaned toward alternative B for the second 

paragraph. However, he suggested a revised formulation reading, 

"To implement this policy against the background of the current 

reductions in reserve requirements, System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 

a view to continuing to ease moderately, but operations shall be 

modified as necessary to further moderate any apparently signif

icant deviations of bank credit from current expectations." He 

thought that language carried the appropriate sense of continuing 

to move toward ease but of not generating expectations going 

beyond what was intended. He would not change the discount rate 

at this juncture.  

Mr. Mitchell observed that seldom had previous speakers 

at Committee meetings said so little with which he disagreed as 

they had today. Accordingly, he had little to add. He endorsed 

the staff's analysis and most of the comments that had been made 

about it. In his judgment the main objective of monetary policy 

now should be to change bank lending policies as quickly as possible.  

The System had already accomplished a good deal in that connection, 

in that banks' liquidity desires had been largely met. But their 

lending policies had not yet changed to any significant extent; 

and until those policies were changed drastically the contribution 

of monetary policy would be very limited.

-57-



Mr. Mitchell agreed with Mr. Hickman that the Committee 

had to act quickly. Developments in the next month or two were 

already water over the dam, but the Committee could have some 

effect on events of the summer and fall if it did not back and 

fill now. He favored a much more aggressive policy, limited 

only as necessary to avoid the psychological impact that would 

result from an impression that the Federal Reserve was deeply 

worried about the economic outlook. He would not want to move 

so aggressively as to create that impression.  

With respect to operating targets, Mr. Mitchell agreed 

with Mr. Francis that the Committee should get the money supply 

growing, and on some basis other than shifts out of Treasury 

balances; the money supply should grow because reserves were 

being aggressively supplied. In that connection he noted that 

the credit proxy chart in the blue book seemed to indicate the 

absence of any significant growth in February. As far as bill 

rates and free reserves were concerned, he would let them go to 

whatever levels were needed to accomplish the desired expansion 

of the aggregates. He thought a fairly low bill rate would be 

required--perhaps around 4 per cent--but he would go along with 

a 3-1/2 per cent rate if necessary or, for that matter, with a 

4-1/2 per cent rate; the bill rate should be treated strictly as 

a residual.

3/7/67 -58-



3/7/67

As to the directive, Mr. Mitchell said, he thought Mr. Daane's 

objections to Mr. Brill's proposed phrase for the first paragraph 

could be met by saying it was the Committee's policy to combat "the 

effects of" recessionary tendencies. He favored alternative B for 

the second paragraph, but would delete the word "somewhat" before 

"easier conditions in the money market." In his judgment easier 

conditions were definitely needed and the qualification was undesir

able.  

Mr. Shepardson said that, like Mr. Mitchell, he agreed 

essentially with the analyses that had been presented thus far.  

He agreed particularly with the inference he drew from Mr. Hersey's 

remarks that a balanced approach was necessary to the problems 

facing the Committee.  

In the present situation, Mr. Shepardson continued, it 

seemed to him that there were grounds for moving toward an easier 

monetary situation. He had been disturbed for a considerable time 

over what seemed to be a reluctance to act vigorously against 

excessive rates of economic expansion. The Committee had tended 

to move too little and too late, so that it had found itself faced 

with the kind of severe adjustment that had occurred last summer.  

Two wrongs did not make a right, and he did not favor moving too 

slowly when ease was required simply because earlier moves toward 

firmness had been too slow. In sum, he agreed that there should



3/7/67 -60

be some further easing at this time. He would hope, however, 

that the Committee would arrive at a point where it would be just 

as aggressive in restraining economic excesses as some members 

thought it should be in acting against adjustments in the other 

direction that in many cases seemed to him to be healthy.  

Mr. Shepardson liked Mr. Daane's suggestion for the first 

paragraph of the directive. He agreed with Mr. Hayes that about 

the same results could be accomplished with either alternative A 

or B for the second paragraph if the language of B was modified 

somewhat. He would not be opposed to alternative B if it were 

tempered as Mr. Daane had suggested.  

Mr. Wayne said that to conserve time he would omit all 

reference to District business conditions. In general, he agreed 

with the analysis of national developments given in the green 

book. The staff comments this morning were indeed sobering.  

On the policy for the period ahead, Mr. Wayne favored a 

distinct but gradual easing of credit conditions. The major 

problem was to achieve an orderly and gradual movement. In the 

turbulent conditions of the past two months, largely because of 

volatile expectational factors the market had swung too far, first 

in one direction and then in the other. No monetary policy could 

be effective in such conditions, which necessarily left both bor

rowers and lenders uncertain and confused.



3/7/67 -61

Mr. Wayne noted that he had participated in the daily 

telephone conference call during the past month, and had been 

impressed by the unreliability of the projections, by the wide 

fluctuations that had occurred in market conditions, and by the 

difficulties that the Desk had faced from day to day in trying 

to carry out the terms of the directive without at the same time 

engendering further volatile expectations in the market. He had 

never seen a more difficult period for open market operations, 

and he thought that the Desk had performed quite well.  

As Mr. Holmes had noted, Mr. Wayne continued, the Treasury 

had authorized the Desk to inform the market fully about the 

character of the massive operations that were carried out in the 

recent period for the trust accounts. He would suggest that the 

Committee might give careful thought to the fact that the Desk's 

explanations had a highly desirable effect on the market's ability 

to absorb the operations without undesirable repercussions. He 

was not suggesting that explanations of what was being done should 

be made to the market each day. He was merely noting an experience 

in which large operations, which could have led to undesirably 

sharp movements in the market, had in fact been handled smoothly 

by fully informing the market; and suggesting that the Committee 

might give some thought to following such a policy if similar 

conditions arose in the future.



3/7/67 -62

In resisting the rapid upsurge of rates in February, 

Mr. Wayne observed, the Desk had found it necessary to supply 

larger amounts of reserves than might have been anticipated.  

The banks apparently used all of those additional amounts to 

increase their investments, partly in an effort to rebuild their 

liquidity. In addition, borrowing had reached a very low level 

and banks would not feel the full effect of the reduction in 

reserve requirements until next week. The Treasury balance also 

had been reduced to a nominal amount and the Treasury might borrow 

from the FederaL Reserve within the week. All of those devel

opments provided fuel for a further easing of rates, which was 

desirable. If possible the Committee should avoid the development 

of expectational factors which might trigger a stampede in either 

direction.  

To summarize, Mr. Wayne said, he favored a definite move 

toward ease but with safeguards to prevent it from getting out of 

hand. To accomplish that, it seemed to him that the Desk should 

place primary emphasis on interest rates and be prepared to see 

wide fluctuations in free reserves. The goal should be to hold 

the bill rate and the Federal funds rate moderately below the 

discount rate with the expectation that that would exert downward 

pressure on longer rates. In the process, he would hope that the 

growth of the bank credit proxy would be above the 6 to 8 per cent



3/7/67 -63

figure mentioned in the blue book but somewhat below the rates 

of January and February.  

Mr. Wayne agreed with Mr. Mitchell that a change in the 

direction of ease in the credit practices of the commercial banks 

was badly needed. Some further reduction in the prime rate might 

be necessary as an overt move to achieve that result. If the 

easier policy contemplated by alternative B for the second par

agraph of the directive as modified by Mr. Daane--which he favored-

did not lead to downward adjustments at commercial banks during 

this month, a reduction of 1/4 per cent in the discount rate would 

be appropriate. As of now, he would hope that no change in the 

discount rate would be required in the next four weeks.  

Mr. Clay commented that recent evidence concerning the 

performance of the national economy had not been particularly 

encouraging. Unseasonably severe weather in important marketing 

and production areas undoubtedly had taken its toll. Nevertheless, 

recent news on the economy's performance had raised considerable 

question about the strength of the economy in the months ahead.  

Certainly the prospects were less encouraging than they had 

appeared a month ago.  

The economy continued with many cross-currents, Mr. Clay 

observed, and generalizations for the total economy were by no 

means unambiguous. One of the seeming contradictions was the



3/7/67 -64

continuing strength in employment and the marked shortage of 

qualified labor despite the slow progress of economic expansion.  

Adjustments in labor inputs had been made, however, by reducing 

the length of the workweek. Moreover, total employment tends 

to lag other activity measures, especially when uncertainty 

about the future suggests to business firms the advisability of 

holding together a qualified labor force.  

In view of the current state of the economy, further 

monetary action to encourage economic expansion appeared to 

Mr. Clay to be in order. That judgment was underscored by the 

probability of further deterioration in business prospects. The 

recent turnaround in short-term interest rates to lower levels 

had been encouraging, but action to further ease interest rates, 

particularly long-term rates, was called for. While the large 

volume of financing was an important factor stiffening long-term 

interest rates, monetary policy action could be a moderating 

force in those financial markets.  

Such a policy, Mr. Clay said, would embrace further easing 

of money markets and thus a move toward lower levels of interest 

rates. It presumably would also involve a larger rate of increase 

in bank credit in March than that projected by the staff on the 

basis of current monetary policy. Obviously, the implementation 

of policy should take into account the availability of reserve



3/7/67 -65

funds resulting from the reductions in reserve requirements on 

time and savings deposits.  

Alternative B of the draft economic policy directives 

was satisfactory to Mr. Clay for the period ahead, essentially 

in line with the relevant discussion in the blue book.  

Mr. Scanlon reported that February brought additional 

evidence in the Seventh District that demand pressures on avail

able manpower, materials, and facilities were easing. Development 

of pessimistic attitudes on the part of businessmen and consumers 

was spreading. With retail sales about level, total business 

inventories relatively high and rising rapidly, large user 

holdings of recently purchased long-lasting goods, and continued 

upward pressure on costs, he agreed with those who felt the 

economy could be entering a period of substantial adjustment in 

both the rate of growth and the mix of private demand.  

At present, Mr. Scanlon said, the only manufacturing 

activities in the Seventh District that showed good prospects of 

continued expansion were farm machinery, electrical generating 

and transmission equipment, defense equipment, and color television.  

In the latter case a shift of product mix, placing greater emphasis 

on the lower-priced sets, was in process. Recent sharp declines 

in orders for such capital equipment as machine tools, presses, 

and railroad equipment reflected, in part, the growing view that



3/7/67 -66

the investment tax credit would be restored before the end of the 

year, perhaps before midyear.  

Adverse weather conditions, of course, had had a partic

ularly severe impact on construction activity, Mr. Scanlon noted.  

Permits for apartments in the Chicago area in January were the 

lowest for any January since 1959 and permits for homes were the 

lowest since January 1945. But experts in the area believed the 

home building picture was certain to improve rapidly. Mortgage 

credit terms were easing and rates on new loans were down as much 

as 50 basis points from last year's highs. Reports of layoffs in 

various hard and soft goods lines continued, but large increases 

from last year in new claims for unemployment compensation had 

been confined largely to the automotive centers. Help-wanted 

advertising had declined in recent months after a long increase, 

but remained at a relatively high volume. Reserve positions of 

major Chicago banks had become more comfortable in the past month 

and none of them was currently borrowing at the discount window.  

In light of the further weakening of the over-all economic 

outlook, it appeared wise to Mr. Scanlon to continue to provide 

reserves at a rapid rate to accommodate any current desires of 

financial institutions and other businesses to rebuild liquidity.  

He believed the current discount rate was appropriate for the 

current period, but agreed with those who thought the System should



3/7/67 -67

consider a move shortly. He favored alternative B of the draft 

directives, as amended by Mr. Daane.  

Mr. Strothman said that he needed to spend little time 

in commenting on economic developments in the Ninth District, 

for the pattern had been essentially similar to that of the 

nation as a whole. Modest differences might be noted in some 

components, but since those were truly modest and were to some 

extent evidenced by fragmentary data, he was left on balance 

with the conclusion that what was good for the United States was 

good for the Ninth District, and vice versa.  

The economic outlook of recent weeks, and now, seemed to 

the Minneapolis Reserve Bank to call for modestly greater monetary 

ease, Mr. Strothman continued. Consequently, he had welcomed the 

change in reserve requirements and would hope to see it confirmed 

to market participants as an overt move toward greater ease. He 

was apprehensive lest the reserve requirement change be dismissed 

as simply a device for supplying seasonal reserve needs. The 

maintenance of consistently positive free reserves would seem to 

be necessary.  

However, Mr. Strothman said, he would hasten to add that 

his inclination was to focus somewhat more sharply on market 

interest rates than on free reserves. He would wish to see a 

continuing modest easing of money market rates. Although at



3/7/67 -68

present some emphasis might be placed on the word "modest," he 

rather expected that, as the near-term future unfolded, short

term rates generally would find levels significantly below 4-1/2 

per cent, and that in the not too far-term future, a discount 

rate change might be called for. That, of course, was only a 

suggestion of the need for serious thought to the possibility 

of a discount rate change. In offering it he was perhaps swayed 

by some skepticism that further significant reduction in the 

world level of interest rates could be achieved without a signal 

from the United States.  

Mr. Strothman favored alternative B of the draft directives.  

Mr. Swan said he would make two brief observations about 

economic conditions in the Twelfth District. First, the strength 

in the aggregate employment figures was somewhat paradoxical in 

light of certain other aspects of the District economy. The 

contrast was particularly marked in January when a rise in employ

ment, seasonally adjusted, brought the sharpest drop in the 

unemployment rate in some time--from 5 to 4-1/2 per cent. The 

January figure was the lowest in eight months. On the other hand, 

seasonally adjusted private housing starts, which rose 18 per cent 

in the rest of the country in January, dropped below the low levels 

of November and December in the Twelfth District. If housing



3/7/67 -69

starts were rounding the corner nationally, the Twelfth District 

was somewhat behind.  

Mr. Swan went on to say that he would certainly favor 

some further easing in view of the prospects for the economy 

that had been discussed this morning and in view of the situation 

that developed in financial markets in the last month. The reduc

tion in reserve requirements had been particularly timely in terms 

of its influence on market expectations. As had been mentioned, 

one of the Committee's aims in the period ahead should be to 

confirm market expectations that that action was not intended 

simply as an alternative to open market operations as a means of 

supplying reserves, but rather to add significantly more reserves.  

At the same time, like Mr. Mitchell he would want to stop short 

of the point at which observers would believe that the System was 

overly concerned about the outlook. In any case, he favored free 

reserves of $200-$250 million and somewhat lower bill rates and 

Federal funds rates through the next four weeks. He hoped that a 

discount rate decrease would not be found necessary during that 

period. While a discount rate change might have a direct effect 

on bank lending attitudes, a preliminary review of the results 

of the recent lending practices survey in the Twelfth District 

indicated that some change had already occurred in such attitudes.



3/7/67 -70

Obviously, Mr. Swan said, he favored alternative B for 

the second paragraph of the directive. For the last sentence of 

the first paragraph, he could accept either Mr. Daane's proposed 

language or Mr. Hayes' suggestion that the term "weakening tend

encies" be substituted for the term "recessionary tendencies" in 

the phrase Mr. Brill had proposed.  

Mr. Irons observed that economic conditions in the Eleventh 

District were following the national pattern closely. There had 

been weakening in various sectors of the District economy, including 

retail trade, construction, and industrial production. Rising 

defense expenditures, however, were offsetting the weakness in 

private spending to some degree. The agricultural situation was 

not as satisfactory as it had been earlier, partly because of 

weather conditions and partly because of price developments.  

District banks were more liquid than some months ago, 

Mr. Irons said. However, he thought more time would be required 

for the banks to reach a position that they would regard as 

adequate; they continued to recall with concern the extremely 

illiquid position in which they had found themselves last summer.  

Their concern with liquidity might be one factor explaining the 

composition of the recent rise in bank credit. Certainly the 

larger banks in the Eleventh District were relying much less on 

borrowings, both in the Federal funds market and from the Reserve



3/7/67 -71

Bank. The volume of discounts at the Dallas Bank had been neg

ligible recently, with no large banks coming to the window. Only 

a few small country banks with seasonal needs were borrowing, 

District banks also were less ready buyers of Federal funds; while 

they remained net purchasers, the volume was small. Loan demand 

had been strong recently, but it was not frantic, as had been the 

case earlier.  

Mr. Irons said he had found the staff's forthright analysis 

of the national economy to be quite helpful. As to policy, the 

reduction in reserve requirements had been interpreted by bankers 

and others in the Eleventh District as a clear indication of an 

overt move toward greater ease. For a while prior to that action 

there had been some feeling of uncertainty as to whether the 

easing that occurred earlier was being continued, or whether a 

firmer policy was creeping back. That uncertainty was dispelled 

by the Board's move. He thought the System now should avoid 

confusing the market; its open market operations should not be 

inconsistent with that overt signal of ease.  

Accordingly, Mr. Irons favored alternative B for the 

directive. He thought emphasis in the coming period should be 

more on interest rates than on the level of free reserves, and he 

would prefer to see the credit proxy rise faster than projected 

in the blue book. In his judgment, a Federal funds rate in the



3/7/67 -72

neighborhood of 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 per cent, a bill rate of about 

4.25 to 4.30 per cent, and free reserves possibly ranging around 

$200 million would not be an inappropriate alignment. He would 

not favor immediate action on the discount rate but, depending 

on conditions, the System might well be giving thought to such 

a step by the time of the next meeting. Like a previous speaker, 

he would prefer to act on the discount rate at a time when market 

rates had fallen further rather than to take an anticipatory action.  

Mr. Ellis complimented Messrs. Partee, Brill and Hersey on 

their persuasiveness but added that, as would become obvious from 

his remarks, he had not fully acquired the sense of gloom that 

wove through the green book and their discussion. He suspected 

that resulted partially from looking at a region which did not 

depend heavily on automobile production and had not been hard hit 

by heavy storms this winter, and did feel the impact of continuing 

heavy defense ordering.  

For example, Mr. Ellis continued, a recent article in the 

press contained a dire prediction of downturn in the textile 

industry. The Boston Reserve Bank's survey of the New England 

portion of that industry suggested that their capital outlays 

would hold close to 1966 levels, which were 14 per cent above 1965 

outlays. Reporting firms expected their 1967 sales to hold at 

1966 levels. Manhours in the region's textile industry rose



3/7/67 -73

(seasonally adjusted) in January and the production index held 

at the December level. In the past three weeks seven regional 

firms received over $7 million in defense orders and the Defense 

Department had announced intentions to buy 10.6 million yards 

of wool cloth this year. He concluded that the forecast for the 

regional textile industry was not bleak for 1967.  

On a more general level, Mr. Ellis said, the Reserve 

Bank's capital expenditures survey of New England manufacturers 

tended to support the recent McGraw-Hill estimate. With the 

sample presently not completed, he anticipated the forecast for 

1967 would fall in the plus 6 to 10 per cent area. Only one firm 

in ten looked for sales to drop this year, and the expected 

increases averaged out to 10 per cent.  

By virtue of $60 million of dividend credits, deposit 

balances at the District's 80 mutual savings banks increased by 

$52 million in January, Mr. Ellis noted. Last year the gain was 

only $24 million. Their real estate loans increased only $8 mil

lion in January, compared with $35 million last year. They were 

still seeking to rebuild their cash positions before resuming 

aggressive lending. The Reserve Bank's monthly survey of the cash 

flow and commitments activities of the insurance companies revealed 

about the same type of improvement. The January increase in 

policy loans was below the average increase for the closing months



3/7/67 -74

of 1966 but higher than the normal monthly increases of past 

years. Total mortgages were staying unchanged but new commit

ments on securities had turned up materially--from a very low 

1966 level.  

In evaluating economic trends to be affected by monetary 

policy, Mr. Ellis emerged with a conviction that the underlying 

position was still one of continued strength camouflaged by an 

inventory "situation" and further confused by an automobile 

"situation." If the full impact of slowed sales and production 

of autos could be successfully identified and subtracted, he 

thought one would find the remaining components of the industrial 

production index would still be expanding.  

Of course, Mr. Ellis said, there was little point to such 

an exercise unless there was some reason for anticipating that 

the present fact of slowed auto sales and general retail sales 

might be reversed. Here he came to a point on which Mr. Mitchell 

had already commented. The green book said that "the estimated 

levels of personal and disposable income have been revised upward 

appreciably for the first quarter." But, pressing further, the 

green book emphasized that the first quarter increase in dispos

able income of $10.5 billion would be associated with a rise of 

only about $3.5 billion in consumer spending, with a consequent 

rise in the savings rate to 7 per cent where it was projected to



3/7/67 -75

hold through the first half. He still found such a projection 

difficult to accept. It would seem to him more logical to 

anticipate that the savings rate would return to more traditional 

levels, that consumers would spend a more traditional portion of 

a sharply rising income, and that consumer spending would be 

counted along with rising Government outlays as a strong and 

rising demand component of GNP. Accordingly, he ended up antic

ipating that the first and second quarter GNP gains would exceed 

the $5 billion now projected by the staff.  

Mr. Ellis felt that a monetary policy in harmony with that 

type of economic projection, and recognizing the built-in aspects 

of cost-push inflation now at work, would seek to provide reserves 

liberally--but would avoid such rapid credit expansion as to add 

demand-pull price pressures to those already at work. Viewed in 

retrospect, the Committee might properly credit monetary policy 

since November with such a stance. Bank credit had been expanding 

at a 10.7 per cent annual rate and money supply, narrowly defined, 

had increased at a 6.2 per cent rate. He had no apologies for the 

rate of nonborrowed reserve creation of 21 per cent in February.  

As to Mr. Mitchell's observation regarding the movement of the 

bank credit proxy in February, he noted that a table in the blue 

book showed a rise of $3 billion in that month. Perhaps there 

was an error in the chart to which Mr. Mitchell had referred.



3/7/67 -76

Looking ahead, Mr. Ellis continued, the Committee might 

anticipate some further stimulation from the recent cut in 

reserve requirements and the easier posture indicated to the 

market by a switch last month to a record of net positive free 

reserves averaging $48 million. There was ample evidence that 

banks were prepared to utilize the reserves the Committee made 

available. It would be surprising indeed if the current projec

tions for a 6 - 8 per cent gain for March in the bank credit 

proxy were not substantially exceeded, at least to match the 

cumulative rate of 10.7 per cent that had been achieved since 

November 16, 1966.  

The competition for funds in the market for the next few 

months was likely to become intense, Mr. Ellis said. The record 

corporate calendar faced the prospect of competing with Government 

sales of participation certificates. In that atmosphere an attempt 

to bolster housing by pushing substantial funds into the mortgage 

market via commercial banks might well result in leading the 

Committee to push reserve creation beyond safe limits. Construc

tion employment in the latest data was within 4 per cent of the 

all-time peak reached in March of last year. It was difficult to 

conceive that the housing industry could be restored to its 

earlier peak levels without developing severe strain on real 

resources. In that situation, it would seem wise to avoid casting 

monetary policy principally with such an objective in mind.



All of that led Mr. Ellis to the conclusion that the 

Committee need not make substantial further moves of policy at 

this time. The reserve requirement reduction had spoken for the 

System for now, and expectations should not be overly stimulated.  

Either alternative A of the draft directives, or alternative B as 

modified by Mr. Hayes, would seem appropriate for the next few 

weeks.  

Mr. Robertson made the following statement: 

I can be quite brief this morning, for our choice, 
as I see it, is fairly clear. I believe we must direct 
open market policy toward further ease. As a practical 
matter, we need to do this in order to carry through the 
easing atmosphere created by our reserve requirement 
reduction. The credit climate that has developed in 
the wake of that action seems salutary to me, particu
larly after the unfortunate tightening episode of 
previous weeks. But to preserve and extend this better 
atmosphere requires that a significant part of the 
required reserves released be left with the banks to 
encourage more ample credit availability, rather than 
being mopped up promptly by offsetting open market opera
tions. This is particularly true on this occasion, when 
a sizable part of the reserve cut accrues to banks that 
may be slow to put their excess reserves to work.  

Operationally, this means allowing free reserves 
to increase substantially during the weeks immediately 
ahead--and allowing them to increase enough to keep 
central money market conditions on a gradually easing 
trend all through the coming tax payment period.  

How the banking aggregates might behave in these 
circumstances is more than ordinarily conjectural, as 
already has been suggested in the comments here this 
morning. My own view is that we should be more sensitive 
to shortfalls in bank credit expansion during this period 
than to overshoots in excess of projections. This is 
fundamentally because I think the economy is in the 
process of a difficult transition from a period of

3/7/67 -77-



3/7/67 -78

excessive demand pressures to a period of sustainable 
growth. And I want bank credit to be amply available 
so that the transition can be accomplished with a 
minimum of loss in potential output--and preferably, 
of course, without any. I am basically bullish rather 
than bearish as to our ability to work out of this 
adjustment without having to endure a full-fledged 
recession, but I want to be sure that monetary condi
tions are a constructive influence rather than a drag 
on that adjustment.  

With these views in mind, I would be in favor of 
directive alternative B essentially as drafted by the 
staff, and I would have in mind about the kind of 
money market and reserve conditions associated with 
that alternative in the blue book. Given the attitude 
toward bank credit expansion to which I have already 
subscribed, I could vote for the one-way proviso 
clause contained in the staff draft but I would prefer 
the usual two-way proviso clause with the understanding 
that deviations on the upside would have to be a good 
deal larger to be interpreted as "significant" than 
would deviations on the downside.  

Mr. Robertson added that he favored Mr. Brill's suggested 

change in the final sentence of the first paragraph. Unlike 

Mr. Daane, he thought that saying it was the Committee's policy to 

"combat" recessionary tendencies did not imply that the Committee 

thought it could control such tendencies. He would suggest a 

revision in the latter part of that sentence, however. Rather 

than indicating that it was the Committee's policy to foster condi

tions conducive to progress toward reasonable balance of payments 

equilibrium, he would prefer to conclude the sentence with the 

phrase, "while recognizing the need for progress toward reasonable

equilibrium in the country's balance of payments."



3/7/67

Mr. Mitchell said he would like to clarify his earlier 

comment on changes in the bank credit proxy in February. The 

relatively level trend shown on the blue book chart related to 

the three weeks ending March 1. Growth in the preceding two 

weeks was stronger, and, as Mr. Ellis had noted, growth on 

average from January to February was $3 billion.  

Mr. Holmes commented that the rapid growth in the proxy 

in the earlier part of February had occurred at a time when the 

Desk was combatting a tightening money market. The small sub

sequent growth was associated with easing money market conditions.  

Chairman Martin remarked that the Committee seemed to be 

in agreement today on the desirability of moving toward easier 

money market conditions. He concurred in the comment by 

Mr. Mitchell and others that the Committee did not want to give 

the impression that it was extremely concerned about the economic 

outlook.  

In general, the Chairman continued, he was quite pleased 

with the course of monetary policy since last November. In that 

period the Committee had been moving steadily and gradually toward 

easier monetary conditions without going overboard. Perhaps the 

Committee had not been completely successful in achieving its 

objectives over the past four weeks, but the situation had been 

corrected quite promptly. Looking back through the minutes of

-79-



3/7/67 -80

previous meetings, as he had done in preparing for today's meeting, 

it struck him that this was the first time since 1960 that the 

economy had experienced some semblance of the February doldrums.  

The fact that there were doldrums this February did not necessarily 

suggest that the economy was on the verge of a major collapse.  

Rather, it might be going through a healthy adjustment.  

The Chairman agreed with Mr. Daane that monetary policy 

could not be expected to correct all of the difficulties that 

resulted from the fact that appropriate fiscal policies had not 

been pursued in the past. Nevertheless, the Committee had to do 

everything that it could.  

Chairman Martin then noted that various suggestions had 

been made for revising the final sentence in the staff's draft of 

the first paragraph of the directive. He thought the Committee's 

intent was perfectly clear; the problem was to arrive at the best 

form of statement.  

After discussion, it was agreed that the sentence in 

question should read, "In this situation, it is the Federal Open 

Market Committee's policy to foster money and credit conditions, 

including bank credit growth, conducive to combatting the effects 

of weakening tendencies in the economy, while recognizing the need 

for progress toward reasonable equilbirium in the country's balance 

of payments."



3/7/67 -81

The Chairman then noted that most members had indicated 

a preference for a second paragraph along the lines of alter

native B. Although some proposals had been made for revising 

the language, he would suggest adoption of alternative B as 

drafted by the staff.  

Mr. Hayes asked whether there was any disposition to 

accept Mr. Robertson's proposal that a two-way proviso clause be 

used, with the understanding that there was more concern about 

possible downward deviations of bank credit from expectations 

than about upward deviations.  

Mr. Daane noted that he also had expressed a preference 

for a two-way proviso, in addition to proposing other language 

changes.  

Messrs. Mitchell and Maisel indicated that they preferred 

the one-way proviso of the staff's draft. Mr. Maisel added that 

a two-way proviso might interfere with the objective of achieving 

further interest rate declines.  

Chairman Martin then proposed that the Committee adopt 

alternative B for the second paragraph, with the understanding 

that a special meeting of the Committee could be called if bank 

credit expansion appeared to be getting out of hand. He suggested 

that the Manager bear that possibility in mind.



3/7/67

Thereupon, upon motion duly made 
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was authorized and directed, until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, 
to execute transactions in the System 
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate some decline in industrial 
production and a marked slowing of expansion in over
all economic activity. Lack of growth in retail sales 
may be retarding adjustment of inventory accumulation 
from its recent excessive rate. Average commodity 
prices have changed little recently, but unit labor 
costs in manufacturing have risen further. Bank credit 
expansion has been vigorous and, after a period of 
rising interest rates and congested bond markets, 
financial conditions have again turned easier. Recent 
data suggest little improvement in the foreign trade 
surplus but also little increase in the outflow of U.S.  
capital. In several important countries abroad, 
economic activity has been softening for several months 
and monetary and fiscal policies have eased somewhat.  
In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee's 
policy to foster money and credit conditions, including 
bank credit growth, conducive to combatting the effects 
of weakening tendencies in the economy, while recognizing 
the need for progress toward reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy against the background of 
the current reductions in reserve requirements, System 
open market operations until the next meeting of the 
Committee shall be conducted with a view to attaining 
somewhat easier conditions in the money market, and to 
attaining still easier conditions if bank credit appears 
to be expanding significantly less than currently 
anticipated.  

Chairman Martin then noted that there had been distributed 

to the Committee a memorandum from Mr. Hackley dated February 20, 

1967, and entitled, "Effect of 'Freedom of Information Act' on

-82-



3/7/67 -83

Procedures of the Federal Open Market Committee." 1 / The Chairman 

suggested that the Committee discuss the subject preliminarily 

today and plan on considering it further at its next meeting. He 

asked Mr. Hackley to open the discussion.  

Mr. Hackley noted that at the meeting of the Committee 

held on November 22, 1966, he had summarized the provisions of 

the so-called "Freedom of Information Act" and had indicated in 

general terms how the Act might affect the operations of the 

Committee when it became effective on July 4, 1967. At that time 

he had noted that the Department of Justice was preparing a Manual 

for guidance of Government agencies in modifying their procedures 

to comply with the Act. The Board's Legal Division had received 

a draft of the Manual in January and had found it helpful, although 

not to the extent that had been hoped. After reviewing the draft 

and studying the law further, the Legal Division had offered to 

the Justice Department some suggestions for additions to the 

Manual that would help clarify the application of the Act to the 

procedures of the Committee and the Board.  

Mr. Hackley suggested that the Committee follow the general 

principle of aiming for the minimum changes in its procedures 

necessary to comply with the spirit as well as the letter of the 

1/ A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the files of 
the Committee.



3/7/67 -84

law, without endangering functions. The draft Manual was helpful 

in suggesting at a number of points that the new law did not 

require any disclosures that would impair the effectiveness of 

an agency's statutory functions.  

Today, Mr. Hackley continued, he would not attempt to 

review the more detailed provisions of the law as set forth in 

his memorandum. Instead, he would concentrate on two main points: 

the documents of the Committee that were required to be published 

in the Federal Register, and the other records that would have to 

be made available to members of the public on request.  

With respect to the first point, Mr. Hackley said, the 

new law made no change in the kinds of documents required to be 

published in the Federal Register--i.e., substantive rules and 

regulations, rules of organization and procedure, interpretations, 

and statements of general policy. However, the scope of the 

requirement was drastically changed as a result of changes in 

exemptions. In the past, the Committee's Regulation, its Rules 

of Organization, its Rules Regarding Information, Submittals, and 

Requests, and its Rules of Procedure had been published in the 

Federal Register and they would continue to be published. Some 

minor revisions probably would be necessary in the Rules of 

Organization and Rules of Procedure, and the Rules Regarding 

Information would have to be recast. The new law, like the old,



3/7/67 -85

required publication in the Federal Register of "statements of 

general policy and interpretations of general applicability." 

Four documents would seem to fall in this category: the contin

uing authority directive with respect to domestic operations, the 

authorization for System foreign currency operations, the foreign 

currency directive, and the domestic current economic policy 

directive adopted at each meeting of the Committee. In the past 

these documents, and any amendments of them, had been set forth 

in the Board's Annual Report, as required by section 10 of the 

Federal Reserve Act. They had been exempt from publication in 

the Federal Register, however, under the provision of the 1946 

Administrative Procedures Act that permitted non-publication on 

the ground that it was justified in the "public interest" or "for 

good cause found." Those exemptions would not be available under 

the new law; non-publication in the Federal Register would have 

to be based on one of nine grounds specified in the new law and 

listed in his memorandum.  

There was no question in his mind, Mr. Hackley continued, 

that the authorizations and directives did reflect "statements of 

general policy." Even though they were literally issued for the 

guidance of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in his judgment 

they were among the most important statements of general policy 

adopted by any agency. The question was not whether those



3/7/67 -86

documents should be published--as he had noted, they were published 

now--but whether the new requirement that they be published 

"currently" permitted a time lag. The Justice Department's draft 

Manual indicated that the word "currently" should be given a 

reasonable construction, but to clarify the matter further the 

Board's Legal Division had suggested to the Justice Department 

that specific language be added to indicate that publication in 

the Federal Register could be deferred for a reasonable time in 

cases where immediate publication would impair an agency's 

functions. In its letter to the Justice Department the staff 

had suggested that a lag of 60 days might be appropriate--having 

in mind the current economic policy directive in particular--but 

it had selected that period rather arbitrarily. Perhaps a longer 

lag might be required--say, 90 days--either as a general rule or 

in particular circumstances in order not to defeat the purposes 

of an action with respect to the current policy directive. With 

respect to the continuing authority directive and the authorization 

and directive for foreign currency operations, it might be appro

priate for the Committee to publish them as soon as possible after 

their adoption or amendment. While the question was, of course, 

for the Committee to decide, some of the staff economists seemed 

to feel that no harm would be done by immediate publication of 

those documents.



As to the second point--that certain other Committee 

records had to be made available to any person on request-

Mr. Hackley noted that any person whose request was denied 

could bring a court action in which the burden of proof would 

be on the Committee to justify that denial under the terms of 

the law. Most of the Committee's records--including the green 

book, the blue book, and the written reports of the Manager and 

Special Manager--clearly would be exempt on the ground that they 

were inter-agency or intra-agency memoranda or letters that would 

not be available to a private party in litigation--one of the 

nine specific exemptions in the law. The most important remaining 

records were those that had traditionally been described as the 

Committee's minutes. To the extent that those documents con

stituted a record of discussion prior to action, he thought they 

could be considered as inter-agency memoranda and thus exempt; 

and he had suggested language for the Justice Department's Manual 

that would so indicate. However, insofar as the minutes consisted 

of records of action, they clearly were not exempt. Accordingly, 

he recommended that in the future the documents traditionally 

described as Committee "minutes" be divided into two documents: 

one, to be called "memorandum of discussion," would be identical 

with what was now called the "minutes"; the second, consisting 

simply of a statement of the actions taken at the meeting, would

3/7/67 -87-



3/7/67 -88

be called "action minutes." The latter document would be similar 

in form to the kind of "minutes" that he understood most multi

member agencies maintained. The action minutes would be made 

available upon request but, since they would include the current 

policy directive adopted, only after a reasonable time. It would 

appear appropriate to refuse access to the action minutes until 

such time as the directive was published in the Federal Register.  

While those recommendations might best be described as 

preliminary, Mr. Hackley said, he thought they would comply with 

both the letter and the spirit of the law. He had not referred 

to the possibility of publishing the current policy directive and 

the reasons for its adoption--perhaps in the form of the present 

policy record entries--in the Federal Reserve Bulletin because 

such a procedure would go beyond the requirements of the law, but 

it was one that the Committee might wish to consider. He thought 

that the main question for the Committee to decide was what con

stituted a "reasonable" time lag for publishing particular documents 

or otherwise making them available; that is, how soon after their 

adoption they could be released without endangering the Committee's 

functions.  

Mr. Robertson commented that Mr. Hackley presumably had 

selected 60 days as a reasonable time lag on the ground that in 

the past the Committee had made its policy record for the preceding



3/7/67 -89

year available to the public early in the new year, roughly 60 

days after the December meeting. That point had merit. However, 

if it lay within the Committee's discretion to determine what 

time lag was reasonable, it might be desirable to select some 

longer period at the outset and shorten the period later if that 

was found feasible. Thus, it might be best to start with a lag 

of one quarter for all actions and then, perhaps, work down to 

60 days.  

Mr. Maisel thought it might be preferable to stay closer 

to the present procedure by publishing all of the actions taken 

during a quarter 60 days after the end of the quarter. In his 

judgment there would be a great advantage in having the directives 

become public in groups, four times a year, rather than singly.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed in general with Mr. Maisel but thought 

that the Committee should keep certain other considerations in 

mind. First, as illustrated by the experience this year, there 

was something to be gained by releasing the policy record entries 

for the closing months of the year early enough in the new year 

for them to be available around the time the Economic Report and 

the Budget Message were being discussed. The schedule adopted 

should not preclude such timing. Secondly, he had been thinking 

in terms of publishing the complete policy record entries, rather 

than the directives alone. But the entries drew extensively on



3/7/67 -90

the economic analyses in the staff reports which, in turn, 

frequently rested on information that had not yet been publicly 

released. He hoped the staff would consider the question of 

how quickly the entries could be released without violating 

confidentiality. As he had noted, however, he agreed that 

there were advantages to publishing a well-reasoned spectrum 

of experience quarterly rather than separate entries for each 

meeting.  

Mr. Hackley said he thought the crucial question concerned 

not what publication procedure would be most desirable in general 

but what procedure would comply with the requirements of the new 

law--which, he emphasized, required publication of general policy 

statements "currently." He was not sure that publication of the 

Committee's directives on a quarterly basis with a 60-day lag 

would be legally defensible. The Committee would have to justify 

refusal of any request for access to unpublished directives, and 

he was concerned with the possibility that it might not be possible 

to muster reasons satisfactory to a court in defense of such a 

schedule.  

Mr. Robertson noted that quarterly publication with a 

60-day lag would result in a five-month delay for the first actions 

of a quarter. Five months appeared to be a long time for the 

purpose.



3/7/67 -91

Mr. Hickman suggested that it might be desirable to 

release the policy record entries individually, with an appro

priate lag, and supplement them with quarterly reviews that 

would provide a longer perspective.  

Mr. Maisel commented that further analysis of the question 

was obviously required. To his mind, however, releasing informa

tion on Committee actions serially was likely to be confusing.  

He thought it made more sense to release the information quarterly, 

and that a schedule such as he had suggested, if fixed and known, 

probably could be justified.  

Mr. Daane thought that the question the Committee should 

answer first was whether, as Mr. Hackley had suggested, the 

Committee was required by the new law to publish its directives 

in the Federal Register. He thought the Committee should make 

its records more generally available, and he was quite sympathetic 

with Mr. Maisel's suggestion for quarterly publication of the 

policy records rather than annual publication as at present, keeping 

in mind the points Mr. Brimmer had made. But if the Committee was 

required to publish its policy statements "currently," he was not 

persuaded that it could justify a lag of 60 days. The fact that 

that had been the minimum lag in the past did not seem, in itself, 

to provide a very strong defense under the new law for 60 days as 

opposed to some other interval.



3/7/67

Mr. Hackley said that his view that the Act required 

publication of the directives in the Federal Register as state

ments of general policy was based on the fact that in the past 

the Committee clearly had regarded them as policy statements, 

and had included them in its Record of Policy Actions published 

in the Board's Annual Report under the terms of the Federal 

Reserve Act. It would be very hard to overthrow the argument 

that they were policy statements. He thought that a 60-day lag 

might be justifiable on the grounds that it had been the minimum 

lag in the past. Moreover, there might be times when a partic

ular directive was so sensitive that it would be desirable to 

withhold it for more than 60 days. But the Committee might be 

on the defensive at the outset with regard to lags because of 

the language of the law specifying that policy statements be 

published "currently." As he had indicated, the Legal Division 

was attempting to have the Justice Department clarify the point 

in its Manual.  

Mr. Daane asked whether the President had not indicated 

on signing the new law that there would be an element of 

flexibility in terms of making information available consistent 

with the national interest.  

Mr. Hackley replied affirmatively, but added that that 

statement, as well as several statements in the Congressional

-92-



3/7/67 -93

Committee reports on the bill, might be hard to support in view 

of the literal language of the law. The President could exempt 

certain matters by Executive Order in the interest--to quote the 

law--of "national defense or foreign policy." 

Mr. Daane remarked that the Committee obviously had 

thought in the past that it was not in the national interest to 

publish its directives currently. He was not questioning 

Mr. Hackley's legal judgment, but simply expressing the view 

that the Committee should give careful consideration to the 

point that if it was agreed that the law required publication 

of the directives it might be difficult to justify any partic

ular time lag.  

Mr. Brimmer said that at this stage he was not prepared 

to rule out the possibility of obtaining an exemption by Exec

utive Order as quickly as Mr. Hackley evidently was. More 

generally, he would hope that the Committee would adopt a 

procedure that it thought consistent with the law and then, if 

necessary, stand ready to have its judgment tested in court.  

Moreover, he would hope that the Committee would take a cautious 

approach and not decide immediately that 60 days was the maximum 

defensible lag. Once such a decision was taken it would not be 

feasible to backtrack.



Mr. Mitchell asked whether the Manager thought a 60-day 

lag would be detrimental.  

Mr. Holmes replied that publication of the directives 

after 60 days could lead to difficulties in that the market was 

likely to interpret the last published directive as indicating 

the Committee's current policy. On that basis, a three-month 

lag would be much better; after such an interval the actions were 

more likely to be thought of as a matter of history. As long as 

monetary policy was operating flexibly there might be risks in a 

60-day lag.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that the Committee had faced such risks 

in the past when its policy record was published, but of course 

that had occurred only once a year.  

Mr. Wayne agreed that there was a real danger that serial 

publication of the directives might lead the market to believe 

that the last directive published reflected current policy.  

Chairman Martin then suggested that the members of the 

Committee continue to think about the matter and plan on discussing 

it further at the next meeting.  

Chairman Martin then noted that at its preceding meeting 

the Committee had agreed to hold a further discussion today of 

criteria for increasing membership in the Federal Reserve network 

of reciprocal currency arrangements. In accordance with the

3/7/67 -94-



3/7/67 -95

Committee's request, memoranda had been distributed on the four 

countries under consideration, namely, Denmark, Norway, Mexico, 

and Venezuela, on February 28, 1967.1/ The Chairman asked 

Mr. Solomon to open the discussion.  

Mr. Solomon said that the four papers examined the 

countries concerned from the point of view of the criteria set 

forth in the earlier staff memorandum, which the Committee had 

discussed at its previous meeting. A few additional but related 

criteria were also applied, including political stability and 

creditworthiness. It was clear from the papers that only one of 

the four countries was now eligible on the basis of the criteria 

used--only Mexico's currency was convertible within the meaning 

of Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International 

Monetary Fund.  

Chairman Martin then invited Mr. Wayne to comment, noting 

that copies of some recent correspondence of his with staff members 

had been distributed to the Committee.  

Mr. Wayne said his letter to Mr. Holland of February 23, 

1967,2/ was prompted by his concern about a possible interpretation 

1/ Copies of these memoranda have been placed in the Committee's 
files.  

2/ Copies of this letter, and of a letter of comment from 

Mr. Solomon to Mr. Wayne dated February 27, 1967, have been 

placed in the Committee's files.



3/7/67 -96

of the earlier staff memorandum--and of some of the Committee's 

discussion at the preceding meeting--to the effect that the 

Committee should consider adopting some arithmetic or mechanical 

criteria for the inclusion of additional countries in the swap 

network. His contention was that System participation in the 

swap network had one overriding purpose, which was fairly well 

spelled out in the record of the Committee's actions in the 

foreign currency area--namely, to further the interests of the 

United States by contributing to the protection of the dollar 

and to the preservation of its role as an international currency.  

Accordingly, he thought that the System should enter into a swap 

arrangement with a particular foreign central bank only if doing 

so would be in the interests of the United States. The Committee, 

of course, had to exercise judgment in making such determinations, 

and if the conclusion was that a particular arrangement was in 

the interests of the United States he would be prepared not only 

to consider it but to authorize the Special Manager to seek it.  

If, on the other hand, the addition of a particular country to 

the network would appear not to have a material effect on the 

position of the dollar, he would prefer not to add that country 

even though doing so might improve its international status or 

perhaps contribute to diplomatic relationships. The Committee 

had the inescapable responsibility for determining whether partic

ular actions were in the interests of the United States.



3/7/67 -97-

Mr. Coombs suggested that the Committee first concentrate

on two of the countries in question, Denmark and Norway, from

whom specific requests for swap arrangements had been received.

In his judgment, it was virtually certain that they would achieve

Article VIII convertibility by early April. Mr. Wayne had put a

direct question that required a direct answer--namely, whether

such arrangements would be in the interests of the United States.

He personally felt that arrangements with Denmark and Norway def-

initely would be. First, with respect to the risk of gold sales,

the Danes had bought gold in 1960, when the price on the London

market broke out, and either country could change its gold ratio.

Secondly, the swap network, by and large, had become focused on

the Basle group of countries, which gave undue weight to the members

of the Common Market. As he had indicated at the preceding meeting,

it would be useful to dilute the influence of those countries by

adding Denmark and Norway. The staff papers on the two countries--

which he thought were excellent--suggested that they were stable

financially, economically, and politically, and that they could be

expected to observe the rules of the game.

Third, Mr. Coombs said, a network of credit lines with

foreign central banks provided a nucleus for rounding up additional

support for a country in case of need. Last September, when an

effort was being made to round up $400 million of additional help



3/7/67 -98

for the Bank of England, it was found possible to raise only $350 

million from the System's swap partners. The sum desired was 

obtained because the Danes and Norwegians contributed $50 million 

to the package even though they were not members of the network.  

Their sense of responsibility and their willingness to help deal 

with emergencies were evident.  

Finally, Mr. Coombs said, while avoiding losses of gold 

was important to the United States, the swap network had the addi

tional important purpose of protecting the international role of 

the dollar. In that connection countries with low gold ratios 

could contribute just as effectively as those with high ratios.  

The availability of the swap arrangement to them could help to 

reinforce their willingness not to buy gold.  

Chairman Martin commented that Mr. Wayne had pointed up 

the question clearly. Assuming that Denmark and Norway achieved 

Article VIII status, he thought there would be no objection to 

including them in the network under the criterion that Mr. Wayne 

had mentioned.  

Mr. Wayne said that he personally was persuaded by the 

comments of Mr. Coombs that the inclusion of Denmark and Norway 

would definitely be in the interests of the United States, assuming 

they met the Article VIII requirement. But to him that did not mean 

that any other country would necessarily fall in the same category.



3/7/67 -99

Mr. Mitchell remarked that he would like to say a word in 

support of including the Latin American countries. The U.S. role 

in international financial affairs was not just a defensive one; 

the United States should be a positive force for the improvement 

of world economic conditions. If the swap network was extended 

only to the countries that foreseeably could help the United 

States, it would consist of an undesirably selective group. In 

his judgment, a failure to include Latin American countries, if 

they were able to qualify under Article VIII, would be a serious 

mistake. The Committee should recognize now that it would be 

desirable to include qualified Latin American countries.  

Mr. Daane said he would underscore the point that the 

overly sharp focus on the Basle countries in the swap network 

had been adverse to the U.S. interest in the operations of the 

network and to the U.S. interest in encouraging the concept of a 

wider rather than a narrower group of countries in the discussions 

of international monetary reform. In his judgment, these factors 

argued for expanding the network. Mr. Wayne had made a good point 

in his letter when he suggested that the Committee should not be 

discriminatory in admitting new members. But it should be 

possible to keep the network open and at the same time act in 

a nondiscriminatory manner. Fairly well-developed criteria would 

help the Committee extend the network in an appropriate way.



3/7/67 -100

Mr. Wayne agreed that the Committee should stand ready to 

extend the swap network and, indeed, should welcome opportunities 

to do so. His contention was that the Committee had to assume 

the responsibility for making determinations on a country-by

country basis.  

Mr. Hayes commented that he agreed with most of what had 

been said. The staff had done the Committee a real service in 

working on objective criteria, but he shared the view that such 

criteria could only be aids to judgment. The Committee should 

not have rigid standards for admitting countries to the network; 

it should consider each case on its merits. On that basis, and 

with Mr. Coombs' comments in mind, he would favor proceeding in 

connection with Denmark and Norway when they complied with the 

requirements of Article VIII. Among the Latin American countries 

of major importance, only Mexico seemed to him to really qualify.  

Some of the statements in the staff memorandum with regard to 

economic and political conditions in Venezuela made him dubious 

about the desirability of including that country at present. He 

did not know whether or not this was the appropriate time to 

include Mexico. Having one Latin American country in the network 

would undoubtedly lead to some pressure to include others, but 

the Committee would have to face and resolve that problem at some 

point.



3/7/67 -101

Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee authorize 

negotiations at this time with the central banks of Denmark and 

Norway looking toward their inclusion in the swap network. He 

did not think the Committee should turn its back on Mexico and 

Venezuela, but Mr. Robertson had made a good point at the last 

meeting when he suggested that it was desirable to proceed cau

tiously in enlarging the network. He thought Mr. Wayne had done 

the Committee a service in raising the questions he had.  

Mr. Scanlon commented that he assumed that the completion 

of swap arrangements with Denmark and Norway would be conditional 

on their attaining Article VIII status, and Chairman Martin agreed.  

Mr. Coombs raised the question of the size of the swap 

arrangements with Denmark and Norway that the Committee would 

consider appropriate. Noting that the smallest arrangement in 

the present network was $100 million, he suggested that he be 

authorized to propose that figure in the negotiations.  

There was general agreement with Mr. Coombs' suggestion.  

Mr. Solomon said he would like to make two points before 

the present discussion was concluded. First, the staff had tried 

in the memoranda to give the Committee some flavor of the political 

situations existing in the four countries in question. But the 

staff's remarks on that score should be considered against the 

background of the political situations in various countries that



3/7/67 -102

were already members of the network; not all countries now in the 

network had always been free of political instability. Secondly, 

he thought that before the Committee moved formally on swap 

arrangements with Denmark and Norway it would be desirable to 

consult with the U.S. Treasury and possibly also with the Depart

ment of State.  

Mr. Coombs commented that he understood from discussions 

with Treasury staff members that they would have no objection and, 

indeed, would be pleased to have the System enter into the arrange

ments in question.  

Mr. Wayne observed that since the System's swap network 

impinged on both international financial relations and diplomatic 

relations of the United States, inter-agency consultations would 

be desirable.  

Chairman Martin then asked whether there were any objections 

to proceeding with negotiations with Denmark and Norway on the 

basis of the discussion today, and no objections were raised.  

Chairman Martin then noted that the authorization for 

forward commitments in Italian lire in the amount of $500 million, 

contained in paragraph 1(C)2 of the authorization for System 

foreign currency operations, had last been discussed at the meeting 

held on November 22, 1966. It had been agreed at that time that 

the matter should be reviewed again after three months. In



3/7/67 -103

preparation for such a discussion today memoranda on the subject 

from the staffs of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the 

Board, both dated February 27, 1967, had been distributed to the 

Committee.1/ The Chairman asked Mr. Coombs to comment.  

Mr. Coombs said that he thought there could be very little 

question but that the forward operations in Italian lire had been 

successful. They had relieved pressure on the Bank of Italy to 

buy gold, and they had had the highly useful effect of channeling 

dollars back to the Euro-dollar market at a time when U.S. banks 

were reducing the volume of dollars they provided to that market 

or were actually pulling dollars back. The Treasury was willing 

to continue such operations, and the question before the Committee 

was whether or not the System should continue to participate in 

them along with the Treasury.  

At the moment, Mr. Coombs continued, he had no firm view 

as to the length of time for which the forward commitments would 

have to be rolled over; that depended on developments in the 

Italian balance of payments. But as a general rule central banks 

were not particularly concerned about the duration of such opera

tions. The time factor that was considered so important for 

maintaining discipline in connection with swap drawings simply 

1/ Copies of these memoranda have been placed in the 
Committee's files.



3/7/67 -104

did not enter into this type of operation, since it was directed 

toward maintaining a desirable degree of ease in a particular 

money market, the Euro-dollar market. While the Committee became 

concerned when a swap drawing threatened to remain outstanding 

for more than six months, he did not think a similar limit should 

be imposed on these technical forward commitments. In general, he 

hoped that the System would continue to participate along with the 

Treasury and the Bank of Italy in this operation. It was useful 

in bringing the System into direct contact with the Bank of Italy 

and with the Euro-dollar market, and at the same time preventing 

a disruptive effect on the gold stock.  

Mr. Solomon said that the Board's staff did not have any 

policy recommendations different from those of Mr. Coombs. In 

its paper it had tried to give the Committee some of the history 

of the Bank of Italy's swap operations with Italian commercial 

banks, to review some of the economic effects of those operations, 

and to outline some of the policy issues as it saw them. The 

matter was extremely complicated, both in terms of economic effects 

and policy questions.  

One fact that came out of the staff's review, Mr. Solomon 

continued, was that the net foreign exchange assets of the Italian 

commercial banks against which the forward commitments were held 

consisted much more of claims against Italian residents than



3/7/67 -105

against foreigners. A second fact the staff thought worth bring

ing to the Committee's attention was that the Bank of Italy's 

swaps with Italian commercial banks had, indeed, kept down their 

official reserve accruals and reduced the pressure for Italy to 

buy gold from the United States. But an important element in 

that situation in 1966 was the fact that U.S. banks had been in 

the Euro-dollar market, absorbing the dollars which the Italian 

banks were putting in. If that had not been the case, the dollars 

might have gone to countries that had a greater propensity than 

Italy to buy gold. Accordingly, it could not be assumed that the 

operations in question would minimize U.S. gold losses under all 

circumstances.  

The staff also had tried to consider what might happen 

if the System swap commitments were withdrawn, Mr. Solomon observed, 

although it was not suggesting such a course. The specific question 

examined was whether the Bank of Italy would then be inclined to 

reduce the volume of its swaps with Italian commercial banks. The 

conclusion was that the Bank of Italy might want to maintain those 

swaps in any event, to avoid the increase in lira liquidity that 

would result if the commercial banks converted their foreign 

dollar claims back into lire. Finally, it did not, by any means, 

appear certain that a shift toward deficit in the Italian balance 

of payments or a change in Italian monetary policy would automatically



3/7/67 -106

result in a reduction in the volume of the Bank of Italy's swaps.  

The relationships here were both complicated and loose. The 

problem was a complex one, with many conflicting considerations, 

and he would repeat that the Board's staff was not suggesting a 

course different from that recommended by Mr. Coombs.  

Mr. Daane said that one alternative to U.S. forward lira 

commitments mentioned in the Board staff's memorandum--that of 

issuing additional Roosa bonds to Italy--had been explored from 

time to time but had met with complete resistance on the part of 

the Italians. Thus, he did not think it was a real alternative.  

Like Mr. Coombs, he thought the forward operations had proved 

extremely useful.  

Mr. Hickman asked whether it was not true that funds 

going into the Euro-dollar market via Italy tended to flow to 

Britain. If so, that would be a desirable result from the stand

point of the United States.  

Mr. Coombs replied that such funds had tended to flow 

both to Britain and to the United States.  

Mr. Hickman then suggested that the Committee reconsider 

the operations in question every three months and plan on 

discontinuing them at any time when their results appeared to 

have become inimical to the interests of the United States.



3/7/67 -107

Mr. Daane commented that the operations in question 

involved no risk to the System, and Mr. Coombs agreed. The 

latter added that the Treasury was prepared to take over the 

System's commitments if the Committee decided to discontinue 

them.  

Mr. Mitchell noted that the System's forward lira commit

ments had been in existence for over a year, and asked whether 

that was consistent with the Committee's general policy in the 

foreign currency area of attempting to deal only with short-run 

situations.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the commitments had run on 

primarily because the Italian balance of payments had continued 

in surplus. As he had mentioned in the discussion last November, 

he thought the Committee should review them from time to time.  

But he thought there was a real distinction between, on the one 

hand, swap drawings--which were extensions of credit and thus 

were appropriately kept to a short term--and, on the other hand, 

operations of the sort under discussion, which were undertaken 

in concert with a foreign central bank to help deal with condi

tions in an important money market while at the same time 

relieving the pressure on that central bank to convert dollars 

into gold. The purpose of the operation was to improve 

international liquidity.



3/7/67 -108

Mr. Mitchell then commented that the difficulty he saw 

with an ad hoc approach, such as was involved here, was that it 

could lead to different treatments in the System's relations 

with each of its counterparts. If a particular operation with 

a foreign partner was found to serve a useful purpose, it should 

be undertaken; but once that was done the Committee should offer 

to enter into the same type of operation with each of its coun

terparts.  

Mr. Coombs replied that he did not think any other central 

bank was interested in the sort of arrangement that had been made 

with the Bank of Italy.  

Mr. Hayes remarked that in the five years since the System 

had undertaken foreign currency operations many possibilities had 

been explored with other central banks as efforts were made to 

devise procedures that suited particular situations. In the case 

of Italy, operations of the kind under discussion had been found 

useful. He did not think the Committee had precluded similar 

operations with others but, as Mr. Coombs had noted, evidently 

no other country was interested in them.  

Mr. Daane said he thought the Committee would not want to 

broadcast the fact that it was willing to enter into some partic

ular kind of operation. It was necessary to take into account 

the different approaches to reserve policies in different countries.



3/7/67 -109

It was often desirable, he thought, to deal with particular 

problems by means of operations tailored in the manner found 

most useful to the United States and the other country concerned.  

It was his personal impression also that other European central 

banks were not interested in arrangements of the kind the System 

had made with the Bank of Italy. However, while he felt it 

would be unwise for the Committee to indicate that it was prepared 

to enter into such arrangements with any central bank, it should 

stand ready to consider any specific proposals made.  

Mr. Brimmer agreed with Mr. Coombs about the usefulness 

of the forward lira operations. He thought the Committee should 

reject any suggestion that it would necessarily confine such opera

tions to lire; the objective was simply to employ techniques that 

were useful in particular situations. As long as the Committee 

was not discriminating against any country, he would not want to 

see it dismantle a useful arrangement simply to achieve uniformity 

in the procedures followed with each partner.  

Mr. Mitchell asked whether the System was not, in effect, 

giving the Bank of Italy a gold guarantee on dollar holdings by 

the forward commitments, and Mr. Robertson added that, if it was, 

the real question was whether it would be prepared to give a 

similar guarantee to all countries. If not, Mr. Robertson said,



he did not think such a guarantee should be given to Italy. The 

longer the arrangement was continued the more difficult it would 

be to disengage from it.  

Mr. Coombs replied that the System's forward lira commit

ments did not involve a gold guarantee which, he agreed, would be 

undesirable. The type of exchange guarantee involved was identical 

to that given in drawings under the swap arrangements. In a way, 

the essence of the System's foreign currency operations was to 

increase the willingness of foreign central banks to hold dollars 

without having gold guarantees.  

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the authorization for System 
foreign currency operations as 
amended on September 9, 1966, was 
reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee 
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, for System Open Market Account, to the 
extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign 
currency directive: 

A. To purchase and sell the follow
ing foreign currencies in the form of cable transfers 

through spot or forward transactions on the open 
market at home and abroad, including transactions 

with the U.S. Stabilization Fund established by 

Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with 

foreign monetary authorities, and with the Bank for 
International Settlements:

3/7/67 -110-



3/7/67

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 

Netherlands guilders 

Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in 
paragraph A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies held spot or purchased 
forward, up to the amounts necessary to fulfill outstanding 
forward commitments; 

(2) Additional currencies held spot 
or purchased forward, up to the amount necessary for 
System operations to exert a market influence but not 
exceeding $150 million equivalent; and 

(3) Sterling purchased on a covered 
or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under agree
ment with the Bank of England, up to $200 million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments 
undertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign cur
rencies, up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver to the 
Stabilization Fund foreign currencies in which the United 
States Treasury has outstanding indebtedness, up to $200 

million equivalent; 

(2) Commitments to deliver Italian 

lire, under special arrangements with the Bank of Italy, 
up to $500 million equivalent; and 

(3) Other forward commitments to 
deliver foreign currencies, up to $275 million equivalent.

-111-



3/7/67

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency 
arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings 
by either party to any such arrangement shall be fully liquidated 
within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circum
stances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 

arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System Open Market Account 

with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated 
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and 
Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of Maximum 
arrangement period of 

Foreign bank (millions of arrangement 
dollars equivalent) (months) 

Austrian National Bank 100 12 

National Bank of Belgium 150 12 

Bank of Canada 500 12 

Bank of England 1,350 12 
Bank of France 100 3 

German Federal Bank 400 6 

Bank of Italy 600 12 

Bank of Japan 450 12 

Netherlands Bank 150 3 

Bank of Sweden 100 12 

Swiss National Bank 200 6 

Bank for International Settlements 
System drawings in Swiss francs 200 6 

System drawings in authorized 
European currencies other than 

Swiss francs 200 6 

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken 
under paragraph 1(A) above shall be at prevailing market rates and 

no attempt shall be made to establish rates that appear to be out 

of line with underlying market forces. Insofar as is practicable, 

foreign currencies shall be purchased through spot transactions

-112-



3/7/67

when rates for those currencies are at or below par and 
sold through spot transactions when such rates are at 
or above par, except when transactions at other rates 
(i) are specifically authorized by the Committee, (ii) 
are necessary to acquire currencies to meet System 
commitments, or (iii) are necessary to acquire currencies 
for the Stabilization Fund, provided that these currencies 
are resold forward to the Stabilization Fund at the same 
rate.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with 
foreign central banks for the coordination of foreign 
currency transactions. In making operating arrangements 
with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall 
not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, 
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  
Any agreements or understandings concerning the administra
tion of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York with the foreign banks designated by 
the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N 
shall be referred for review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested 
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum 
working balances. Such investments shall be in accordance 
with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman 
and the Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice 
Chairman of the Board of Governors (or in the absence 
of the Chairman or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of 
Governors the members of the Board designated by the 
Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee his alternate) is authorized 
to act on behalf of the Committee when it is necessary 
to enable the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage 
in foreign currency operations before the Committee can 
be consulted. All actions taken by the Subcommittee 
under this paragraph shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized:

-113-



3/7/67

A. With the approval of the Committee, 
to enter into any needed agreement or understanding 
with the Secretary of the Treasury about the division 
of responsibility for foreign currency operations 
between the System and the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury 
fully advised concerning System foreign currency opera
tions, and to consult with the Secretary on such policy 
matters as may relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; 
and 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory Council on 
International Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized 
to transmit pertinent information on System foreign cur
rency operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury 
Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate 
in the foreign currency operations for System Account 
in accordance with paragraph 3 G (1) of the Board of 
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 
1944.  

10. The Special Manager of the System Open 
Market Account for foreign currency operations shall 
keep the Committee informed on conditions in foreign 
exchange markets and on transactions he has made and 
shall render such reports as the Committee may specify.  

Upon motion duly made and 
seconded, and by unanimous vote, 
the foreign currency directive 
as adopted on June 7, 1966, was 
reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations 
in foreign currencies are:

-114-



3/7/67

A. To help safeguard the value of the 
dollar in international exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of 
international payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with 
central banks of other countries having convert
ible currencies, with the International Monetary 
Fund, and with other international payments 
institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements 
in exchange rates, within the limits stated 
in the International Monetary Fund Agreement 
or established by central bank practices, 
reflect the interaction of underlying economic 
forces and thus serve as efficient guides to 
current financial decisions, private and public; 
and 

E. To facilitate growth in international 
liquidity in accordance with the needs of an 
expanding world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Federal Open Market Committee, System operations in 
foreign currencies shall be undertaken only when necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations 
in the flows of international payments, if 
such fluctuations (1) are deemed to reflect 
transitional market unsettlement or other 
temporary forces and therefore are expected 
to be reversed in the foreseeable future; 
and (2) are deemed to be disequilibrating 
or otherwise to have potentially destabilizing 
effects on U.S. or foreign official reserves 
or on exchange markets, for example, by 
occasioning market anxieties, undesirable 
speculative activity, or excessive leads and 

lags in international payments; 

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt 
changes in spot exchange rates, and to moderate

-115-



3/7/67

forward premiums and discounts judged to be 
disequilibrating. Whenever supply or demand 
persists in influencing exchange rates in 
one direction, System transactions should be 
modified or curtailed unless upon review and 
reassessment of the situation the Committee 

directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions 
in exchange markets. Special factors that might 

make for exchange market instabilities include 
(1) responses to short-run increases in interna

tional political tension, (2) differences in 
phasing of international economic activity 

that give rise to unusually large interest 
rate differentials between major markets, and 

(3) market rumors of a character likely to 

stimulate speculative transactions. Whenever 

exchange market instability threatens to 

produce disorderly conditions, System transac

tions may be undertaken if the Special Manager 
reaches a judgment that they may help to 

reestablish supply and demand balance at a 

level more consistent with the prevailing flow 
of underlying payments. In such cases, the 

Special Manager shall consult as soon as 
practicable with the Committee or, in an 

emergency, with the members of the Subcommittee 
designated for that purpose in paragraph 6 of 

the Authorization for System foreign currency 

operations; and 

D. To adjust System balances within the 

limits established in the Authorization for 

System foreign currency operations in light of 

probable future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements 

are appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign currencies 

for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by 

the Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either 

outright or in conjunction with spot transactions, may be

-116-



3/7/67 -117

undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or 
discounts from giving rise to disequilibrating move
ments of short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative 
disturbances; (iii) to supplement existing market 
supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly, as 
a means of encouraging the retention or accumulation 
of dollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to 
allow greater flexibility in covering System or 
Treasury commitments, including commitments under swap 
arrangements; (v) to facilitate the use of one cur
rency for the settlement of System or Treasury 
commitments denominated in other currencies; and (vi) 
to provide cover for System holdings of foreign 
currencies.  

Chairman Martin then noted that at a recent meeting the 

Board had given preliminary consideration to a draft review of 

System foreign currency operations in 1966 prepared by the Special 

Manager for inclusion in the Board's 53rd Annual Report. At that 

time it had been suggested that it would be desirable for the 

Committee to discuss the policy it would consider appropriate in 

the future with respect to publication of information regarding 

System foreign currency operations and the understandings that 

might be reached with other interested parties with respect to 

publication of information on particular operations. To provide 

the necessary background, the Board's staff had been asked to 

prepare a report on prior discussions of publication policy in 

the foreign currency area. The staff's memorandum, dated March 2, 

1967, had been distributed to the Committee, along with copies of 

a letter from Mr. Coombs commenting on the reasons for the



3/7/67 -118

omission from the draft text of information concerning a drawing 

made by the Bank of Canada on its swap line with the System in 

the fall of 1966, and the reasons for limiting the information 

given on System operations in sterling during the course of the 

1/ 
year.  

Mr. Brimmer asked whether the issues that had been raised 

in the Board's discussion had not already been largely resolved.  

Mr. Coombs replied affirmatively. He noted that the Bank 

of England had raised questions regarding certain figures included 

in an early draft that had been sent to them for comment and, 

accordingly, he had deleted those figures from the text sent to 

the Board for review. However, when the sterling situation took 

a turn for the better in late February the British attitude 

regarding publication became more relaxed, and the current plan 

was to include all of the data on sterling that had been questioned 

earlier. The sterling report would thus be complete. The Bank 

of Canada still preferred to have information on its 1966 drawing 

withheld at this time, but that information would be included in 

the Special Manager's next semi-annual report. Apart from that 

drawing, the only information that would not be made public concern

ing operations through the end of 1966 related to the dollar volume 

of the System's forward lira commitments.  

1/ Copies of the documents referred to have been placed in 
the Committee's files.



3/7/67 -119

Mr. Robertson commented that, looking toward the future, 

there was a question of policy in this area that the Committee 

should resolve, although not necessarily today. While he rec

ognized the need for flexibility, he thought the Committee might 

want to consider presenting a statement along the following lines 

to each of its partners in the swap network: 

It is the general policy of the FOMC that all foreign 
currency operations in which it is involved, whether at its 
initiative or that of partner central banks, be disclosed 
within a reasonable period of time. The Committee intends 
to continue to publish information on Federal Reserve use 
of these facilities with a time lag of no longer than seven 
months.  

In addition, the Committee desires to propose to its 
partners in the network that they agree to a similar pub
lication procedure by us with respect to their use of 

these facilities, with the understanding that exceptions 
will be made only after discussions between the Governor 
of the central bank proposing the exception and the Chairman 
of the FOMC.  

Final decision on this proposed procedure will be 

postponed until after consideration thereof by the partners 

in the network.  

Mr. Daane commented that he did not question the desirability 

of full publication. He was concerned, however, that presenting 

such a statement to foreign central banks might affect their attitudes 

toward the swap network in a manner that would inhibit the most 

effective use of the network.  

Chairman Martin, noting the lateness of the hour, suggested 

that the Committee plan on continuing the discussion of publication 

policy with regard to foreign currency operations at its next meeting.



3/7/67 -120

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 4, 1967, at 

9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

Secretary



ATTACHMENT A

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) 

Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by the 
Federal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on March 7, 1967 

FIRST PARAGRAPH 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at this 
meeting indicate some decline in industrial production and a marked 
slowing of expansion in over-all economic activity. Lack of growth 
in retail sales may be retarding adjustment of inventory accumula
tion from its recent excessive rate. Average commodity prices have 
changed little recently, but unit labor costs in manufacturing have 
risen further. Bank credit expansion has been vigorous and, after a 
period of rising interest rates and congested bond markets, financial 
conditions have again turned easier. Recent data suggest little 
improvement in the foreign trade surplus but also little increase in 
the outflow of U.S. capital. In several important countries abroad, 
economic activity has been softening for several months and monetary 
and fiscal policies have eased somewhat. In this situation, it is 
the Federal Open Market Committee's policy to foster money and credit 
conditions, including bank credit growth, conducive to noninflationary 
economic expansion and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.  

SECOND PARAGRAPH 

Alternative A 

To implement this policy against the background of the 
current reductions in reserve requirements, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 
a view to maintaining the prevailing easier conditions in the money 
market, but operations shall be modified as necessary to moderate any 
apparently significant deviations of bank credit from current 
expectations.  

Alternative B 

To implement this policy against the background of the 
current reductions in reserve requirements, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to attaining somewhat easier conditions in the money 
market, and to attaining still easier conditions if bank credit 
appears to be expanding significantly less than currently anticipated.


