











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 3, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 3, 1967, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Wayne

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Galusha, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Hersey, Koch, Partee, 

Parthemos, and Solomon, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



10/3/67 -2

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Kimbrel, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Link, Melnicoff, Mann, Taylor, Andersen, 
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Duprey, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, James Parthemos was elected Associate 

Economist, effective immediately, in place of Benjamin U. Ratchford.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 12, 

1967, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on September 12, 1967, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 12 through October 2,

1967, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



10/3/67

By unanimous vote, renewal until December 29, 1967, of 

the $450 million standby swap arrangement with Bank of Italy, 

scheduled to mature on October 20, 1967, was approved, on the 

understanding that the arrangement would have a twelve-month 

term after December 29, 1967.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period September 12 through October 2, 1967, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Francis and Scanlon dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting indicate that, apart from the effects of the 
strike in the automobile industry, underlying economic 
conditions have strengthened and prospects favor more rapid 
growth later in the year. Upward pressures on costs persist, 
average prices of industrial commodities have risen further, 
and the rate of increase in consumer prices remains high.  
While there recently have been large inflows of liquid funds 
from abroad through foreign branches of U.S. banks, the 
balance of payments continues to reflect a substantial under
lying deficit. Bank credit expansion has continued large, 
although there was some moderation in September from the 
rapid July-August rate. The volume of corporate bond flota
tions has slackened, but Federal and State and local Govern
ment financing demands remain large and most interest rates 
have on balance moved up somewhat further. The President's 
new fiscal program is still pending before Congress. In 
this situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market



10/3/67

Committee to foster financial conditions, including 
bank credit growth, conducive to sustainable economic 
expansion, recognizing the need for reasonable price 
stability for both domestic and balance of payments 
purposes.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining about the pre
vailing conditions in the money market; but operations 
shall be modified, to the extent permitted by Treasury 
financing, to moderate any apparent tendency for bank 
credit to expand significantly more than currently 
expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 24, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


