











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 20, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 20, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 

Maisel 

Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Wayne 

Patterson, Alternate for Mr. Francis

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Galusha, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Craven, Hersey, Jones, Koch, and 

Partee, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account



6/20/67 -2

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel, 
Legal Division, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lewis, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Eastburn, Mann, 
Parthemos, Taylor, Tow, and Green, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Nelson, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Deming, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Stiles, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on May 23, 1967, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 23 through June 19, 1967, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal until December 22, 1967 of the 

$50 million supplementary swap arrangement with the National Bank of 

Belgium, scheduled to mature on June 30, 1967, and its consolidation



6/20/67 -3

with the basic $100 million arrangement maturing on December 22, 

1967, was approved, on the understanding that the combined 

arrangement would have a twelve-month term after December 22, 1967.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of six 

months of the $150 million standby swap arrangement with the 

Netherlands Bank, scheduled to mature on June 30, 1967, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period May 23 through June 19, 1967, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed at 
this meeting suggest that economic activity is rising 
modestly, and that prospects for economic expansion later 
in the year have strengthened. Output is still being 
retarded by adjustments of excessive inventories, but 
growth in final demands continues strong, reflecting 
substantial further increases in Government expenditures 
and also some strengthening of consumer buying. Prices 
of farm products have turned up recently, but average 
prices of industrial commodities have remained stable.  
The pace of bank credit expansion has increased in recent 
weeks, but is still well below the rapid rate of earlier 
in the year. Most long-term interest rates have tended 
to rise further under the influence of heavy securities 
market financing, and most short-term yields have also 
increased. The balance of payments deficit has remained 
substantial despite some improvement in the foreign trade



6/20/67

surplus. In this situation, it is the Federal Open 
Market Committee's policy to foster money and credit 
conditions, including bank credit growth, conducive to 
renewed economic expansion, while recognizing the need 
for progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
expected Treasury financing activity, the timing and 
quantity of which are still uncertain, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the 
same conditions in the money market as have prevailed 
since the preceding meeting of the Committee, while 
continuing to utilize operations in coupon issues in 
supplying part of reserve needs.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Open Market Committee's rules 

regarding the availability of information were revised effective 

July 4, 1967, to read as follows: 

RULES REGARDING AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION 

SECTION 271.1--BASIS AND SCOPE 

This Part is issued by the Federal Open Market 

Committee (the "Committee") pursuant to the require

ment of section 552 of Title 5 of the United States 

Code that every agency shall publish in the Federal 

Register for the guidance of the public descriptions 

of the established places at which, the officers from 

whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain 

information, make submittals or requests or obtain 

decisions.  

SECTION 271.2--DEFINITIONS 

(a) "Information of the Committee". - For purposes 

of this Part, the term "information of the Committee" 

means all information coming into the possession of 

the Committee or of any member thereof or of any officer, 

employee, or agent of the Committee, the Board of Governors



6/20/67

of the Federal Reserve System, or any Federal Reserve 
Bank, in the performance of duties for, or pursuant to 
the direction of, the Committee, 

(b) "Records of the Committee". - For purposes of 
this Part, the term "records of the Committee" means 
rules, statements, opinions, orders, memoranda, letters, 
reports, accounts, and other papers containing informa
tion of the Committee that constitute a part of the 
Committee's official files.  

SECTION 271.3--PUBLISHED INFORMATION 

(a) Federal Register. - To the extent required by 
sections 552 and 553 of the U.S. Code, and subject to 
the provisions of sections 271.5 and 271.6 of this 
Part, the Committee publishes in the Federal Register, 
in addition to this Part, 

(1) a description of its organization; 

(2) statements of the general course and 

method by which its functions are 

channeled and determined; 

(3) rules of procedure; 

(4) substantive rules of general applicability, 
and statements of general policy and inter

pretations of general applicability formu
lated and adopted by the Committee; 

(5) every amendment, revision, or repeal of the 

foregoing; and 

(6) general notices of proposed rule making.  

(b) Policy record. - In accordance with section 10 

of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 247a), each annual 

report made to Congress by the Board of Governors of the 

Federal Reserve System includes a complete record of the 

actions taken by the Committee during the preceding year 

upon all matters of policy relating to open market opera

tions, showing the votes taken and the reasons underlying 

such actions.



6/20/67

(c) Other published information. - From time to time, 
other information relating to open market operations of 
the Federal Reserve Banks is published in the Federal 
Reserve Bulletin, issued monthly by the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, in such Board's annual 
report to Congress, and in announcements and statements 
released to the press. Copies of issues of the Bulletin 
and of annual reports of the Board may be obtained upon 
request.  

SECTION 271.4--RECORDS AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC 
ON REQUEST 

(a) Records available. - Records of the Committee 
are made available to any person, upon request, for 
inspection or copying in accordance with the provisions 
of this section and subject to the limitations stated 
in sections 271.5 and 271.6 of this Part. Records 
falling within the exemptions from disclosure set forth 
in section 552(b) of Title 5 of the United States Code 
and in section 271.6 of this Part may nevertheless be 
made available in accordance with this section to the 
fullest extent consistent, in the Committee's judgment, 
with the effective performance of the Committee's 
statutory responsibilities and with the avoidance of 
injury to a public or private interest intended to be 
protected by such exemptions.  

(b) Place and time. - In general, the records of 
the Committee are held in the custody of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, but certain 
of such records, or copies thereof, are held in the 
custody of one or more of the Federal Reserve Banks.  
Any such records subject to this section will be made 
available for inspection or copying during regular 
business hours at the offices of the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System in the Federal Reserve 
Building, 20th and Constitution Avenue, Washington, 
D. C., 20551, or, in certain instances as provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, at the offices of one 
or more designated Federal Reserve Banks.  

(c) Obtaining access to records. - Any person 
requesting access to records of the Committee shall 
submit such request in writing to the Secretary of



6/20/67

the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  
In any case in which the records requested, or copies 
thereof, are available at a Federal Reserve Bank, the 
Secretary of the Board may so advise the person re
questing access to the records. Every request for 
access to records of the Committee shall state the 
full name and address of the person requesting them 
and shall describe such records in a manner reasonably 
sufficient to permit their identification without 
undue difficulty; and such person shall pay a fee in 
an amount based upon $5 per hour for the time required 
to locate such records and prepare them for inspection 
plus 10 cents per standard page for any copying thereof.  

SECTION 271.5--DEFERMENT OF AVAILABILITY 
OF CERTAIN INFORMATION 

(a) Deferred availability of information. - In 
some instances, certain types of information of the 
Committee are not published in the Federal Register 
or made available for public inspection or copying 
until after such period of time as the Committee may 
determine to be reasonably necessary to avoid the 
effects described in paragraph (b) of this section or 
as may otherwise be necessary to prevent impairment 
of the effective discharge of the Committee's statutory 
responsibilities. For example, the Committee's current 
economic policy directive adopted at each meeting of 
the Committee is published in the Federal Register 
approximately 90 days after the date of its adoption; 
and no information in the records of the Committee 
relating to the adoption of any such directive is 
made available for public inspection or copying before 
it is published in the Federal Register.  

(b) Reasons for deferment of availability. 
Publication of, or access to, certain information of 
the Committee may be deferred because earlier disclo
sure of such information would 

(1) interfere with the orderly execution of 
policies adopted by the Committee in the 

performance of its statutory functions;



6/20/67

(2) permit speculators and others to gain 
unfair profits or to obtain unfair 
advantages by speculative trading in 
securities, foreign exchange, or other
wise; 

(3) result in unnecessary or unwarranted 
disturbances in the securities market; 

(4) make open market operations more costly; 

(5) interfere with the orderly execution of 
the objectives or policies of other 
Government agencies concerned with 
domestic or foreign economic or fiscal 
matters; or 

(6) interfere with, or impair the effective
ness of, financial transactions with 
foreign banks, bankers, or countries that 
may influence the flow of gold and of 
dollar balances to or from foreign 
countries.  

SECTION 271.6--INFORMATION NOT DISCLOSED 

Except as may be authorized by the Committee, in
formation of the Committee that is not available to the 
public through other sources will not be published or 
made available for inspection, examination, or copying by 
any person if such information 

(1) is exempted from disclosure by statute 
or executive order; 

(2) relates solely to internal personnel 
rules or practices or other internal 
practices of the Committee; 

(3) relates to trade secrets or commercial 
or financial information obtained from 
any person and privileged or confidential;



6/20/67

(4) is contained in inter-agency or intra
agency memoranda or letters, including 
records of deliberations and discussions 
at meetings of the Committee and reports 
and documents filed by members or staff 
of the Committee that would not be 
routinely available to a private party 
in litigation with the Committee; 

(5) is contained in personnel, medical, or 
similar files (including financial files) 
the disclosure of which would constitute 
a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy; or 

(6) is contained in or related to examination, 
operating, or condition reports prepared 
by, on behalf of, or for the use of any 
agency responsible for the regulation or 
supervision of financial institutions.  

Except as provided by or pursuant to this Part, no person 
shall disclose, or permit the disclosure of, any informa
tion of the Committee to any person, whether by giving out 
or furnishing such information or copy thereof, by allowing 
any person to inspect, examine or produce such information 
or copy thereof, or by any other means, whether the 
information is located at the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any Federal Reserve 
Bank, or elsewhere, unless such disclosure is required in 
the performance of duties for, or pursuant to the direction 
of, the Committee. Any person who may be denied access to 
records of the Committee may, within 5 days thereafter, file 
with the Committee a written request for review of such action.  

SECTION 271.7--SUBPOENAS 

(a) Advice by person served. - If any person, whether or 
not an officer or employee of the Committee, of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or of a Federal 
Reserve Bank, has information of the Committee that may not be 
disclosed by reason of sections 271.5 or 271.6 of this Part 

and in connection therewith is served with a subpoena, order, or 
other process requiring his personal attendance as a witness or 

the production of documents or information upon any proceeding, 
he should promptly inform the Secretary of the Committee of such



6/20/67

service and of all relevant facts, including the docu
ments and information requested and any facts that may be 
of assistance in determining whether such documents or 
information should be made available; and he should take 
action at the appropriate time to inform the court or 
tribunal that issued the process, and the attorney for 
the party at whose instance the process was issued, if 
known, of the substance of this Part.  

(b) Appearance by person served. - Except as dis
closure of the relevant information is authorized pursuant 
to this Part, any person who has information of the 
Committee and is required to respond to a subpoena or 
other legal process shall attend at the time and place 
therein mentioned and decline to disclose such information 
or give any testimony with respect thereto, basing his 
refusal upon this Part. If, notwithstanding, the court or 
other body orders the disclosure of such information, or 
the giving of such testimony, the person having such 
information of the Committee shall continue to decline to 
disclose such information and shall promptly report the 
facts to the Committee for such action as the Committee 
may deem appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, section 1 of the Federal Open Market 

Committee's rules of organization was revised, effective July 4, 1967.  

The amended rules of organization read as follows: 

RULES OF ORGANIZATION 

SECTION 1--BASIS AND SCOPE 

These rules are issued by the Federal Open Market 

Committee (the "Committee") pursuant to the requirement 

of section 552 of Title 5 of the United States Code 

that every agency shall publish in the Federal Register 

a description of its central and field organization.  

SECTION 2--COMPOSITION AND MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE 

(a) Members. - The Federal Open Market Committee 

consists of the members of the Board of Governors of 

the Federal Reserve System and five representatives of



6/20/67

the Federal Reserve Banks who are Presidents or First 
Vice Presidents of such Banks. The representatives 
of the Federal Reserve Banks, and an alternate for 
each representative, are elected in accordance with 
section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act for terms of 
one year commencing on March 1 of each year.  

(b) Chairman and Vice Chairman. - At its first 
meeting on or after March 1 of each year, the Committee 
selects a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its 
membership.  

(c) Meetings. - The Committee meets at Washington, 
D. C., on call by the Chairman of the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System or at the request of three 
members of the Committee, at least four times each year 
and oftener if deemed necessary.  

SECTION 3--PERSONNEL 

(a) Official Staff. - The official staff of the 
Federal Open Market Committee includes its Secretary 
and Assistant Secretaries, General Counsel and Assistant 
General Counsel, and Economist and Associate Economists, 
who perform the duties indicated by their titles. These 
staff members are selected from among the officers and 
employees of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Banks. In addi
tion, one of the Federal Reserve Banks is selected by 
the Committee to execute transactions for the System 
Open Market Account; and the Committee selects a Manager 
of the System Open Market Account and a Special Manager 
for foreign currency operations for such Account, both 
of whom shall be satisfactory to such Federal Reserve 
Bank.  

(b) Others. - The services of other officers and 
employees of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System and Federal Reserve Banks are made 
available and are utilized by the Committee as required.  

By unanimous vote, sections 272.1 and 272.3 of the Federal 

Open Market Committee's rules of procedure were revised, and section 

272.5 repealed, effective July 4, 1967. The amended rules of

procedure read as follows.

-11-



6/20/67

RULES OF PROCEDURE 

SECTION 272.1--BASIS AND SCOPE 

This part is issued by the Federal Open Market 
Committee (the "Committee") pursuant to the requirement 
of section 552 of Title 5 of the United States Code that 
every agency shall publish in the Federal Register its 
rules of procedure.  

SECTION 272.2--COMMITTEE ACTION 

The function of the Committee is the direction 
and regulation of open market operations which are 
conducted by the Federal Reserve Banks. This involves 
the determination of the policies which are to be 
pursued with respect to open market operations by the 
Federal Reserve Banks with a view to accommodating 
commerce and business and with regard to their bearing 
upon the general credit situation of the country, 
together with consideration and action upon incidental 
matters relating to the manner in which such operations 
are to be conducted. The discharge of the Committee's 
responsibilities requires the continuous gathering of 

information and study of changing financial, economic, 
and credit conditions and other pertinent considerations 
by the members of the Committee and its personnel. These 
activities are closely interrelated with other activities 

of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

and the Federal Reserve Banks and all relevant informa
tion and views developed by these organizations are 

available to the Committee. With this background, 

action is taken by the Committee upon its own initiative 

at periodic meetings held at least four times each year 

and oftener if deemed necessary. Attendance at Committee 

meetings is restricted to members of the Committee and 

its official staff, including the Manager of the System 

Open Market Account and the Special Manager for foreign 

currency operations for such Account, the Presidents of 

Federal Reserve Banks who are not at the time members of 

the Committee, and such other advisers as the Committee 

may invite from time to time. The Committee acts through 

the adoption and transmittal of directives and regulations 

to the Federal Reserve Banks. Operations in the System 

Open Market Account are conducted pursuant to directives 

issued by the Committee.

-12-



6/20/67 -13

SECTION 272.3--NOTICE AND PUBLIC PROCEDURE 

There ordinarily will be no published notice of 
proposed action by the Committee or public procedure 
thereon, as described in section 553 of Title 5 of the 
United States Code, because such notice and procedure 
are impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the 
public interest.  

SECTION 272.4--EFFECTIVE DATE 

Committee action ordinarily will be made effective 
on the date the action is taken because the nature of 
the subject matter and the action taken is such that the 
public interest and the proper discharge of the Committee's 
responsibilities so require.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the release to the 

press and to other interested persons of the entries prepared for 

the record of policy actions of the Committee approximately 90 days 

after the meetings at which the policy actions were taken, and the 

release of the entries prepared for the meetings held in 1967 through 

April 4 at about the time the Committee's rules, as revised today, 

were transmitted to the Federal Register.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the release to any 

person on request of certain documents held at the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York containing information of the Committee, described 

in the list dated May 17, 1967, prepared by the staff, with time 

lags as indicated therein.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized a staff committee 

consisting of the Committee's General Counsel, the Manager of the 

System Open Market Account, the Secretary of the Committee, and the



6/20/67 -14

Secretary of the Board of Governors, to authorize release to any 

person on request documents held at the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York containing information of the Committee of types similar 

to those for which the Committee had authorized release, with such 

time lags as were considered appropriate by the staff committee 

in light of the time lags the Committee had authorized for other 

documents.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the transfer of 

the original copy of the minutes for the Committee meetings held 

in the calendar year 1961 to the National Archives, on the same 

basis as the minutes for prior years had been transferred in 1964.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 18, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


