











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 12, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 12, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Wayne

Messrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 

City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Garvy, Jones, Koch, 
Partee, Ratchford, and Solomon, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



9/12/67

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Mann, Brandt, 
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 

Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York 
Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 15, 1967, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on August 15, 1967, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 15 through September 11, 

1967, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period August 15 through September 11, 1967, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.



9/12/67

With Messrs. Hayes, Francis, and Scanlon dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The economic and financial developments reviewed 
at this meeting indicate that economic activity has 
strengthened and, despite the strike in the automobile 
industry, that prospects favor more rapid growth later 
in the year. Upward pressures on costs persist and 
average prices of industrial commodities have turned 
up following several months of stability. While there 
recently have been large inflows of liquid funds from 
abroad, the balance of payments continues to reflect a 
substantial underlying deficit. Bank credit expansion 
has continued large, while most short- and long-term 
interest rates have fluctuated close to their highs of 
the year, under the combined pressure of heavy private 
security market financing and of recent and prospective 
Federal financing. The President's new fiscal program 
calling for a sizable increase in income taxes, which 
would make a substantial contribution to balanced 
economic growth, is now before Congress. In this 
situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions, including 
bank credit growth, conducive to sustainable economic 
expansion, recognizing the need for reasonable price 
stability for both domestic and balance of payments 
purposes.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about 

the prevailing conditions in the money market; but 
operations shall be modified as necessary to mod
erate any apparent tendency for bank credit to 
expand significantly more than currently expected.



9/12/67

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 3, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


