











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 12, 1967 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 12, 1967, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Brimmer 

Francis 

Maisel 

Mitchell 

Robertson 

Scanlon 

Sherrill 1/ 

Swan 

Wayne

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, Patterson, and Galusha, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 

City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Baughman, Hersey, Koch, Partee, 

Parthemos, and Solomon, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



12/12/67

Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Eastburn, Mann, 
Taylor, Andersen, Tow, and Green, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. MacLaury and Meek, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 14, 1967, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 14, 1967, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the action taken by members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on November 30, 1967, increasing effective as 

of that date the swap arrangement with the Bank of Canada by $250 

million equivalent, from $500 million to $750 million equivalent,



12/12/67 -3

and the corresponding change in paragraph 2 of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations, was ratified.  

Mr. Sherrill entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period November 27 through 

December 11, 1967, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Renewal for further periods of twelve months of the $750 

million swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, maturing 

December 28, 1967, and with the Bank of Italy, maturing December 29, 

1967, was approved.  

Renewal for a period of twelve months of the $225 million 

swap arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, maturing December 29, 

1967, was approved.  

Renewal for a period of three months of the $100 million 

swap arrangement with the Bank of France, maturing December 29, 1967, 

was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 27 through December 11, 1967, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Maisel dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accord

ance with the following current economic policy directive:



12/12/67

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that industrial output and employment have rebounded 
following strike settlements in the automobile and other 
industries, and that prospects have heightened for more 
rapid expansion of over-all economic activity in the 
months ahead. Both industrial and consumer prices have 
continued to rise at a substantial rate. The imbalance 
in U.S. international transactions has worsened, partly 
because of weakening in the export surplus since midyear.  
Foreign purchases of gold have been large following the 
devaluation of the pound sterling. Bank credit expansion 
has lessened, with diminished bank buying of Government 
securities and continued moderate loan growth. Most 
interest rates have risen further in reaction to the 
British devaluation and Bank rate increase, the rise 
in Federal Reserve discount rates, and waning expectations 
of enactment of the President's fiscal program. In this 
situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
resistance of inflationary pressures and progress toward 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to moving slightly beyond the firmer 
conditions that have developed in money markets partly 
as a result of the increase in Federal Reserve discount 
rates; provided, however, that operations shall be 
modified as needed to moderate any apparently significant 
deviations of bank credit from current expectations or 
any unusual liquidity pressures.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, January 9, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


