











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 8, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 8, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 

St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Link, 

Mann, Partee, Solomon, and Taylor, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors



10/8/68

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eastburn, Baughman, Jones, Nelson, 
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Snellings, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Olson, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 10, 

1968, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on September 10, 1968 was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 10 through October 7, 

1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Secretary's Note: On March 14, 1968, the Committee had 

authorized negotiations looking toward increases in a number of 

System swap lines, on the understanding that any such increases



10/8/68 -3

would become effective upon a determination by Chairman Martin that 

they were in the national interest. As a result of a determination 

by Chairman Martin on October 8, 1968, that an increase in the swap 

line with the Bank of Italy from $750 million to $1 billion 

equivalent was in the national interest, the table contained in 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency 

operations was amended, effective immediately, to read as follows: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 100 
National Bank of Belgium 225 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 100 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 700 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,000 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 400 
Bank of Norway 100 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

System drawings in Swiss francs 600 
System drawings in authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

Also, on September 24, 1968, under the terms of the 

Committee's action of July 16, 1968, Chairman Martin had determined 

that an increase of $650 million, to $1 billion equivalent, in the 

limit on outstanding System forward commitments to deliver foreign



10/8/68

currencies to the Stabilization Fund was in the national interest.  

Accordingly, paragraph 1C(1) of the authorization for System 

foreign currency operations was amended, effective September 24, 

1968, to read as follows: 

Commitments to deliver foreign currencies to the 
Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion equivalent.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period September 10 through October 7, 1968, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Hayes, Hickman, and Kimbrel dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that over-all economic expansion has moderated, although 
less than projected, from its very rapid pace earlier in 
the year, but upward pressures on prices and costs are 
persisting. Most market interest rates have changed 
little on balance in recent weeks. Bank credit and time 
and savings deposits expanded rapidly this summer, but 
the money supply has shown no net growth since July 
after rising substantially for several months. The 
earlier improvement in the U.S. balance of payments was 
not maintained in August and September, according to 
preliminary indications, and the foreign trade balance 
and underlying payments position continue to be matters 
of serious concern. In this situation, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to sustainable economic growth,



10/8/68 -5

continued resistance to inflationary pressures, and 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about 
the prevailing conditions in money and short-term 
credit markets; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified, to the extent permitted by the 
forthcoming Treasury refunding operation, if bank 
credit expansion appears to be significantly exceeding 
current projections.  

It was agreed that the Secretariat for the current Treasury

Federal Reserve study of the U.S. Government securities market 

should be continued on a permanent basis, with responsibility for 

continuing study of the operations and functioning of the U.S.  

Government securities market.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 29, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


