











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 28, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 28, 1968, at 9:45 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, and Taylor, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



5/28/68 -2

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Gramley and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Parthemos, 
Baughman, Andersen, Tow, Green, and 
Craven, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas 
City, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 19 and 

30, 1968, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on April 19 and 30, 1968, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 30 through May 27, 1968,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



5/28/68 -3

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1B(3) of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations was amended, effective 

immediately, to read as follows: 

1B(3). Sterling purchased on a covered or 
guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under 
agreement with the Bank of England, up to $300 
million equivalent.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of three 

months of the $100 million swap arrangement with Bank of France, 

maturing June 28, 1968, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of six 

months of the $50 million fully drawn portion of the swap arrange

ment with the National Bank of Belgium, maturing June 24, 1968, 

was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of two System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, 

maturing June 12 and June 19, 1968, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of the System's Swiss franc drawings on the Swiss National 

Bank and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing June 18 

and June 21, 1968, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of two drawings by the Bank of England, maturing June 11 

and June 28, respectively, was authorized.



5/28/68

By unanimous vote, paragraph 4 of the foreign currency 

directive was amended, effective immediately, to read as follows: 

Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either 
outright or in conjunction with spot transactions, may 
be undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or 
discounts from giving rise to disequilibrating movements 
of short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative disturb
ances; (iii) to supplement existing market supplies of 
forward cover, directly or indirectly, as a means of 
encouraging the retention or accumulation of dollar 
holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to allow greater 
flexibility in covering System or Treasury commitments, 

including commitments under swap arrangements, and to 

facilitate operations of the Stabilization Fund; (v) to 

facilitate the use of one currency for the settlement of 
System or Treasury commitments denominated in other 
currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for System holdings 

of foreign currencies.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period April 30 through May 27, 1968, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 

that the very rapid increase in over-all economic activity 
is being accompanied by persisting inflationary pressures.  

There has been little or no growth on average in bank 

credit and time and savings deposits over the past two 

months, although the money supply has expanded consider

ably as U.S. Government deposits have declined. In recent



5/28/68

weeks both short- and long-term interest rates have risen 
sharply on balance from their earlier advanced levels, 
partly in reaction to shifting expectations with regard 
to the likelihood of fiscal restraint. There has been 
some revival of speculative activity in the private gold 
market and in foreign exchange markets. The U.S. foreign 
trade balance and over-all payments position continue to 
be a matter of serious concern. In this situation, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to resistance of 
inflationary pressures and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, while 
taking account of the potential for severe pressures in 
financial markets if fiscal restraint is not forthcoming.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining firm conditions in 
the money market; provided, however, that operations shall 
be modified if bank credit appears to be deviating 
significantly from current projections or if unusual 
pressures should develop in financial markets.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, June 18, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


