











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 18, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 18, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Bopp, Alternate for Mr. Ellis 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Link, 

Mann, Partee, Reynolds, Solomon, and 
Taylor, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors



6/18/68 -2

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Latham, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Parthemos, 
Baughman, Andersen, Tow, Green, and 
Craven, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas 
City, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Geng, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 28, 1968, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on May 28, 1968, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 28 through June 17, 1968, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of three 

months of the System drawing on the Bank of Italy, maturing July 26, 

1968, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances



6/18/68

during the period May 28 through June 17, 1968, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that the very rapid increase in over-all economic 
activity is being accompanied by persisting inflationary 
pressures. Enactment of fiscal restraint measures now 
under consideration in Congress, however, would be 
expected to contribute to a considerable moderation of 
the rate of advance in aggregate demands. Growth in 
bank credit and time and savings deposits has been 
relatively small on average in recent months, although 
the money supply has expanded considerably as U.S.  
Government deposits have declined. Both short- and 
long-term interest rates have receded from the advanced 
levels reached in May, mainly in reaction to enhanced 
expectations of fiscal restraint. The U.S. foreign trade 
balance and over-all payments position continue to be 
a matter of serious concern. In this situation, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to resistance of 
inflationary pressures and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, while 
taking account of the potential impact of developments 
with respect to fiscal legislation.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
generally firm but orderly conditions in the money 
market; provided, however, that if the proposed fiscal 
legislation is enacted operations shall accommodate 
tendencies for short-term interest rates to decline in 
connection with such affirmative congressional action 
on the pending fiscal legislation so long as bank 
credit expansion does not exceed current projections.



6/18/68 -4

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, July 16, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


