











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 13, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 13, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Bopp, Alternate 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Hersey, Link, Mann, Partee, Solomon, 

and Taylor, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors



8/13/68

Mr. Farrell, Director, Division of Federal 
Reserve Bank Operations, Board of 
Governors 1/ 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Weiner, Assistant Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Latham, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, MacLaury, Baughman, 
Jones, Tow, and Craven, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
New York, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Meek and Snellings, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Shotwell, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Stahl, Research Officer and Economist, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Duprey, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Mr. Fraser, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 16, 1968, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on July 16, 1968, was accepted.

1/ Entered shortly before the meeting closed.



8/13/68

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 16 through August 12, 

1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period July 16 through August 12, 1968, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 

that some elements of economic activity continued to 
expand vigorously in early summer. Expansion in over
all activity, however, is projected to slow considerably 
in coming months as a result of the new fiscal restraint 
measures and a marked reduction in inventory accumulation.  
Industrial prices have been increasing less rapidly in 
recent months, but consumer prices have continued to 
rise substantially. Wage pressures remain strong, and 

the recent wage settlement in the steel industry was 
followed by announcements of steel price increases.  

Both short- and long-term interest rates have declined 

considerably, in large part as a result of expectations 

of easier credit conditions. Bank time and savings 

deposits, particularly large-denomination CD's, have 

expanded sharply in early summer; growth in the money 

supply has continued large as U.S. Government deposits 
have been drawn down further on average; and growth in 
total bank credit has been unusually rapid. Although 
the U.S. balance of payments has recently shown a marked 

improvement, the foreign trade balance and underlying 

payments position continue to be matters of serious 
concern. In this situation, it is the policy of the



8/13/68

Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial condi
tions conducive to sustainable economic growth, continued 
resistance to inflationary pressures, and attainment of 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining, on balance, about 
the prevailing conditions in money and short-term credit 
markets; provided, however, that operations shall be 
modified if bank credit appears to be significantly 
exceeding current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, September 10, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


