











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 2, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 2, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Mann, Partee, 

Reynolds, Solomon, and Taylor, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



4/2/68

Messrs. Cardon and Fauver, Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 

Board of Governors 
Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Baughman, 

Andersen, Tow, Green, and Craven, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Wallace, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Geng, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 5, 1968, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on March 5, 1968, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the actions taken by members of the 

Federal Open Market Committee on March 16 and 17, 1968, authorizing



4/2/68 -3

the Special Manager to undertake negotiations looking toward 

increases in System swap arrangements with (1) the German Federal 

Bank, from $750 million to $1,000 million equivalent, and 

(2) the Bank of England, from $1,500 million to $2,000 million 

equivalent, to become effective, along with corresponding amend

ments to paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign 

currency operations, upon determinations by Chairman Martin that 

such increases were in the national interest, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the action taken on March 6, 1968, 

under paragraph 3 of the authorization for System foreign 

currency operations, by the Subcommittee designated in paragraph 

6 of the authorization, approving a purchase from the Swiss 

National Bank of $50 million equivalent of Swiss francs at a 

rate other than the prevailing market rate, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the action taken by members of the 

Committee on March 19, 1968, approving revised procedures with 

respect to allocations of securities in the System Open Market 

Account, effective March 21, 1968, was ratified. The revised 

procedures were as follows: 

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account 
shall be reallocated on the last business day of each 
month by means of adjustments proportionate to the 
adjustments that would have been required to equalize 
approximately the average ratios of gold holdings to



4/2/68

note liabilities of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks based 
on the ratios of gold to notes for the most recent five 
business days.  

2. Until the next reallocation the Account shall 
be apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in 
paragraph 1.  

3. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of 
delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 
Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 
that day.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 5 through April 1, 1968, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period March 5 through April 1, 1968, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that over-all economic activity has expanded at a very 
rapid pace in early 1968, with prices rising substantially, 
and that prospects are for a continuing rapid advance in 
activity and persisting inflationary pressures in the 
period ahead. Since late fall, growth rates of bank 
credit, the money supply, and time and savings accounts 
at financial institutions have moderated considerably.



4/2/68

Speculative activity in gold and foreign exchange markets, 
which was intense in early March, abated after the mid

month agreement on gold policy by gold pool members and 
appears to have slackened further following the Stockholm 

agreement regarding Special Drawing Rights. The foreign 

trade surplus, however, has remained at a sharply reduced 
level in recent months and the imbalance in U.S. inter
national payments continues to be a matter of serious 
concern. Most market interest rates have fluctuated 
widely, although rising on balance, in reaction to 

international financial developments, the firming of 

monetary policy, and uncertainties regarding military 
and fiscal prospects. In this situation, it is the 

policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 

financial conditions conducive to resistance of infla

tionary pressures and attainment of reasonable equilibrium 

in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 

be conducted with a view to attaining slightly firmer 

conditions in the money market; provided, however, that 

operations shall be modified if bank credit appears to 
be deviating significantly from current projections or 
if unusual liquidity pressures should develop.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 30, 1968, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


