











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 17, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 17, 1968, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Hayes, Vice Chairman, Presiding 

Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 

Maisel 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 

Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Mann, Partee, 
Reynolds, Solomon, and Taylor, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account



12/17/68

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat As
sistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Lewis, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, MacLaury, Eastburn, 
Jones, Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Wallace and Scheld, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 26, 

1968, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 26, 1968, was accepted.



12/17/68

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 26 through December 16, 

1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 26 through December 16, 1968, were ap

proved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that over-all economic activity is expanding rapidly 
and that upward pressures on prices and costs are 
persisting. Market interest rates have risen consid
erably further in recent weeks. Bank credit growth has 
been sustained by continuing strong expansion of time 
and savings deposits, while growth in the money supply 
has accelerated and U.S. Government deposits have 
declined. The U.S. foreign trade surplus remains very 
small and the over-all balance of payments apparently 
worsened in October and November. In this situation, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions conducive to the reduction 
of inflationary pressures, with a view to encouraging 
a more sustainable rate of economic growth and attaining 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to attaining firmer conditions 
in money and short-term credit markets, taking account 
of the effects of other possible monetary policy action;



12/17/68 -4

provided, however, that operations shall be modified 
if bank credit expansion appears to be deviating 
significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on January 14, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


