











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

November 26, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 26, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, Scanlon, and 
Treiber, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Mann, 

Partee, Reynolds, Solomon, and Taylor, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



11/26/68 -2

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Connell, Deputy General Counsel, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Nichols, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governor.  

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Parthemos, 
Baughman, Jones, Tow, Green, and Craven, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Richmond, 
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Geng, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve.Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 29, 1968, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on October 29, 1968, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the actions of 

members on November 22, 1968, (1) approving an increase from $700 

million to $1 billion in the Federal Reserve reciprocal currency 

arrangement with Bank of France, and the conforming amendment to 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency



11/26/68

operations, effective November 22, 1968; and (2) approving renewal 

of the French swap arrangement for a period of one year when it 

matured on December 27, 1968.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period October 29 through November 25, 

1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during 

the period October 29 through November 25, 1968, were approved, 

ratified,and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Hayes, Hickman, Kimbrel, and Morris dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the expansion in over-all economic activity, while 

still strong, is moderating somewhat further from its 
very rapid pace earlier in the year. Upward pressures 
on prices and costs are persisting. Most market interest 

rates have risen further in recent weeks. Bank credit 

has continued to expand rapidly. Growth in the money 
supply has accelerated from the low average rate of 
recent months, while expansion in commercial bank time 
and savings deposits has slowed. Savings inflows to 
thrift institutions increased somewhat further in Octo

ber but remained moderate. Following discussions among 
leading industrial countries, France, Germany, and 
Britain have acted to combat the recent speculation in 
their currencies by taking steps designed to reduce 
imbalances in their external payments. The U.S. foreign



11/26/68

trade balance and over-all balance of payments improved 
in the third quarter but partial data for recent weeks 
suggest that the improvement is not being sustained, and 
the underlying U.S. payments position remains a serious 
problem. In this situation, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial condi
tions conducive to sustainable economic growth, continued 
resistance to inflationary pressures, and attainment of 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining about the prevailing 
conditions in money and short-term credit markets; provided, 
however, that operations shall be modified if bank credit 
expansion appears to be exceeding current projections.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, December 17, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


