











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 16, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 16, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 

Bopp, Alternate 1/

Messrs. Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Francis and Swan, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of 

St. Louis and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken,1 / Mann, 
Partee, and Reynolds, Associate 

Economists

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



7/16/68

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government Finance 

Section, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Latham and Black, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of Boston and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Eastburn, Parthemos, Brandt, 
Baughman, Jones, Tow, Green, and Craven, 

Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 

Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, 
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, 

and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Boston 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 18, 1968, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 18, 1968, was accepted.

-2-



7/16/68

By unanimous vote, the action taken by Committee members 

on July 2, 1968, approving an increase, effective immediately, in 

the reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of France from 

$100 million to $700 million, and the corresponding amendment to 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency 

operations, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, John H. Kareken was elected Associate 

Economist of the Committee to serve until the first meeting of the 

Committee after February 28, 1969, with the understanding that in 

the event of the discontinuance of his official connection with 

the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, he would cease to have 

any official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

Mr. Kareken entered the meeting at this point.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 18 through July 15, 1968, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Bopp entered the meeting at this point.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1C(1) of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations was amended to increase the 

limit on outstanding System forward commitments to deliver foreign 

currencies to the Stabilization Fund from $350 million to a level 

to be determined by Chairman Martin (or, in his absence, 

Mr. Robertson) in light of the participation of other countries

-3-



7/16/68 -4

in the proposed funding arrangement for sterling balances but not 

exceeding $1,050 million equivalent, subject to the understanding 

that the action would become effective upon a determination by 

Chairman Martin (or, in his absence, Mr. Robertson) that it was 

in the national interest.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period June 18 through July 15, 1968, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, new procedures for System subscriptions 

in Treasury cash refundings, as proposed in the Manager's 

memorandum of July 10, 1968, were approved. It was agreed that 

a letter concerning the new procedures should be sent to the 

Secretary of the Treasury.  

Secretary's Note: On July 18, 1968, 
the following letter was sent to the 

Secretary of the Treasury over the 
Chairman's signature: 

I am enclosing a memorandum prepared by the Manager 
of the System Open Market Account regarding the handling 

of System subscriptions to Treasury refunding offerings 
in the light of recent innovations in Treasury debt 
management techniques.  

These innovations--which involved combining an 
exchange offering of new securities with a cash 

offering--have a number of obvious advantages from the 
point of view of debt management and System operations.  

There is, however, a disadvantage in that--for practical 
reasons--the System's options for exchanging its holdings 

of maturing issues are limited. As a result, the System's



7/16/68

subscriptions tend to be predetermined by the Treasury's 
choice of a particular debt management technique--a 
situation that may not be the best for monetary 
management. This anomalous situation could be avoided 
if the suggestions contained in the memorandum were 
adopted by the Treasury and I commend them to you.  

I emphasize that what is involved is a technical 
problem and not a question of basic relationships between 
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. I know that we 
both feel strongly that any Treasury offering must meet 
the test of the market and that the Treasury does not 
want to look to special System support of its financing 
operations. I am sure that we would agree also that it 
is essential for the Federal Reserve to have ample 
facilities for rolling over its holdings of maturing 
issues, including the possibility of subscribing to both 
long- and short-term issues in any optional Treasury 
refunding operation.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that over-all economic activity continued to expand 
rapidly in the second quarter, with inventory accumula
tion accelerating while the rise in capital outlays and 
in consumer spending slowed. The new fiscal restraint 
measures are expected to contribute to a considerable 
moderation of the rate of advance in aggregate demands.  
Industrial prices have been increasing less rapidly than 
earlier but consumer prices have continued to rise 
substantially and wage pressures remain strong. Growth 
in bank credit and time and savings deposits has been 
moderate on average in recent months; growth in the 
money supply has been larger as U.S. Government deposits 
have been reduced. Conditions in money and capital 
markets have eased somewhat, mainly in response to the 
increase in fiscal restraint. Although there recently 
have been large inflows of foreign capital, the U.S.



7/16/68

foreign trade balance and underlying payments position 
continue to be matters of serious concern. In this 

situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 

Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 

sustainable economic growth, continued resistance to 

inflationary pressures and attainment of reasonable 

equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 

forthcoming Treasury financing activity, System open 

market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 

shall be conducted with a view to accommodating the 

tendency toward somewhat less firm conditions in the 

money market that has developed since the preceding 
meeting of the Committee; provided, however, that 

operations shall be modified, to the extent permitted 

by Treasury financing, if bank credit appears to be 

deviating significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, August 13, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-6-


