











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 9, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 9, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 1/ 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 1/ 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 1/ 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Wayne

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Patterson, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas 

City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Craven, Hersey, Partee, 

and R. Solomon,2/ Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.  
2/ Withdrew from the meeting at the point indicated.



1/9/68

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board 
Mr. F. Solomon, Director, Division of 

Examinations, Board of Governors 1/ 

Messrs. Axilrod and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 

Governors 
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Heflin and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Eastburn, Mann, 
Brandt, Andersen, and Tow, Vice 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis, and 

Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Geng and Snellings, Assistant Vice 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of New York and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 27 

and December 12, 1967, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 27 and December 12, 1967, 

were accepted.  

1/ Withdrew from the meeting at the point indicated.



1/9/68

By unanimous vote, the action taken by members of the 

Federal Open Market Committee on December 14, 1967, increasing 

the swap arrangement with the Bank for International Settlements 

providing for System drawings in Swiss francs, and the arrangement 

with the Swiss National Bank, each from $250 million to $400 

million equivalent, effective immediately, and approving the 

corresponding changes in paragraph 2 of the authorization for 

System foreign currency operations, was ratified.  

The reports of audit of the System Open Market Account and 

of foreign currency transactions, made by the Board's Division of 

Examinations as at the close of business September 22, 1967, 

submitted by the Chief Federal Reserve Examiner under date of 

October 31, 1967, and distributed to the Committee under date of 

December 8, 1967, were accepted.  

Messrs. Frederic Solomon and Robert Solomon withdrew from 

the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 12, 1967, through 

January 8, 1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Martin and Mr. Robertson entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period December 12, 1967, through January 8, 1968, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.



1/9/68

Mr. Daane entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that over-all economic activity has been expanding 
vigorously, with both industrial and consumer prices 
continuing to rise at a substantial rate, and that 

prospects are for further rapid growth and persisting 

inflationary pressures in the period ahead. The 
imbalance in U.S. international transactions worsened 
further in late 1967, but the new program announced 
by the President should result in a considerable 
reduction in the deficit this year. Following 
announcement of the program, foreign purchases of gold 

slackened abruptly and the dollar strengthened in 

foreign exchange markets. Long-term bond yields have 
declined in recent weeks but some short-term interest 
rates have risen further. Bank credit has changed 

little on balance recently as banks have disposed of 

Government securities to accommodate strengthened loan 
demands. Growth in the money supply has slackened and 
flows into time and savings accounts at bank and 

nonbank financial intermediaries have continued to 

moderate. In this situation, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to resistance of inflationary 

pressures and progress toward reasonable equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
somewhat firmer conditions that have developed in the 
money market in recent weeks, partly as a result of 
the increase in reserve requirements announced to 
become effective in mid-January; provided, however, 
that operations shall be modified as needed to moderate 

any apparently significant deviations of bank credit 
from current expectations.



1/9/68 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, February 6, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


