











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 10, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 10, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, Scanlon, and 

Treiber, Alternate Members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.  

Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Reynolds, 

Solomon, and Taylor, Associate Economists 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors



9/10/68 -2

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Sternlight, Eastburn, 
Parthemos, Baughman, Jones, Tow, Green, 
and Craven, Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, 
Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago, St.  
Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Geng, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Shotwell, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 13 and 

19, 1968, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on August 13 and 19, 1968, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 13 through September 9, 

1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a period of up to one year 

of the $700 million swap arrangement with Bank of France, maturing 

September 27, 1968, was approved.



9/10/68

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period August 13 through September 9, 1968, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accord

ance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that, although consumer demands have been strong this 

summer, reduced rates of inventory accumulation and 

tapering growth of Government expenditures are being 

reflected in a slowing of expansion in over-all activity.  

Industrial prices have been increasing less rapidly in 

recent months, but consumer prices have continued to 

rise substantially and wage pressures remain strong.  

Most market interest rates have changed little on 

balance following reductions in Federal Reserve Bank 
discount rates. Growth in bank credit and time and 

savings deposits has been rapid this summer; growth in 

the money supply slowed in August as U.S. Government 

deposits were built up following an extended decline.  

The earlier improvement in the U.S. balance of payments 
was not maintained in August, according to preliminary 

indications, and the foreign trade balance and under

lying payments position continue to be matters of serious 

concern. In this situation, it is the policy of the 

Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 

conditions conducive to sustainable economic growth, 
continued resistance to inflationary pressures, and 

attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 

balance of payments.  

System open market operations until the next meeting 

of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to main
taining about the prevailing conditions in money and 

short-term credit markets; provided, however, that



9/10/68 -4

operations shall be modified if bank credit appears to 
be deviating significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, October 8, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


