











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 14, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on 

Thursday, March 14, 1968, at 5:30 p.m., at the call of Chairman 

Martin. This was a telephone conference meeting, and each individual 

was in Washington except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the 

following list of those participating.

PARTICIPATING: Mr. Martin, Chairman 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Ellis 
Mr. Hickman 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Sherrill 
Mr. Clay, Alternate for 

Mr. Galusha 
Mr. Coldwell, Alternate for 

Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for 

Mr. Hayes

(Boston) 
(Cleveland) 

(Kansas City) 

(Dallas) 

(New York)

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Partee, Reynolds, 

and Solomon, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open 

Market Account (New York) 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, 

System Open Market Account



3/14/68

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board 
Mr. Sammons, Associate Director, 

Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Kiley, Associate Director, Division 

of Bank Operations, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ring, Assistant Director, Division of 

Bank Operations, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gramley, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Semia, Technical Assistant, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Bilby and MacLaury, Vice Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

(New York) 

Mr. Geng, Assistant Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

(New York) 

With Messrs. Maisel, Mitchell, and Robertson dissenting, the 

Committee authorized the Special Manager to undertake negotiations 

looking toward increases in a number of the System swap lines, on the 

understanding that any such increases and corresponding amendments 

to paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency opera

tions would become effective upon a determination by Chairman Martin 

that they were in the national interest. Negotiations were authorized 

for increases in the swap lines with the following foreign banks to 

new levels not exceeding the amounts indicated (millions of dollars 

equivalent): 

National Bank of Belgium 400 

Bank of Canada 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,000



3/14/68

Bank of Japan 1,000 

Netherlands Bank 400 

Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 600 

Bank for International Settlements: 

System drawings in Swiss francs 600 

System drawings in other authorized 

European currencies 1,000 

It was agreed that the Committee would take a more liberal 

view for the time being of the time period appropriate to swap drawings.  

Secretary's note: On March 17, 
Chairman Martin determined that nego
tiations had been satisfactorily 
completed with respect to increases, 
to the levels indicated above, in the 

swap lines with (1) the Bank of Canada, 

(2) the Bank of Japan, (3) the Netherlands 

Bank, (4) the Swiss National Bank, and 

(5) the Bank for International Settlements.  
On March 17 Chairman Martin made the same 

determination with respect to an increase 
in the swap line with the Bank of Sweden 
to $250 million equivalent.  

Also, members of the Committee 
authorized the Special Manager to under

take negotiations looking toward increases 

in the reciprocal currency arrangements 

with (1) the German Federal Bank, from 

$750 to $1,000 million equivalent, on 

March 16, 1968; and (2) with the Bank 

of England, from $1,500 to $2,000 million 

equivalent, on March 17, 1968. It was 
understood that such increases and the 

corresponding amendments to paragraph 2 

of the authorization for System foreign 
currency operations would become effective 

upon a determination by Chairman Martin 

that they were in the national interest.  
Chairman Martin so determined on March 17, 
1968. Messrs. Robertson and Maisel, in 
voting to approve the negotiation of a



3/14/68

swap line increase with the German 
Federal Bank, noted that they continued 
to hold the general reservations con
cerning swap line increases at this 
juncture that they had expressed at 
the telephone conference meeting of 
the Committee held on March 14, but 
that since the majority of the Committee 
had approved such increases they felt 
it was appropriate that Germany also 
be included.  

As a result of these actions, the table contained in 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency 

operations was amended, effective March 17, 1968, to read as 

follows: 

Amount of 

arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 100 
National Bank of Belgium 225 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 100 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 100 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 750 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 400 
Bank of Norway 100 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

System drawings in Swiss francs 600 
System drawings in authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to



3/14/68

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

In light of recent international financial develop
ments, System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to maintaining firm but orderly conditions in the 
money market, taking into account the effects of in
creases in Federal Reserve discount rates.  

By unanimous vote, procedures with respect to allocation of 

securities in the System Open Market Account were revised to read 

as follows: 

1. The Board's Division of Bank Operations shall 
assemble, in the morning of each business day, data on 
the Federal Reserve note liability of each Bank and 
total gold reserves of each Bank for the preceding day.  

2. The Division of Bank Operations shall deter
mine from these data the amount of adjustment needed 
in each Bank's gold reserves to equalize, to five 
places to the right of the decimal with the last 
digit rounded, the reserve ratios of the 12 Federal 
Reserve Banks at the close of business on the preceding 
day. The amount of adjustment, rounded to the nearest 
dollar, will be furnished to the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.  

3. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall 
then reallocate the securities in the System Open 
Market Account as of the preceding day in such a 
way as to provide each Bank with a net settlement 
as close as possible to the amount of adjustment in 
paragraph 2.  

4. The Board's staff and each Federal Reserve 
Bank shall then be notified of the amounts involved 
and the Interdistrict Settlement Fund may be closed 
after giving effect to the adjustments.  

5. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of



3/14/68 -6

delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 
Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 
that day.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, April 2, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


