











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 6, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 6, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Wayne

Messrs. Ellis, Hickman, and Galusha, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bopp, Kimbrel, Clay, and Coldwell, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Atlanta, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Garvy, Hersey, Partee, 

Parthemos, and Solomon, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee



2/6/68

Messrs. Cardon and Fauver, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Messrs. Axilrod and Gramley, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Heflin, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve of Richmond 

Messrs. Eastburn, Mann, Taylor, Andersen, 
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas 
City, and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Meek, Assistant Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Runyon, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 9, 

1968, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on January 9, 1968, was accepted.



2/6/68 -3

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 9 through February 5, 

1968, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period January 9 through February 5, 1968, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that over-all economic activity has been expanding 
rapidly, with both industrial and consumer prices 
rising at a substantial rate, and that prospects are for 
continuing rapid growth and persisting inflationary 
pressures in the period ahead. The imbalance in U.S.  
international transactions worsened further in late 
1967, primarily because of a sharp reduction in the 
surplus on merchandise trade. Although day-to-day 
money market rates have remained firm, rates on other 
short-term instruments have declined recently; meanwhile, 
long-term bond yields have fluctuated irregularly below 
the peaks reached late last year. Growth in bank credit 
resumed in January, reflecting both loan expansion 
around the year end and Treasury financing. The money 
supply expanded sharply following earlier slackening, 
but flows into time and savings accounts at bank and 
nonbank financial intermediaries have continued to 
moderate. In this situation, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to resistance of inflationary 
pressures and progress toward reasonable equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments.



2/6/68

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
Treasury financing activity, System open market opera

tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining firm conditions 
in the money market, and operations shall be modified 
to the extent permitted by Treasury financing if bank 
credit appears to be expanding as rapidly as is 
currently projected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee, which 

would be the annual organizational meeting, would be held on 

Tuesday, March 5, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


