











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 30, 1968 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 30, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Ellis 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Kareken, Link, Mann, 

Partee, Reynolds, and Taylor, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



4/30/68

Mr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss McWhirter, Analyst, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Baughman, 
Andersen, Tow, Green, and Craven, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Snellings, Assistant Vice President 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 14 and April 2, 1968, 

were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on March 14 and April 2, 1968, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the action taken on April 11, 1968, under 

paragraph 3 of the authorization for System foreign currency operations, 

by the Subcommittee designated in paragraph 6 of the authorization, 

approving a purchase from the Netherlands Bank of $12.84 million



4/30/68 -3

equivalent of Dutch guilders at a rate other than the prevailing 

market rate, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 2 through 29, 1968, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph IB(3) of the authorization for 

System foreign currency operations was amended, effective immediately, 

to read as follows: 

1B(3). Sterling purchased on a covered or guaranteed 
basis in terms of the dollar, under agreement with the Bank 
of England, up to $250 million equivalent.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of three 

months of the drawing by the Bank of England maturing on May 21, 

1968, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three months 

of the two System drawings on the Belgian National Bank maturing on 

May 14 and May 28, 1968, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period April 2 through 29, 1968, were approved, ratified and confirmed.  

With Mr. Hickman dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following current economic policy directive:



4/30/68

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates that 
over-all economic activity has expanded at a very rapid pace 
thus far in 1968, with prices rising substantially, and that 
prospects are for a continuing rapid advance in activity and 
persisting inflationary pressures in the period ahead. Since 
late fall, growth rates of bank credit, the money supply, and 
time and savings accounts at financial institutions have on 
balance moderated considerably. Market interest rates have 
risen in recent weeks, partly in reaction to the firming of 
monetary policy including the further increase in Federal Reserve 
discount rates. The U.S. foreign trade balance has worsened 
further, and the international payments position of the United 
States continues to be a matter of serious concern. In this 
situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions conducive to resistance of infla
tionary pressures and attainment of reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of Treasury 
financing activity, System open market operations until the 
next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view 
to maintaining the firmer conditions prevailing in the money 
market; provided, however, that operations shall be modified, 
to the extent permitted by Treasury financing, if bank credit 
appears to be deviating significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 28, 1968, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


