











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 7, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 7, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 
Alternate Members of 
Market Committee

Hickman,1/ and Swan, 
the Federal Open

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 

Green, Hersey, Solomon, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account

1/ Entered the meeting at point indicated.



10/7/69

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special 
Assistants to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Associate 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Weiner, Assistant Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Jones, 
and Craven, Senior Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Richmond, St. Louis, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Brandt, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland 
and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Bodner, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Davis, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 9, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on September 9, 1969, was accepted.



10/7/69

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 9 through October 6, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Hickman entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, increases of $100 million each, from 

$100 million to $200 million, in the swap arrangements with the 

Austrian National Bank, the National Bank of Denmark, and the Bank 

of Norway, together with the conforming amendments to paragraph 2 

of the Authorization for System foreign currency operations, were 

approved, effective immediately. As amended, the paragraph read 

as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 
arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System Open Market 
Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months with the 
following foreign banks, which are among those designated 
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign 
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee 
to renew such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 500 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,000 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300



10/7/69

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 
Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

By unanimous vote, paragraph 2 of the continuing authority 

directive was amended to read as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase 

directly from the Treasury for the account of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York, or, if the New York Reserve Bank 
is closed, any other Reserve Bank for its own account 
(with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to 

issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) 
such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebt
edness as may be necessary from time to time for the 

temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that 

the rate charged on such certificates shall be a rate 
1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, 

and provided further that the total amount of such 

certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve 

Banks shall not exceed $1 billion.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period September 9 through October 6, 1969, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

With Mr. Maisel dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive:



10/7/69

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the pace of expansion in real economic activity was 
sustained in the third quarter by an acceleration of 
inventory investment, which about offset a further slack
ening in growth of private final sales. Some monthly 
economic measures have weakened recently, and slower 
over-all growth is projected for the fourth quarter 
Substantial upward pressures on prices and costs are 
persisting. Most market interest rates recently have 
risen to new highs as demands for funds have pressed 
against limited supplies. In September, on average, 
the money supply changed little as U.S. Government 
deposits rose considerably further, and bank credit 
increased slightly after 2 months of substantial 
decline. The outstanding volume of large-denomination 
CD's decreased further in September, and flows of con
sumer-type time and savings funds at banks and nonbank 
thrift institutions appear to have remained relatively 
weak. The U.S. foreign trade surplus increased a little 
in August. In August and September the deficit in the 
over-all balance of payments on the liquidity basis was 
very large, although not as large as in preceding months; 
and the official settlements balance, which had been in 
surplus for more than a year, shifted into deficit, 
reflecting slackened Euro-dollar borrowing by U.S. banks 
and new speculative flows into Germany. Exchange market 
tensions were reduced somewhat when the German Government 
decided to cease temporarily official sales of marks, 
after which the exchange rate for that currency rose 
above the official parity. In light of the foregoing 
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to the 
reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging sustainable economic growth and attaining 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term 
credit markets; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified if bank credit appears to be 
deviating significantly from current projections.  

By unanimous vote, the continuing authority directive was 

amended by the addition of the following paragraph 3:



10/7/69

In order to insure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee 
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to 
lend U.S. Government securities held in the System 
Open Market Account to Government securities dealers 
and to banks participating in Government securities 
clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee 
may specify from time to time.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 28, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


