











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 12, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 12, 1969, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Bopp 
Brimmer 
Coldwell 

Daane 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Swan, Alternate for Mr. Clay

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, and Hickman, 

Alternate Members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 

Messrs. Gramley, Green, Hersey, Link, 
Reynolds, Solomon, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System 
Open Market Account



8/12/69

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special 
Assistants to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Associate 
Advisers, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Weiner, Assistant Adviser, Divi
sion of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government 
Finance Section, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Fossum, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, 
and Craven, Senior Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, and San 

Francisco, respectively 
Messrs. Sternlight and Hocter, Vice 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York and Cleveland, 
respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic 
Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Scheld and Jordan, Assistant 
Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Chicago and 

St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York



8/12/69 -3

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 15, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on July 15, 1969, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 15 through August 11, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of three 

months, if requested, of the swap drawing by the Bank of England 

maturing on September 9, 1969, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during 

the period July 15 through August 11, 1969, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Maisel and Mitchell dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following current economic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
indicates that expansion in real economic activity 
slowed somewhat in the first half of 1969 and some 
further moderation is projected. Substantial 
upward pressures on prices and costs are persisting.



8/12/69

Most market interest rates recently have receded 
slightly from their earlier highs. In July the 
money supply expanded as U. S. Government deposits 
decreased further; bank credit declined on average, 
after adjusting for an increase in assets sold to 
affiliates and to customers with bank guarantees.  
The run-off of large-denomination CD's which began 
in mid-December continued without abatement in 
July, and there apparently were net outflows from 
consumer-type time and savings accounts at banks 
and nonbank thrift institutions combined. The 
over-all balance of payments deficit on the liquidity 
basis remained very large in July; the balance on 
the official settlements basis was still in surplus 
in the first half of the month but subsequently 
shifted toward deficit as U. S. banks' borrowings 
of Euro-dollars leveled off. Foreign exchange 
markets appear initially to be adjusting in an 
orderly fashion to the announced devaluation of 
the French franc. In light of the foregoing 
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open 
Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
conducive to the reduction of inflationary pressures, 
with a view to encouraging sustainable economic 
growth and attaining reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term 
credit markets; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified if bank credit appears to be 
deviating significantly from current projections 
or if pressures arise in connection with foreign 
exchange developments or with bank regulatory changes.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, September 9, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting was adjourned.  

Secretary


