











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 9, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 9, 1969, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 

Alternate Members of 

Market Committee

Hickman, and Swan, 
the Federal Open

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 

Green, Hersey, Link, Reynolds, Solomon, 
and Tow, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



9/9/69

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Associate Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Taylor, and Craven, Senior 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Monhollon, Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland 
and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Meek and Bowsher, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and St. Louis, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 12, 1969, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on August 12, 1969, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members on 

August 27, 1969, to increase the swap line with National Bank of



9/9/69 -3

Belgium to $500 million, with a conforming amendment to 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency 

operations, effective September 2, 1969, was ratified.1/ 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period August 12 through 

September 8, 1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period August 12 through September 8, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the dollar limit specified in 

paragraph 2 of the continuing authority directive, on Federal 

Reserve Bank holdings of short-term certificates of indebted

ness purchased directly from the Treasury, was increased from 

$1 billion to $2 billion, with the understanding that the limit 

would revert to $1 billion at the close of business on October 7, 

1969, unless otherwise decided by the Committee on or before that 

date. As amended, paragraph 2 read as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase 
directly from the Treasury for the account of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in 

1/ Committee members had initially voted on August 15, 1969 to 
authorize an increase in the Belgian swap line from $300 million to 
$500 million, effective August 18. This increase was not executed.  
Subsequently, the members took the action noted above.



9/9/69

cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations 
to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of 

special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may 

be necessary from time to time for the temporary 

accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the rate 

charged on such certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 
per cent below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, and 

provided further that the total amount of such certifi
cates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks 
shall not exceed $2 billion.  

With Messrs. Maisel and Mitchell dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that expansion in real economic activity slowed somewhat 
in the first half of 1969 and some further moderation 

during the second half is projected. Substantial upward 

pressures on prices and costs are persisting. Long-term 
interest rates recently have risen to new peaks, while 
short-term rates have changed little on balance. In 

August the money supply decreased while U.S. Government 

deposits rose somewhat; bank credit declined further on 
average; the run-off of large-denomination CD's continued 

without abatement; and there were further net outflows 

from consumer-type time and savings accounts at banks.  

The U.S. foreign trade surplus was very small in July.  

The over-all balance of payments deficit on the liquidity 
basis remained very large in both July and August, while 
the balance on the official settlements basis shifted 

into deficit in August as U.S. banks' borrowings of 
Euro-dollars leveled off. In light of the foregoing 
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 

Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to the 
reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging sustainable economic growth and attaining 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.



9/9/69 -5

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury refunding, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term 
credit markets; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified, to the extent permitted by the 
Treasury refunding, if bank credit appears to be 
deviating significantly from current projections or 
if pressures arise in connection with foreign exchange 
developments or with bank regulatory changes.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 7, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


