











































Minutes of Actions


Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee

March 4, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 4, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Bopp 
Brimmer 

Clay 
Coldwell 

Daane 
Maisel 

Mitchell 
Robertson 

Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, Hickman, Swan, and 

Treiber, Alternate Members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 

Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Brill, Economist 

Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Green, 
Hersey, Solomon, and Tow, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sherman, Consultant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 

to the Board of Governors



3/4/69

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos, Taylor, and Jones, Senior 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 

Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and MacLaury, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston and New York, respectively 

Messrs. Garvy and Kareken, Economic Advisers 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York 

and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mr. Shotwell, Assistant Vice President and 

Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 

Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one 

year beginning March 1, 1969, that it appeared that such persons 

were legally qualified to serve, and that they had executed their 

oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
with William F. Treiber, First Vice President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate;



3/4/69 -3

Karl R. Bopp, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Phila
delphia, with Aubrey N. Heflin, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate; 

Charles J. Scanlon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with W. Braddock Hickman, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

George H. Clay, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, with Eliot J. Swan, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate; 

Philip E. Coldwell, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Dallas, with Darryl R. Francis, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1970, with the understanding that in the event of the 

discontinuance of their official connection with the Board of 

Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee: 

Wm. McC. Martin, Jr. Chairman 
Alfred Hayes Vice Chairman 
Robert C. Holland Secretary 
Arthur L. Broida Deputy Secretary 

Kenneth A. Kenyon and Charles Molony Assistant Secretaries 
Howard H. Hackley General Counsel 

David B. Hexter Assistant General Counsel 
Daniel H. Brill Economist 
Stephen H. Axilrod, Ernest T.  

Baughman, David P. Eastburn, 
Ralph T. Green, A. B. Hersey, 
Robert G. Link, J. Charles Partee, 
John E. Reynolds, Robert Solomon, 

and Clarence W. Tow Associate Economists



3/4/69

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account 

until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee after February 28, 1970.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes and Charles A. Coombs 

were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Federal Open Market 

Committee as Manager of the System Open Market Account and as 

Special Manager for foreign currency operations for such Account, 

respectively, it being understood that their selection was subject 

to their being satisfactory to the Board of Directors of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently 
was received that Messrs. Holmes and 
Coombs were satisfactory to the Board of 
Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York for service in the respective 

capacities indicated.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 4, 

1969, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on February 4, 1969, was accepted.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, according to the customary practice of reviewing 

such matters at the first meeting in March of every year, and the 

actions set forth hereinafter were taken.



3/4/69

By unanimous vote, the following procedures with respect 

to allocations of securities in the System Open Market Account 

were approved without change: 

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account 
shall be reallocated on the last business day of each 
month by means of adjustments proportionate to the 
adjustments that would have been required to equalize 
approximately the average ratios of gold holdings to 
note liabilities of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks 
based on the ratios of gold to notes for the most 
recent five business days.  

2. Until the next reallocation the Account shall 
be apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in 
paragraph 1.  

3. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of 
delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 
Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 
that day.  

By unanimous vote, the following list for distribution of 

periodic reports prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

for the Federal Open Market Committee was approved: 

1. Members and Alternate Members of the Committee, 
other Reserve Bank Presidents, and officers of 
the Committee.  

*2. The Secretary of the Treasury.  
*3. The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary 

Affairs and the Deputy Under Secretary for 
Monetary Affairs.  

*4. The Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury 
working on debt management problems.  

*5. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.  
6. The Director of the Division of Federal Reserve 

Bank Operations, Board of Governors

* Weekly reports only.



3/4/69

7. The officer in charge of research at each of the 
Federal Reserve Banks not represented by its 
President on the Committee.  

8. The officers of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
working under the Manager and Special Manager of 
the System Open Market Account.  

9. With the approval of a member of the Committee or 
any other President of a Federal Reserve Bank, 
with notice to the Secretary, any other employee 
of the Board of Governors or of a Federal Reserve 
Bank.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the authoriza

tion, first given on March 1, 1951, for the Chairman to appoint a 

Federal Reserve Bank to operate the System Open Market Account 

temporarily in case the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is unable 

to function.  

By unanimous vote, the following resolution to provide for 

the continued operation of the Federal Open Market Committee during 

an emergency was reaffirmed: 

In the event of war or defense emergency, if the 
Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or in the event of the unavailability 
of both of them, the Secretary or Acting Secretary of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) 
certifies that as a result of the emergency the avail
able number of regular members and regular alternates 
of the Federal Open Market Committee is less than seven, 
all powers and functions of the said Committee shall be 
performed and exercised by, and authority to exercise 
such powers and functions is hereby delegated to, an 
Interim Committee, subject to the following terms and 
conditions: 

Such Interim Committee shall consist of seven 
members, comprising each regular member and regular 
alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee then



3/4/69

available, together with an additional number, sufficient 
to make a total of seven, which shall be made up in the 
following order or priority from those available: (1) 
each alternate at large (as defined below); (2) each 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank not then either a 
regular member or an alternate; (3) each First Vice 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank; provided that (a) 
within each of the groups referred to in clauses (1), 
(2), and (3) priority of selection shall be in numerical 
order according to the numbers of the Federal Reserve 
Districts, (b) the President and the First Vice President 
of the same Federal Reserve Bank shall not serve at the 
same time as members of the Interim Committee, and (c) 
whenever a regular member or regular alternate of the 
Federal Open Market Committee or a person having a higher 
priority as indicated in clauses (1), (2), and (3) becomes 
available he shall become a member of the Interim Committee 
in the place of the person then on the Interim Committee 
having the lowest priority. The Interim Committee is 
hereby authorized to take action by majority vote of those 
present whenever one or more members thereof are present, 
provided that an affirmative vote for the action taken 
is cast by at least one regular member, regular alternate, 
or President of a Federal Reserve Bank. The delegation 
of authority and other procedures set forth above shall 
be effective only during such period or periods as there 
are available less than a total of seven regular members 
and regular alternates of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.  

As used herein the term "regular member" refers to 
a member of the Federal Open Market Committee duly 
appointed or elected in accordance with existing law; 
the term "regular alternate" refers to an alternate of 
the Committee duly elected in accordance with existing 
law and serving in the absence of the regular member for 
whom he was elected; and the term "alternate at large" 
refers to any other duly elected alternate of the Com
mittee at a time when the member in whose absence he was 
elected to serve is available.  

By unanimous vote, the following resolution authorizing 

certain actions by the Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency

was reaffirmed:



3/4/69

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes 
each Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the 
actions set forth below during war or defense emergency 
when such Federal Reserve Bank finds itself unable after 
reasonable efforts to be in communication with the 
Federal Open Market Committee (or with the Interim Com
mittee acting in lieu of the Federal Open Market Committee) 
or when the Federal Open Market Committee (or such Interim 
Committee) is unable to function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of 
economic conditions and the general credit situation then 
prevailing (after taking into account the possibility of 
providing necessary credit through advances secured by 
direct obligations of the United States under the last 
paragraph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such 
Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and sell obligations of 

the United States for its own account, either outright or 
under repurchase agreement, from and to banks, dealers, 
or other holders of such obligations.  

(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations 
of the United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable 

to tender the actual securities representing such obliga
tions because of conditions resulting from the emergency, 
such Federal Reserve Bank may, in its discretion and 
subject to such safeguards as it deems necessary, accept 
from such seller, in lieu of the actual securities, a 

"due bill" executed by the seller in form acceptable to 
such Federal Reserve Bank stating in substantial effect 
that the seller is the owner of the obligations which 

are the subject of the purchase, that ownership of such 
obligations is thereby transferred to the Federal Reserve 

Bank, and that the obligations themselves will be delivered 

to the Federal Reserve Bank as soon as possible.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretion 
purchase special certificates of indebtedness directly 
from the United States in such amounts as may be needed 

to cover overdrafts in the general account of the Treasurer 

of the United States on the books of such Bank or for the 

temporary accommodation of the Treasury, but such Bank 

shall take all steps practicable at the time to insure as 
far as possible that the amount of obligations acquired 
directly from the United States and held by it, together



3/4/69

with the amount of such obligations so acquired and held 
by all other Federal Reserve Banks, does not exceed $5 
billion at any one time.  

Authority to take the actions set forth shall be 
effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve 
Bank is able again to establish communications with the 
Federal Open Market Committee (or the Interim Committee), 
and such Committee is then functioning.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the authoriza

tion, first given at the meeting on December 16, 1958, providing 

for System personnel assigned to the Office of Emergency Preparedness, 

Special Facilities Division, on a rotating basis to have access to 

the resolutions (1) providing for continued operation of the 

Committee during an emergency and (2) authorizing certain actions 

by the Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency.  

There was unanimous agreement that no action should be 

taken to change the existing procedure, as called for by resolution 

adopted June 21, 1939, requesting the Board of Governors to cause 

its examining force to furnish the Secretary of the Federal Open 

Market Committee a report of each examination of the System Open 

Market Account.  

It was agreed unanimously that no action should be taken 

at this time to amend the procedure authorized at the meeting of 

the Committee on March 2, 1955, and most recently reaffirmed on 

March 5, 1968, whereby, in addition to members and officers of 

the Committee and Reserve Bank Presidents not currently members



3/4/69 -10

of the Committee, minutes and other records could be made available 

to any other employee of the Board of Governors or of a Federal 

Reserve Bank with the approval of a member of the Committee or 

another Reserve Bank President, with notice to the Secretary.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Open Market 

Account in accordance with the following continuing authority 

directive relating to transactions in U.S. Government securities, 

agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances: 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the 
extent necessary to carry out the most recent current 
economic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the 
Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government 
securities in the open market, from or to 
Government securities dealers and foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
System Open Market Account at market prices 
and, for such Account, to exchange maturing 
U.S. Government securities with the Treasury 
or allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of such 
securities held in such Account at the close 
of business on the day of a meeting of the 
Committee at which action is taken with 
respect to a current economic policy directive 
shall not be increased or decreased by more 
than $2.0 billion during the period commencing 
with the opening of business on the day follow
ing such meeting and ending with the close of 
business on the day of the next such meeting;



3/4/69

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' accept
ances of the kinds designated in the Regulation 
of the Federal Open Market Committee in the 
open market, from or to acceptance dealers and 
foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, 
or deferred delivery basis, for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market 

discount rates; provided that the aggregate 
amount of bankers' acceptances held at any one 
time shall not exceed (1) $125 million or (2) 
10 per cent of the total of bankers' acceptances 
outstanding as shown in the most recent accept
ance survey conducted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, whichever is the lower; 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, 
obligations that are direct obligations of, or 
fully guaranteed as to principal and interest 

by, any agency of the United States, and prime 

bankers' acceptances with maturities of 6 months 

or less at the time of purchase, from nonbank 

dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase 
of such securities, obligations, or acceptances 
in 15 calendar days or less, at rates not less 
than (1) the discount rate of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York at the time such 
agreement is entered into, or (2) the average 
issuing rate on the most recent issue of 3-month 
Treasury bills, whichever is the lower; provided 
that in the event Government securities or 
agency issues covered by any such agreement are 

not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the 

agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be 
sold in the market or transferred to the System 

Open Market Account; and provided further that 
in the event bankers' acceptances covered by 
any such agreement are not repurchased by the 
seller, they shall continue to be held by the 

Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the 

open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase 
directly from the Treasury for the account of the Federal



3/4/69

Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in cases where 
it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more 
Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term 
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time 
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; 
provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such 
purchases, and provided further that the total amount of 
such certificates held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall not exceed $1 billion.  

By unanimous vote, the authorization for System foreign 

currency operations was amended to read as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for 
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to 
carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot 
or forward transactions on the open market at home and 
abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Stabiliza
tion Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve 
Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, and with 
the Bank for International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 

French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs

-12-



3/4/69

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in para
graph A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, 
including currencies purchased from the 
Stabilization Fund, and sold forward to the 
Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or 
forward, up to the amounts necessary to fulfill 
other forward commitments; 

(3) Additional currencies purchased 
spot or forward, up to the amount necessary for 
System operations to exert a market influence 
but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered 
or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, 
under agreement with the Bank of England, up 
to $300 million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments 
undertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign 
currencies, up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign 
currencies to the Stabilization Fund, up to 
the limit specified in paragraph 1B(1) above; 

(2) Commitments to deliver Italian 
lire, under special arrangements with the 
Bank of Italy, up to $500 million equivalent; 
and 

(3) Other forward commitments to 
deliver foreign currencies, up to $550 million 
equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal cur
rency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided 
that drawings by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any 
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless

-13-



3/4/69

the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System 
Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 
months with the following foreign banks, which are among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements on 
maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 100 
National Bank of Belgium 225 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 100 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,000 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 400 
Bank of Norway 100 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 
currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

3. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, all transactions in foreign currencies under
taken under paragraph 1(A) above shall be at prevailing 
market rates and no attempt shall be made to establish 
rates that appear to be out of line with underlying 
market forces.

-14-



3/4/69 -15-

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 
transactions. In making operating arrangements with 
foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign cur
rencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not 
commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless 
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any 
agreements or understandings concerning the administration 
of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board 
of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall 
be referred for review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested 
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum 
working balances. Such investments shall be in accordance 
with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman and 
the Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman 
of the Board of Governors (or in the absence of the 
Chairman or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors 
the members of the Board designated by the Chairman as 
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of 
the Committee his alternate) is authorized to act on 
behalf of the Committee when it is necessary to enable 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage in foreign 
currency operations before the Committee can be consulted.  
All actions taken by the Subcommittee under this paragraph 
shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, and in the absence of both, 
the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with the 
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of responsi
bility for foreign currency operations between the System 
and the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency operations, 
and to consult with the Secretary on such policy matters 
as may relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; and



C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory Council 
on International Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized 
to transmit pertinent information on System foreign 
currency operations to appropriate officials of the 
Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in 
the foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of Governors' 
Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relation
ships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

10. The Special Manager of the System Open Market 
Account for foreign currency operations shall keep the 
Committee informed on conditions in foreign exchange 
markets and on transactions he has made and shall render 
such reports as the Committee may specify.  

By unanimous vote, the foreign currency directive given below 

was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in 
foreign currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar 
in international exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of international 
payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with central 
banks of other countries having convertible currencies, 
with the International Monetary Fund, and with other 
international payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements in 
exchange rates, within the limits stated in the Inter
national Monetary Fund Agreement or established by 
central bank practices, reflect the interaction of

3/4/69 -16-



3/4/69

underlying economic forces and thus serve as efficient 
guides to current financial decisions, private and 
public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international 
liquidity in accordance with the needs of an expanding 
world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee, System operations in 
foreign currencies shall be undertaken only when neces
sary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the 
flows of international payments, if such fluctuations 
(1) are deemed to reflect transitional market unsettle
ment or other temporary forces and therefore are expected 
to be reversed in the foreseeable future; and (2) are 
deemed to be disequilibrating or otherwise to have 
potentially destabilizing effects on U.S. or foreign 
official reserves or on exchange markets, for example, 
by occasioning market anxieties, undesirable speculative 
activity, or excessive leads and lags in international 
payments; 

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in 
spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums 
and discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever 
supply or demand persists in influencing exchange rates 
in one direction, System transactions should be modified 
or curtailed unless upon review and reassessment of the 
situation the Committee directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions 
in exchange-markets. Special factors that might make 
for exchange market instabilities include (1) responses 
to short-run increases in international political tension, 
(2) differences in phasing of international economic 
activity that give rise to unusually large interest rate 
differentials between major markets, and (3) market rumors 
of a character likely to stimulate speculative trans
actions. Whenever exchange market instability threatens 
to produce disorderly conditions, System transactions 
may be undertaken if the Special Manager reaches a 
judgment that they may help to reestablish supply and

-17-



demand balance at a level more consistent with the 
prevailing flow of underlying payments. In such cases, 
the Special Manager shall consult as soon as practicable 
with the Committee or, in an emergency, with the members 
of the Subcommittee designated for that purpose in para
graph 6 of the Authorization for System foreign currency 
operations; and 

D. To adjust System balances within the 
limits established in the Authorization for System 
foreign currency operations in light of probable 
future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements are 
appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign currencies 
for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either 
outright or in conjunction with spot transactions, may 
be undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or 
discounts from giving rise to disequilibrating movements 
of short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative dis
turbances; (iii) to supplement existing market supplies 
of forward cover, directly or indirectly, as a means of 
encouraging the retention or accumulation of dollar 
holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to allow 
greater flexibility in covering System or Treasury 
commitments, including commitments under swap arrange
ments, and to facilitate operations of the Stabilization 
Fund; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for the 
settlement of System or Treasury commitments denominated 
in other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for System 
holdings of foreign currencies.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 4, through March 3, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the

3/4/69 -18-



period February 4 through March 3, 1969, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity has been 
moderating, but that upward pressures on prices and 
costs are persisting. Prospects are for some further 
slowing in economic expansion in the period ahead. Most 
market interest rates have edged up on balance in recent 
weeks. In the first two months of the year bank credit 
changed little on average, as investments contracted 
while loan demands, especially from businesses, remained 
strong. The outstanding volume of large-denomination 
CD's continued to decline sharply and inflows of other 
time and savings deposits slowed. Growth in the money 
supply moderated as U.S. Government deposits rose con
siderably. It appears that a sizable deficit reemerged 
in the U.S. balance of payments on the liquidity basis 
in January and February and, with Euro-dollar inflows 
moderating, a deficit also reappeared in the balance on 
the official settlements basis in February. In this 
situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
the reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging a more sustainable rate of economic growth 
and attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining on balance about 
the prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term 
credit markets; provided, however, that operations shall 
be modified if bank credit appears to be deviating 
significantly from current projections.

3/4/69 -19-



3/4/69 -20

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, April 1, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


