











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 16, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 16, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Heflin and Hickman, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 

Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 
Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 

Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 
Green, Hersey, Reynolds, Solomon, and 
Tow, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 
Account



12/16/69

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special 
Assistants to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Associate Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 

of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Lewis and Merritt, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of St. Louis and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, and 

Craven, Senior Vice Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 

Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Hocter, Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Davis, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York 

Mr. Carlson, Assistant Vice President, 

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 25, 

1969, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 25, 1969, was accepted.



12/16/69

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 25 through December 15, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 25 through December 15, 1969, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real economic activity has expanded only moderately 
in recent quarters and that a further slowing of growth 
appears to be in process. Prices and costs, however, 
are continuing to rise at a rapid pace. Most market 
interest rates have advanced further in recent weeks 
partly as a result of expectational factors, including 
concern about the outlook for fiscal policy. Bank 
credit rose rapidly in November after declining on 
average in October, while the money supply increased 
moderately over the two-month period; in the third 
quarter, bank credit had declined on balance and the 
money supply was about unchanged. The net contraction 
of outstanding large-denomination CD's has slowed 
markedly since late summer, apparently reflecting mainly 
an increase in foreign official time deposits. However, 
flows of consumer-type time and savings funds at banks 
and nonbank thrift institutions have remained weak, and 
there is considerable market concern about the potential 
size of net outflows expected around the year end. In 
November the balance of payments deficit on the liquidity 
basis diminished further and the official settlements 
balance reverted to surplus, mainly as a result of return



12/16/69

flows out of the German mark and renewed borrowing by 
U.S. banks from their foreign branches. In light of the 

foregoing developments, it is the policy of the Federal 

Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
conducive to the reduction of inflationary pressures, 
with a view to encouraging sustainable economic growth 
and attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's 

balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee 

shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing firm conditions in the money market; pro

vided, however, that operations shall be modified if 

bank credit appears to be deviating significantly 

from current projections or if unusual liquidity 
pressures should develop.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, January 13, 

1970, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


