











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 14, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 14, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Coldwell, and Scanlon, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Link, Mann, 

Partee, Solomon, and Taylor, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



1/14/69 -2

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Eastburn, Snellings, 
Baughman, Jones, Tow, Green, and Craven, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Richmond, 
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 17, 1968, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on December 17, 1968, was accepted.  

The reports of audit of the System Open Market Account and of 

foreign currency transactions, made by the Board's Division of Federal 

Reserve Bank Operations as at the close of business on October 18, 1968, 

and submitted by Mr. Schaeffer, Chief Federal Reserve Examiner, were 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 17, 1968, through 

January 13, 1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



1/14/69

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period December 17, 1968, through January 13, 1969, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Morris dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank was autho

rized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity has been mod
erating, with slower growth in consumer outlays but 
higher rates of business inventory accumulation and 
capital expenditures. Upward pressures on prices and 
costs, however, are persisting. Since the mid-December 
firming of monetary policy, most interest rates have 
risen further and, with the outstanding volume of large 
denomination CD's declining sharply, bank credit expansion 
has slowed. Growth in the money supply moderated somewhat 
on average in December from its rapid November pace. The 
U.S. foreign trade surplus remains very small but near the 
end of the year unusual capital inflows had a markedly 
favorable effect on the over-all balance of payments. In 
this situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to the 
reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to encour
aging a more sustainable rate of economic growth and attain
ing reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted 
with a view to maintaining the prevailing firm conditions in 
money and short-term credit markets; provided, however, that 
operations shall be modified, to the extent permitted by the 
forthcoming Treasury refunding, if bank credit expansion 
appears to be deviating significantly from current projections.



1/14/69 -4

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, February 4, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


