











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 15, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 15, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Maisel 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, Hickman, and Swan, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Green, 

Hersey, Reynolds, and Tow, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 

Governors



7/15/69

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos and Craven, Senior Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, and Andersen, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Cleveland, Atlanta, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Garvy and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Fieleke, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 24, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 24, 1969, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 24 through July 14, 1969,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



7/15/69 -3

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months, if requested, of the swap drawings by the National Bank 

of Belgium maturing in the period August 8-15, 1969, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months, if requested, of the swap drawings by the Bank of England 

maturing in the period August 11-21, 1969, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period June 24 through July 14, 1969, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity, after moderat
ing slightly in the first quarter, has continued at 
about the same pace since then. Substantial upward 
pressures on prices and costs are persisting. Market 
interest rates have fluctuated widely recently, partly 
because of varying expectations, although credit demands 
remain relatively strong. Short-term rates on balance 
have continued under upward pressure, against the back
ground of considerable restraint on the banking system.  
In June bank credit showed little change, after allowance 
for assets sold to affiliates and to customers with bank 
guarantees. Growth in the money supply resumed at a 
slow pace, and the run-off of large-denomination CD's 
which began in mid-December continued without abatement.  
There apparently were substantial net outflows from 
consumer-type time and savings accounts at banks and



7/15/69

nonbank thrift institutions around midyear, following a 
period of slackened growth. The over-all balance of 
payments deficit on the liquidity basis rose sharply in 
the second quarter; there were large outflows into 

German marks and into Euro-dollar deposits, and there 
was no significant improvement in net exports. In 

contrast, there was another large surplus on the official 
settlements basis as U.S. banks borrowed heavily in the 
Euro-dollar market. In light of the foregoing develop
ments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
the reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging a more sustainable rate of economic growth 
and attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury refunding, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining the currently 
prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term 

credit markets; provided, however, that operations shall 
be modified, to the extent permitted by the Treasury 

refunding, if bank credit appears to be deviating 

significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 12, 1969, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary


