











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 1, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 1, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 1 / 

Bopp 
Brimmer 

Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 

Sherrill 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Francis, Hickman, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 

Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 
Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Green, 

Hersey, Link, Partee, Reynolds, Solomon, 
and Tow, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



4/1/69

Mr. Sherman, Consultant, Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 

to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Black, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Parthemos, Jones, and Craven, 
Senior Vice Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Brandt, Vice President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Miss Beekel, Assistant Vice President and 
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

By unanimous vote, Mr. Robertson was elected Acting Chairman 

for the period until Chairman Martin entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 4, 1969,

were approved.



4/1/69 -3

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on March 4, 1969, was accepted.  

Chairman Martin entered the room and assumed the chair.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 4 through 31, 1969, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period March 4 through 31, 1969, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Coldwell and Maisel dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that, while expansion in real economic activity has 
moderated somewhat further, current and prospective 
activity now appears stronger than earlier projections 
had indicated. Substantial upward pressures on prices 
and costs are persisting. Most long-term interest rates 
have risen further on balance in recent weeks, but 
movements in short-term rates have been mixed. In the 
first quarter of the year bank credit changed little on 
average, as investments contracted while loans expanded 
further. In March the outstanding volume of large
denomination CD's continued to decline sharply; inflows 
of other time and savings deposits were moderate; and 
growth in the money supply remained at a sharply reduced 
rate. It appears that a sizable deficit reemerged in



4/1/69

the U.S. balance of payments on the liquidity basis in 
the first quarter but that the balance on the official 
settlements basis remained in surplus as a result of 
further large inflows of Euro-dollars. In this 
situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
the reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging a more sustainable rate of economic growth 
and attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining firm conditions 
in money and short-term credit markets, taking account 
of the effects of other possible monetary policy action; 
provided, however, that operations shall be modified if 
bank credit appears to be deviating significantly from 
current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, April 29, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


