











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

November 25, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 25, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Bopp 
Brimmer 

Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 

Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 

Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 
Alternate Members of 
Committee

Hickman, and Swan, 
the Federal Open Market

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 

Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 
Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 

Green, Hersey, Link, Reynolds, Solomon, 
and Tow, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



11/25/69

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 

to the Board of Governors 
Mr. O'Connell, Deputy General Counsel, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Associate Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Taylor, and Craven, Senior 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Snellings, Vice Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Keran, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 28, 1969, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on October 28, 1969, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members amending 

paragraph 1(a) of the continuing authority directive, effective Novem

ber 14, 1969, to increase the leeway for changes in System Account



11/25/69

holdings of U.S. Government securities between meetings of the 

Committee from $2 billion to $3 billion, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period October 28 through November 24, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the continuing authority 

directive was amended to reduce the leeway for changes in System 

Account holdings of U.S. Government securities between meetings of 

the Committee from $3 billion to $2 billion. As amended, paragraph 

1(a) read as follows: 

To buy or sell U.S. Government securities in the 

open market, from or to Government securities dealers 

and foreign and international accounts maintained at 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, 
or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market 

Account at market prices and, for such Account, to 

exchange maturing U.S. Government securities with the 

Treasury or allow them to mature without replacement; 

provided that the aggregate amount of such securities 

held in such Account at the close of business on the 

day of a meeting of the Committee at which action is 

taken with respect to a current economic policy direc

tive shall not be increased or decreased by more than 

$2.0 billion during the period commencing with the 

opening of business on the day following such meeting 

and ending with the close of business on the day of the 

next such meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period October 28 through November 24, 1969, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to



11/25/69

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real economic activity has expanded only moderately 

in recent quarters and that a further slowing of growth 

appears to be in process. Prices and costs, however, are 
continuing to rise at a rapid pace. Most market interest 

rates have again been advancing in recent weeks, in many 

cases reaching new highs as a result of demand pressures, 
including heavy Treasury and foreign official bill sales, 
and a reversal of earlier market expectations partly 

stemming from growing concern about the outlook for fiscal 
policy. In October bank credit declined on average and 

the money supply changed little, but both appear to be 
increasing relatively rapidly in November. Recently the 
net contraction of outstanding large-denomination CD's 

has slowed markedly, apparently reflecting mainly an 

increase in foreign official time deposits. However, 

flows of consumer-type time and savings funds at banks 
and nonbank thrift institutions have remained weak. In 

the third quarter a small surplus in U.S. foreign trade 

re-emerged, but there was another very large deficit in 
the over-all balance of payments on the liquidity basis 
and the official settlements balance, which had been in 

surplus earlier, was also in deficit. More recently, re
turn flows out of the German mark have apparently con
tributed to some short-run improvement in the U.S. payments 

position. In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to the reduction of 

inflationary pressures, with a view to encouraging sus
tainable economic growth and attaining reasonable equilibrium 

in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera

tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 

conducted with a view to maintaining the prevailing firm 

conditions in money and short-term credit markets; provided, 

however, that operations shall be modified if bank credit 

appears to be deviating significantly from current projec

tions or if pressures arise in connection with possible 

bank regulatory changes.



11/25/69

By unanimous vote, the following letter was approved: 

Mr. John F. Hahn, 
3700 Bagley, Apt. 305, 
Los Angeles, California. 90034 

Dear Mr. Hahn: 

In response to your letter of September 19, 1969, 
and pursuant to section 271.6 of its Rules Regarding Avail
ability of Information, the Federal Open Market Committee 
has reviewed your request for access to certain Committee 
records. Your letter requested such review following an 
earlier exchange of correspondence between you and Charles 
Molony, and was prompted by Mr. Molony's indication that 
certain Committee records are not available for public 
inspection.  

The first two items in your appeal (questions 5 
and 6 of your inquiry) involve staff memoranda, briefings, 
and reports in connection with any Committee meeting in 
1969 and minutes of discussion at such meetings in 1968 
and 1969. With respect to these records, the Committee 
has sustained the determination reported to you by Mr.  
Molony. The Committee has adopted procedures intended to 
inform the public of its actions as fully and as promptly 
as possible without compromising the effectiveness of those 
actions. To that end, an extensive summary record of policy 
actions is published by the Committee, and action minutes 
are also available for public inspection, with deferrals of 
generally about 90 days. Disclosure of the materials which 
you request would unnecessarily inhibit the free discussion 
essential to a reasoned group judgment, and would also reveal 
actions considered but deferred or not taken, with possible 
adverse effects on both public and private interests. For 
these reasons, the Committee relies upon the exemption from 
public disclosure provided by 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(5), and declines 
to make such material available for public inspection.  

Your letter also requests a review of the denial of 
access to data regarding specific securities transactions with 
individual dealers. You explain that your interest is in 
determining the amount of profit made by dealers on such trans
actions, and indicate that, at this time at least, you are not 
interested in data with respect to any particular dealer. This 
casts a somewhat different light on the issue, since it was 
previously understood that you were requesting access to the



11/25/69

records of transactions with individual and specified 
dealers. The Committee would sustain Mr. Molony's ruling 
with respect to transactions revealing the identity of 
individual dealers, but information as to the prices at 
which securities were purchased and sold in the conduct of 
System open market operations would be provided, without 
identification of individual dealers and subject to a 
reasonable time lag, We should note, however, that this 
information will in fact shed little light on profits 
made by dealers on transactions with the Federal Reserve.  

It should also be noted that this material, even 
for a relatively brief time span, would be voluminous, and 
its assembly would be very time-consuming for our staff 
and consequently costly to you under the fees chargeable 
for search time. A compilation very similar to that in 
which you express an interest was prepared several years 
ago in response to a Congressional inquiry. While this 
particular compilation is not current, it could be pro
vided fairly promptly and at little cost; you might 
therefore wish to inspect it as a first step and make a 
judgment in that light as to whether, and to what extent, 
you wish to inquire further into the matter.  

Secretary's note: The letter was transmitted over Mr. Holland's 

signature later in the day.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the release with a 

reasonable time lag to any person on request of certain documents held 

at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, described in a staff memorandum 

of November 12, 1969, in supplementation of the list of such documents 

that had been approved for release on June 20, 1967.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, December 16, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


