











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 4, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 4, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr, 

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Galusha 
Hickman 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Clay and Coldwell, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and Swan, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, Kareken, Partee, 

Solomon, and Taylor, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors



2/4/69

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special 
Assistants to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Gramley, Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hilkert and Helmer, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Eastburn, Parthemos, Baughman, 
Jones, Tow, and Craven, Senior Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, 
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and Green, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Bodner and Geng, Assistant Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Miss Beekel, Assistant Vice President and 
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 14, 

1969, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on January 14, 1969, was accepted.



2/4/69

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 14 through February 3, 

1969, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period January 14 through February 3, 1969, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity has been 
moderating, but that upward pressures on prices and 
costs are persisting. Prospects are for some further 
slowing in economic expansion in the period ahead.  
Market interest rates recently have fluctuated near the 
highs reached around the turn of the year. Bank credit 
contracted slightly in January on average, as the 
outstanding volume of large-denomination CD's continued 
to decline sharply, inflows of other time and savings 
deposits slowed, and growth in the money supply 
moderated. The U.S. balance of payments on the 
liquidity basis appears to have reverted to deficit 
in early 1969, but large inflows of Euro-dollars have 
had the effect of keeping the official settlements 
balance in surplus. In this situation, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to the reduction of 
inflationary pressures, with a view to encouraging a 
more sustainable rate of economic growth and attaining 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of the current Treasury refunding, System open market



2/4/69

operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term 
credit markets; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified, to the extent permitted by the 
Treasury refunding, if bank credit appears to be 
deviating significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on March 4, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


