











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 27, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 27, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Kimbrel and Galusha, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 

Green, Hersey, Link, Reynolds, Solomon, 
and Tow, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



5/27/69

Mr. Sherman, Consultant, Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 

to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Latham and MacDonald, First Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston and Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Taylor, Jones, and Craven, Senior 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, St. Louis, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Hocter, and Snellings, 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Cleveland, and Richmond, 
respectively 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Sandberg, Special Assistant, Securities 
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 29, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on April 29, 1969, was accepted.

-2-



5/27/69 -3

By unanimous vote, J. Charles Partee was elected Economist 

and Lyle E. Gramley,Associate Economist of the Federal Open Market 

Committee to serve until the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1970, with the understanding that in the event of the 

discontinuance of their official connection with the Board of 

Governors, they would cease to have any official connection with 

the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members on 

May 14, 1969, approving equalization of System swap lines with the 

Netherlands Bank and the National Bank of Belgium at $300 million each, 

and the conforming amendments to paragraph 2 of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations, effective immediately, was 

ratified.  

As a result of these actions, the table contained in 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency 

operations was amended, effective May 14, 1969, to read as 

follows: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 100 
National Bank of Belgium 300 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 100 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000



5/27/69

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Bank of Italy 1,000 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300 
Bank of Norway 100 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 
currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 29 through May 26, 1969, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months, if requested, of the two drawings by the Bank of England 

maturing in the period June 9-10, 1969, and totaling $150 million, 

was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period April 29 through May 26, 1969, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive:



5/27/69

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity is continuing 
to moderate slightly, but that substantial upward 
pressures on prices and costs are persisting. Interest 
rates have risen in recent weeks. Bank credit and the 
money supply appear to be changing little on average in 
May after bulging in April. The outstanding volume of 
large-denomination CD's has continued to decline, and 
the available evidence suggests only modest recovery in 
other time and savings deposits at banks and in savings 
balances at nonbank thrift institutions following the 
outflows of the first half of April. The U.S. balance 
of payments on the liquidity basis was in sizable 
deficit in the first 4 months of 1969 but the balance 
on the official settlements basis remained in surplus 
as a result of large inflows of Euro-dollars. However, 
there were substantial outflows of funds from the United 
States in the first half of May, during the period of 
intense speculation on a revaluation of the German mark, 
and the payments balance was in very large deficit on 
both bases. In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to the reduction 
of inflationary pressures, with a view to encouraging 
a more sustainable rate of economic growth and attaining 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the 
prevailing pressure on money and short-term credit 
markets; provided, however, that operations shall be 
modified if .bank credit appears to be deviating 
significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, June 24, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


