











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 24, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 24, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 

Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, Hickman, and Swan, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 

Green, Hersey, Reynolds, Solomon, and 

Tow, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sherman, Consultant, Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 

to the Board of Governors



6/24/69

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Taylor and Jones, Senior Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and Hocter, Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston and Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Garvy and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Wallace, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 27, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on May 27, 1969, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 27 through June 23, 1969,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



6/24/69

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months, if requested, of the swap drawings by the National Bank 

of Belgium maturing in the period July 2-16, 1969, was authorized.  

It was agreed unanimously that the informal understandings 

governing use of the existing authority to warehouse up to $1 

billion of foreign currencies for the Stabilization Fund should 

be temporarily liberalized to permit use of the full facility for 

the general purposes of the Stabilization Fund without limitation 

as to currency.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period May 27 through June 23, 1969, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Maisel dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity is continuing 
to moderate slightly, but that substantial upward 
pressures on prices and costs are persisting. Most 
market interest rates have risen considerably on 
balance in recent weeks, as credit demands continued 
strong against the background of considerable restraint 
on the banking system. Growth in bank credit and the 
money supply thus far in 1969 has been limited, and 
both declined somewhat on average in May. Large
denomination CD's have continued to run off at a rapid 
pace recently, and net inflows of consumer-type time



6/24/69

and savings deposits have remained small. At nonbank 
thrift institutions, savings inflows slowed somewhat 
on average in April and May. Very heavy Euro-dollar 
borrowing by U.S. banks through their foreign branches 
produced a large surplus in the balance of payments on 
the official settlements basis after mid-May. On the 
other hand, high Euro-dollar interest rates apparently 
also stimulated outflows of funds from the United States 

that contributed to a large deficit on the liquidity 
basis thus far in June. In light of the foregoing devel

opments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
the reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view 
to encouraging a more sustainable rate of economic growth 
and attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to maintaining the firm conditions 
currently prevailing in money and short-term credit 
markets; provided, however, that operations shall be 
modified if bank credit appears to be deviating signif
icantly from current projections or if unusual liquidity 
pressures should develop.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, July 15, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


