











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 29, 1969 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 29, 1969, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 

Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 

Scanlon

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 
Alternate Members of 
Market Committee

Hickman, and Swan, 
the Federal Open

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Brill, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Green, 

Hersey, Partee, Solomon, and Tow, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account



4/29/69

Mr. Sherman, Consultant, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special 
Assistants to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Associate Adviser, Divi
sion of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Bernard, Special Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assis
tant, Office of the Secretary, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Taylor, Jones, and Craven, Senior 
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, St. Louis, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Sternlight, and 
Snellings, Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
New York, and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Davis, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Geng and Shotwell, Assistant Vice 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York and Cleveland, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 1, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on April 1, 1969, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 1 through 28, 1969,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



4/29/69 -3

With Messrs. Brimmer and Mitchell dissenting, renewal for 

further periods of three months, if requested, of the four swap 

drawings by the Bank of France maturing in the period May 19-20, 

1969, and totaling $281 million, was authorized.  

With Mr. Brimmer dissenting, renewal for further periods of 

three months, if requested, of the seven swap drawings by the Bank 

of England maturing in the period May 20 - June 4, 1969, and 

totaling $800 million, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period April 1 through 28, 1969, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that expansion in real economic activity has moderated 
only slightly since the fourth quarter of 1968. At the 
same time, substantial upward pressures on prices and 
costs are persisting. Long-term interest rates have 
generally declined in recent weeks, but most short-term 
rates have risen somewhat. In the first quarter of the 
year bank credit changed little on average and the 
money supply grew at a sharply reduced rate. In early 
April both measures increased substantially, influenced 
in part by large tax-date borrowing and deposit bulges 
around Easter. The outstanding volume of large-denom
ination CD's has continued to decline and there 
was a net outflow of consumer-type time and savings



4/29/69

deposits from banks and other thrift institutions in 
the first half of April. A sizable deficit reemerged 
in the U. S. balance of payments on the liquidity 
basis in the first quarter but the balance on the 
official settlements basis remained in surplus as a 
result of large inflows of Euro-dollars. In this 
situation, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
the reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging a more sustainable rate of economic growth 
and attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury refunding, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the pre
vailing firm conditions in money and short-term credit 
markets; provided, however, that operations shall be 
modified, to the extent permitted by the Treasury 
refunding, if bank credit appears to be deviating 
significantly from current projections.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 27, 1969, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


