











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 10, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 10, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Bopp 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Hickman, and Swan, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 

Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 

Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 

Messrs. Axilrod, Baughman, Eastburn, Gramley, 
Green, Hersey, Link, Solomon, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 
Account



2/10/70

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 

to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hilkert and Black, First Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia 
and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, Jones, 
and Craven, Senior Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Hocter, Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, Arthur F. Burns was elected Chairman of the 

Federal Open Market Committee to serve until the election of his 

successor at the first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 

1970, with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance 

of his official connection with the Board of Governors during that 

period, he would cease to have any official connection with the

Federal Open Market Committee.



2/10/70 -3

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 15, 

1970, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on January 15, 1970, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 15 through February 9, 

1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period January 15 through February 9, 1970, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Hayes, Brimmer, and Coldwell dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real economic activity, which leveled off in the 
fourth quarter of 1969, may be weakening further in 
early 1970. Prices and costs, however, are continuing 
to rise at a rapid pace. Long-term market interest 
rates recently have fluctuated under the competing 
influences of heavy demands for funds and shifts in 
investor attitudes regarding the outlook for monetary 
policy. Bank credit declined in January but the money 
supply increased substantially on average; both had 
risen slightly in the fourth quarter. Flows of time 
and savings funds at banks and nonbank thrift



2/10/70

institutions have remained generally weak since year 
end, and they apparently have been affected little 
thus far by the recent increases in maximum rates pay
able for such funds. The U.S. foreign trade balance 
improved somewhat in December, as imports fell off.  
The over-all balance of payments has been in substan
tial deficit in recent weeks. In light of the foregoing 
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open 
Market Committee to foster financial conditions conducive 

to the orderly reduction of inflationary pressures, with 

a view to encouraging sustainable economic growth and 
attaining reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance 

of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the current Treasury refunding, possible bank regula

tory changes and the Committee's desire to see moderate 
growth in money and bank credit over the months ahead, 
System open market operations until the next meeting 

of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 

moving gradually toward somewhat less firm conditions 

in the money market; provided, however, that operations 
shall be modified promptly to resist any tendency for 

money and bank credit to deviate significantly from a 

moderate growth pattern.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, March 10, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


