











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 5, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 5, 1970, at 10:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, and Morris, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 
Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Baughman, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Chicago 

By unanimous vote, the provision of paragraph 1(a) of the 

continuing authority directive limiting changes in System Account



5/5/70 -2

holdings of U.S. Government securities between meetings of the Com

mittee to $2 billion was suspended for the period from the opening 

of business May 5, 1970, until the close of business May 26, 1970.  

At this point the following entered the meeting: 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, 

Hocter, Jones, and Solomon, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser , Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Melnicoff, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, and Tow, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, New York, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Snellings, Scheld, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, Chicago, and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Cox, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta



5/5/70

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 7, 

1970, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on April 7, 1970, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 7 through May 4, 1970, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period April 7 through May 4, 1970, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Com

mittee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real economic activity weakened further in the first 
quarter of 1970. Growth in personal income, however, is 
being stimulated in the second quarter by the enlargement 
of social security benefit payments and the Federal pay 
raise. Prices and costs generally are continuing to rise 

at a rapid pace, although some components of major price 
indexes recently have shown moderating tendencies. Most 
market interest rates have risen sharply in recent weeks 

as a result of heavy demands for funds, possible shifts 
in liquidity preferences, and the disappointment of 

earlier expectations regarding easing of credit market 
conditions. Prices of common stocks have declined



5/5/70

markedly since early April. Attitudes in financial mar

kets generally are being affected by the expansion of 
military operations in Southeast Asia and by concern 
about the success of the Government's anti-inflationary 

program. Both bank credit and the money supply rose 
substantially from March to April on average, although 
during the course of April bank credit leveled off and 
the money supply receded sharply from the end-of-March 
bulge. The over-all balance of payments was in consid
erable deficit during the first quarter. In light of 
the foregoing developments, it is the policy of the 

Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial condi

tions conducive to orderly reduction in the rate of 
inflation, while encouraging the resumption of sustain
able economic growth and the attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee desires to 

see moderate growth in money and bank credit over the 

months ahead. System open market operations until the 

next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to maintaining bank reserves and money market 

conditions consistent with that objective, taking account 
of the current Treasury financing; provided, however, 
that operations shall be modified as needed to moderate 
excessive pressures in financial markets, should they 
develop.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 26, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


