











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 20, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 20, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Francis 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Morris, Alternate for Mr. Heflin

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Garvy, Gramley, 

Hersey, Hocter, Parthemos, Reynolds, and 
Solomon, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



10/20/70

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant 
Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Black and Fossum, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Taylor, and Tow, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Atlanta, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Scheld, Andersen, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Chicago, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 15,

1970, were approved.



10/20/70 -3

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on September 15, 1970, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period September 15 through 

October 19, 1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during 

the period September 15 through October 19, 1970, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Hayes dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services increased 
slightly further in the third quarter but that employ
ment declined and unemployment continued to rise; 
activity in the current quarter is being adversely 
affected by a major strike in the automobile industry.  
Wage rates generally are continuing to rise at a rapid 
pace, but improvements in productivity appear to be 
slowing the increase in costs, and some major price 
measures are rising less rapidly than before. Most 
interest rates have declined since mid-September, 
although yields on corporate and municipal bonds have 
been sustained by the continuing heavy demands for 
funds in capital markets. The money supply rose 
slightly on average in September and increased moder
ately over the third quarter as a whole. Bank credit 
expanded further in September but at a rate consider
ably less than the fast pace of the two preceding 
months. Banks continued to issue large-denomination 
CD's at a relatively rapid rate and experienced heavy 
inflows of consumer-type time and savings funds, while



10/20/70

making substantial further reductions in their use of 
nondeposit sources of funds. The balance of payments 
deficit on the liquidity basis diminished in the third 
quarter from the very large second-quarter rate, but 
the deficit on the official settlements basis remained 
high as banks repaid Euro-dollar liabilities. In light 
of the foregoing developments, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial condi
tions conducive to orderly reduction in the rate of 
inflation, while encouraging the resumption of sustain
able economic growth and the attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and 
moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit 
expansion over the months ahead. System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves 
and money market conditions consistent with those objec
tives, taking account of the forthcoming Treasury 
financings.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, November 17, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


