











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 26, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 26, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Morris, Alternate for Mr. Heflin

Messrs. Galusha and Kimbrel, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Coldwell, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, Hocter, 

Jones, Parthemos, and Solomon, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr, Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors



5/26/70

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Black, Fossum, and Baughman, First 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond, Atlanta, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Taylor, and Tow, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, Atlanta, and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner, Scheld, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

New York, Chicago, and Dallas, respectively 
Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 5, 1970, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal

Open Market Committee held on May 5, 1970, was accepted.



5/26/70

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 5 through 25, 1970, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period May 5 through 25, 1970, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real economic activity declined more than previously 
estimated in the first quarter of 1970, but little further 
change is projected in the second quarter. Prices and 
costs generally are continuing to rise at a rapid pace, 
although some components of major price indexes recently 
have shown moderating tendencies. Since early May most 
long-term interest rates have remained under upward 
pressure, partly as a result of continued heavy demands 
for funds and possible shifts in liquidity preferences, 
and prices of common stocks have declined further. Atti
tudes in financial markets generally are being affected 
by the widespread uncertainties arising from recent 
international and domestic events, including doubts 
about the success of the Government's anti-inflationary 
program. Both bank credit and the money supply rose 
substantially from March to April on average; in May 
bank credit appears to be changing little while the 
money supply appears to be expanding rapidly. The over
all balance of payments continued in considerable deficit 
in April and early May. In light of the foregoing 
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, while 
encouraging the resumption of sustainable economic



5/26/70

growth and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, in view of current market 
uncertainties and liquidity strains, open market opera
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to moderating pressures on financial 
markets, while, to the extent compatible therewith, 
maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions 
consistent with the Committee's longer run objectives 
of moderate growth in money and bank credit.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, June 23, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


