











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 15, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 15, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, 

Hocter, Parthemos, Jones, and Solomon, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account



9/15/70

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant 
Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Plant, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, and Taylor, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. Bodner, Scheld, Doll, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New 
York, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 18,

1970, were approved.



9/15/70

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on August 18, 1970, was accepted, 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period August 18 through 

September 14, 1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Gov

ernment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period August 18 through September 14, 1970, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Hayes dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accor

dance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real economic activity, which edged up slightly 
in the second quarter, is expanding somewhat further 
in the third quarter, led by an upturn in residential 
construction. Wage rates generally are continuing to 
rise at a rapid pace, but improvements in productivity 
appear to be slowing the rise in costs, and some major 
price measures are rising less rapidly than before.  
Interest rates declined in the last half of August, but 
most yields turned up in early September, as credit 
demands in securities markets have continued heavy; 
existing yield spreads continue to suggest concern with 
credit quality. The money supply rose rapidly in the 
first half of August but moved back down through early 
September. Bank credit expanded sharply further in 
August as banks continued to issue large-denomination 
CD's at a relatively rapid rate, while reducing their 
reliance on the commercial paper market after the Board 
of Governors acted to impose reserve requirements on 
bank funds obtained from that source. The balance of 
payments deficit on the liquidity basis diminished



somewhat in July and August from the very large second
quarter rate, but the deficit on the official settle
ments basis remained high as banks repaid Euro-dollar 
liabilities. In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions conducive to orderly 
reduction in the rate of inflation, while encouraging 
the resumption of sustainable economic growth and the 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
promote some easing of conditions in credit markets 
and moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit 
expansion over the months ahead. System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining bank 
reserves and money market conditions consistent with 
that objective.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 20, 1970, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

9/15/70 -4-


