











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

Decenber 15, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 15, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Francis 
Mr. Heflin 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Sherrill 
Mr. Swan 
Mr. Mayo, Alternate 

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, 

Hocter, Jones, Reynolds, and Solomon, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant Secre
taries, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors



12/15/70

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 

Section, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 
Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Taylor, and Tow, 

Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, Atlanta, and 

Kansas City, respectively 
Messrs. Bodner, Snellings, Scheld, and Green, 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

New York, Richmond, Chicago, and Dallas, 

respectively 
Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 17, 1970, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 17, 1970, was accepted.



12/15/70 -3

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 17 through December 14, 

1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period November 17 through December 14, 1970, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services has declined 
since the third quarter, largely as a consequence of 
the recent strike in the automobile industry, and that 
unemployment has increased. Resumption of higher auto
mobile production is expected to result in a bulge in 
activity in early 1971. Wage rates generally are 
continuing to rise at a rapid pace, but gains in pro
ductivity appear to be slowing the increase in unit 
labor costs. Movements in major price measures have 
been diverse; most recently, wholesale prices have 
shown little change while consumer prices have advanced 
substantially. Market interest rates declined con
siderably further in the past few weeks, and Federal 
Reserve discount rates were reduced by an additional 
one-quarter of a percentage point. Demands for funds 
in capital markets have continued heavy, but business 
loan demands at banks have been weak. Growth in the 
money supply was somewhat more rapid on average in 
November than in October, although it remained below 
the rate prevailing in the first three quarters of the 
year. Banks acquired a substantial volume of securities 
in November, and bank credit increased moderately after 
changing little in October. The foreign trade balance 
in September and October was smaller than in any other



12/15/70 -4

2-month period this year. The over-all balance of pay
ments deficit on the liquidity basis remained in October 
and November at about its third-quarter rate. The deficit 
on the official settlements basis was very large as banks 
continued to repay Euro-dollar liabilities. In light of 
the foregoing developments, it is the policy of the Federal 
Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions con
ducive to orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, 
while encouraging the resumption of sustainable economic 
growth and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market operations 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the recently 
attained money market conditions until the next meeting of 
the Committee, provided that the expected rates of growth 
in money and bank credit will at least be achieved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of one year of 

the following swap arrangements, having the indicated amounts and 

maturity dates, was approved: 

Amount of Maturity 
arrangement of latest 
(millions of authorized 

Foreign bank dollars) renewal 

National Bank of Belgium 500 December 22, 1970 
Bank of Canada 1,000 December 30, 1970 
Bank of France 1,000 December 28, 1970 
German Federal Bank 1,000 December 16, 1970 
Bank of Italy 1,250 December 30, 1970 
Netherlands Bank 300 December 30, 1970 

In connection with the foregoing action, it was reported 

that some of the central banks affected had raised certain technical 

questions regarding procedures used in the operation of the swap 

arrangements and that discussions of the matter with those central 

banks were currently under way. It was agreed that a subcommittee, 

consisting of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee and



12/15/70 -5

the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, or designated alter

nates, should be authorized to act on behalf of the Committee 

with respect to the matter, on the understanding that the sub

committee would communicate with the full Conmittee if it had 

any serious doubts about the appropriate course of action.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, January 12, 1971.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


