











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 15, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Thursday, January 15, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.1/

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Martin, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Bopp 
Brimmer 

Clay 
Coldwell 
Daane 

Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Scanlon 
Sherrill

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, Hickman, and Swan, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Galusha, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Baughman, Gramley, Green, 

Hersey, and Tow, Associate Economists 

1/ This meeting, originally planned for January 13, 1970, had 
been postponed two days because adverse weather conditions pre
vented several members of the Committee and staff from reaching 
Washington by the former date.



Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Office 
of the Secretary 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Jones, and 
Craven, Senior Vice Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Hocter, Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Garvy and Kareken, Economic Advisers 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Meek and Honea, Assistant Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York 
and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Willes, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 16, 1969, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on December 16, 1969, was accepted.

1/15/70 -2-



1/15/70 -3

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 16, 1969, through 

January 14, 1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period December 16, 1969, through January 14, 1970, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Com

mittee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real economic activity leveled off in the fourth 
quarter of 1969 and that little change is in prospect 
for the early part of 1970. Prices and costs, however, 
are continuing to rise at a rapid pace. Most market 
interest rates have receded from highs reached during 
December. Bank credit and the money supply increased 
slightly on average in December and also over the fourth 
quarter as a whole. Outstanding large-denomination CD's 
held by domestic depositors have continued to contract 
in recent months while foreign official time deposits 
have expanded considerably. Flows of consumer-type time 
and savings funds at banks and nonbank thrift institutions 
have remained weak, and there apparently were sizable 
net outflows after year-end interest crediting. U.S.  
imports and exports have both grown further in recent 
months but through November the trade balance showed 
little or no further improvement from the third-quarter 
level. At the year end the over-all balance of payments 
statistics were buoyed by large temporary inflows of U.S.  
corporate funds. In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to the orderly



1/15/70

reduction of inflationary pressures, with a view to 
encouraging sustainable economic growth and attaining 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury refunding, possible bank regu
latory changes and the Committee's desire to see a 
modest growth in money and bank credit, System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining firm 
conditions in the money market; provided, however, that 
operations shall be modified if money and bank credit 
appear to be deviating significantly from current 
projections.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of 

the minutes of the Committee for the years 1962-65, inclusive, 

on the basis described in a memorandum from the Secretariat 

dated January 8, 1970, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 10, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


