











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 7, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 7, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 

Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 

Maisel 

Mitchell 

Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, 

Hocter, Jones, and Solomon, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors



4/7/70

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Baughman, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Taylor, and Tow, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, Atlanta, and 

Kansas City, respectively 
Messrs. Bodner, Monhollon, Scheld, and Green, 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Richmond, Chicago, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Gustus, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Herder, Assistant Research Director, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 10, 1970, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on March 10, 1970, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 10 through April 6, 1970,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



4/7/70

By unanimous vote, paragraphs 1B and 1C of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations were amended to read as 

follows: 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in para
graph A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, in
cluding currencies purchased from the Stabili
zation Fund, and sold forward to the Stabilization 
Fund, up to $1 billion equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or forward, 
up to the amounts necessary to fulfill other forward 
commitments; 

(3) Additional currencies purchased 
spot or forward, up to the amount necessary for 

System operations to exert a market influence 
but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered or 
guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under 
agreement with the Bank of England, up to $200 
million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments under
taken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign currencies, 
up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign 
currencies to the Stabilization Fund, up to the 

limit specified in paragraph 1B(1) above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to 

deliver foreign currencies, up to $550 million 
equivalent.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period March 10 through April 6, 1970, were approved, ratified, and

confirmed.



4/7/70

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real economic activity weakened further in early 

1970, while prices and costs continued to rise at a 
rapid pace. Fiscal stimulus, of dimensions that are 

still uncertain, will strengthen income expansion in 
the near term. Most long-term interest rates backed 
up during much of March under the pressure of heavy 
demands for funds, but then turned down in response 
to indications of some relaxation of monetary policy 
and to the reduction in the prime lending rate of 
banks. Short-term rates declined further on balance 
in recent weeks, contributing to the ability of banks 
and other thrift institutions to attract time and 
savings funds. Both bank credit and the money supply 
rose on average in March; over the first quarter as 
a whole bank credit was about unchanged on balance and 
the money supply increased somewhat. The U.S. foreign 
trade surplus increased in February, but the over-all 
balance of payments appears to have been in considerable 
deficit during the first quarter. In light of the fore
going developments, it is the policy of the Federal 
Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
conducive to orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, 
while encouraging the resumption of sustainable economic 
growth and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee desires to 
see moderate growth in money and bank credit over the 
months ahead. System open market operations until the 
next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with 
a view to maintaining money market conditions consistent 
with that objective, taking account of the forthcoming 
Treasury financing.



4/7/70 -5

It was agreed the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 5, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


