











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 18, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, Mayo, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay and Coldwell, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Dallas, 

respectively 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 

Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Garvy, Hocter, 
Parthemos, Reynolds, and Solomon, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant 

Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 
Governors



8/18/70

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Melnicoff, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and Tow, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston 
and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Sternlight, Brandt, Scheld, Nelson, and 
Green, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Bowsher, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Gustus, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's note: Advices had been received 
of the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland and Chicago of Mr. Robert P. Mayo, 
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
as alternate member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to represent those Federal Reserve 
Banks for the balance of the one-year term 
expiring February 28, 1971; and it appeared 
that Mr. Mayo was legally qualified to serve.  
Mr. Mayo had executed his oath of office prior 
to this meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 21, 1970, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on July 21, 1970, was accepted.



8/18/70

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 21 through August 17, 1970, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period July 21 through August 17, 1970, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

With Messrs. Hayes, Brimmer, and Francis dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following current economic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real economic activity, which edged up slightly 
in the second quarter after declining appreciably ear
lier in the year, may be expanding somewhat further.  
Prices and wage rates generally are continuing to rise 
at a rapid pace. However, improvements in productivity 
appear to be slowing the rise in costs, and some major 
price measures are showing moderating tendencies. Credit 
demands in securities markets have continued heavy, 
and interest rates have shown mixed changes since mid
July after declining considerably in preceding weeks.  
Some uncertainties persist in financial markets, 
particularly in connection with market instruments 
of less than prime grade. In July the money supply 
rose moderately on average and bank credit expanded 
substantially. Banks increased holdings of securities 
and loans to finance companies, some of which were 
experiencing difficulty in refinancing maturing 
commercial paper. Banks sharply expanded their out
standing large-denomination CD's of short maturity, 
for which rate ceilings had been suspended in late 
June, and both banks and nonbank thrift institutions 
experienced large net inflows of consumer-type time 
and savings funds. The over-all balance of payments 
remained in heavy deficit in the second quarter,



8/18/70

despite a sizable increase in the export surplus.  
In July the official settlements deficit continued 
large, but there apparently was a marked shrinkage 
in the liquidity deficit. In light of the foregoing 
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open 
Market Committee to foster financial conditions conducive 
to orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, while 
encouraging the resumption of sustainable economic growth 
and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and 
somewhat greater growth in money over the months ahead 
than occurred in the second quarter, while taking account 
of possible liquidity problems and allowing bank credit 
growth to reflect any continued shift of credit flows 
from market to banking channels. System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves 
and money market conditions consistent with that objec
tive, taking account of the effects of other monetary 
policy actions.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 15, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary


