











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 21, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 21, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Garvy, Gramley, Hersey, Hocter, 

Jones, and Reynolds, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors



7/21/70

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Baughman, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and Taylor, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner, Snellings, Scheld, Billington, 
and Green, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, Richmond, Chicago, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 23, 1970, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 23, 1970, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 23 through July 20, 1970,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



7/21/70

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period June 23 through July 20, 1970, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real economic activity changed little in the second 
quarter after declining appreciably earlier in the year.  
Prices and wage rates generally are continuing to rise 
at a rapid pace. However, improvements in productivity 
appear to be slowing the rise in costs, and some major 

price measures are showing moderating tendencies. Since 
mid-June long-term interest rates have declined consider
ably, and prices of common stocks have fluctuated above 
their recent lows. Although conditions in financial mar
kets have improved in recent weeks uncertainties persist, 
particularly in the commercial paper market where the 
volume of outstanding paper has contracted sharply. A 
large proportion of the funds so freed apparently was 
rechanneled through the banking system, as suggested by 
sharp increases in bank loans and in large-denomination 
CD's of short maturity--for which rate ceilings were 
suspended in late June. Consequently, in early July bank 
credit grew rapidly; there was also a sharp increase in 

the money supply. Over the second quarter as a whole 
both bank credit and money supply rose moderately. The 
over-all balance of payments remained in heavy deficit 
in the second quarter. In light of the foregoing devel
opments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 

orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, while 
encouraging the resumption of sustainable economic growth 
and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.



7/21/70

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
persisting market uncertainties, liquidity strains, and 
the forthcoming Treasury financing, the Committee seeks 
to promote moderate growth in money and bank credit over 
the months ahead, allowing for a possible continued shift 
of credit flows from market to banking channels. System 
open market operations until the next meeting of the 
Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with 
that objective; provided, however, that operations shall 
be modified as needed to counter excessive pressures in 
financial markets should they develop.  

By unanimous vote, the resolution authorizing certain actions 

by the Federal Reserve Banks that had last been reaffirmed on March 10, 

1970, was amended to read as follows: 

RESOLUTION OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE AUTHORIZING 
CERTAIN ACTIONS BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS DURING AN EMERGENCY 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes 
each Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions 
set forth below during war or defense emergency when such 
Federal Reserve Bank finds itself unable after reasonable 
efforts to be in communication with the Federal Open Market 
Committee (or with the Interim Committee acting in lieu of 
the Federal Open Market Committee) or when the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or such Interim Committee) is unable to 
function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of 
economic conditions and the general credit situation then 
prevailing (after taking into account the possibility of 
providing necessary credit through advances secured by 
direct obligations of the United States under the last 
paragraph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such 
Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and sell obligations of 
the United States for its own account, either outright or 
under repurchase agreement, from and to banks, dealers, or 
other holders of such obligations.  

(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations of 
the United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable to 
tender the actual securities representing such obligations 
because of conditions resulting from the emergency, such



7/21/70

Federal Reserve Bank may, in its discretion and subject 
to such safeguards as it deems necessary, accept from 
such seller, in lieu of the actual securities, a "due 
bill" executed by the seller in form acceptable to such 
Federal Reserve Bank stating in substantial effect that 
the seller is the owner of the obligations which are 
the subject of the purchase, that ownership of such 
obligations is thereby transferred to the Federal Reserve 
Bank, and that the obligations themselves will be delivered 
to the Federal Reserve Bank as soon as possible.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretion 
purchase special certificates of indebtedness directly 
from the United States in such amounts as may be needed 
to cover overdrafts in the general account of the Treasurer 
of the United States on the books of such Bank or for the 
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, but such Bank 
shall take all steps practicable at the time to insure as 
far as possible that the amount of obligations acquired 

directly from the United States and held by it, together 
with the amount of such obligations so acquired and held 
by all other Federal Reserve Banks, does not exceed $5 
billion at any one time.  

(4) Such Federal Reserve Bank may engage in operations 
of the types specified in the Committee's authorization for 

System foreign currency operations when requested to do so 
by an authorized official of the U.S. Treasury Department; 
provided, however, that such Bank shall take all steps 
practicable at the time to insure as far as possible that, 
in light of the information available on other System 
foreign currency operations, its own operations do not 
result in the aggregate in breaching any of the several 
dollar limits specified in the authorization.  

Authority to take the actions set forth shall be 
effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve Bank 
is able again to establish communications with the Federal 
Open Market Committee (or the Interim Committee), and such 
Committee is then functioning.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 18, 1970, at

9:30 a.m.



7/21/70

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's note: On July 15, 1970, 
the second of the two letters quoted 
below was sent to Mr. Elmer B. Staats, 
Comptroller General of the United 
States, over the signature of 
Mr. Holland. This letter was in 
response to Mr. Staats' letter of 

June 30, 1970, quoted immediately 
below, to Chairman Burns.  

Dear Mr. Burns: 

The Chairman of the Joint Economic Committee of the 
Congress has asked the General Accounting Office to review 
the accounting standards and practices of dealers in 
Federal Government securities in relation to their report
ing to the Federal Reserve System. A copy of the Chairman's 

request has been furnished to Mr. Peter Keir of your staff.  

The Committee is concerned with the soundness of the 
dealers' accounting in support of the data they report to 
the Federal Reserve System, in the reliability and adequacy 
of these data, and in the accuracy of the reported profits 

taking into account the methods of allocating expenses.  
Our review is to be directed entirely to these matters 
through interview, interrogation and observation of dealers' 
activities. The knowledge and experience of officials of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York who are involved with 

the dealers' operations and reporting could provide valuable 

insight as a basis for our review approach and possibly for 
an entree to the dealers selected.  

We plan to secure our basic data directly from the 
dealers and to rely on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

to validate such data from the Bank's reports and records 
if needed. This should avoid any question of compromising 

confidential data reported to the Bank by the dealers.  

In view of the Committee's interest in speedy comple

tion of our review, we would very much appreciate your 
cooperation in arranging with the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York to assist our representatives and give them the 
benefit of their expertise.



7/21/70

Dear Mr. Staats: 

I am replying to your letter of June 30, 1970, in 
which you asked for assistance in responding to a request 
from Chairman Patman of the Joint Economic Committee who 
asked for a review of the accounting standards and prac

tices used by U.S. Government securities dealers in their 
reports to the Federal Reserve System. It is our under
standing that the General Accounting Office would secure 
the necessary information for complying with Chairman 

Patman's request by direct interviews and observation 
of the dealers' activities and that the necessary basic 
data would be obtained directly from the dealers. The 
Federal Reserve, notably officials at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, would undertake to provide the GAO staff 
with technical advice and might in addition be asked to 
validate from the records of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York data which the dealers will provide.  

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee, which 
has jurisdiction in this area, have indicated their 

willingness to have the Federal Reserve cooperate in this 
study in the manner you have outlined. It is their under

standing that the confidential nature of the dealers' 
reports to the System would be protected and on this basis 
they interpose no objection to proceeding promptly with 
the study.  

Secretary


