











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

November 17, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 17, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan

Messrs. Galusha, Mayo, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, 

Hocter, Parthemos, Reynolds, and 
Solomon, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



11/17/70

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant 
Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Fossum, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Link, Taylor, and Tow, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Scheld and Andersen, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and St.  
Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Friedman, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 20, 

1970, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on October 20, 1970, was accepted.

-2-



11/17/70

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period October 20 through November 16, 

1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of one year 

of the following swap arrangements, having the indicated amounts 

and maturity dates, was approved: 

Amount of Maturity 
arrangement of latest 
(millions of authorized 

Foreign bank dollars) renewal 

Austrian National Bank 200 December 2, 1970 
National Bank of Denmark 200 December 2, 1970 
Bank of England 2,000 December 2, 1970 
Bank of Japan 1,000 December 2, 1970 
Bank of Mexico 130 December 2, 1970 
Bank of Norway 200 December 2, 1970 
Bank of Sweden 250 December 2, 1970 
Swiss National Bank 600 December 2, 1970 
Bank for International 

Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 December 2, 1970 
Dollars against authorized 
European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1,000 December 2, 1970 

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period October 20 through November 16, 1970, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Maisel dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by



11/17/70

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services is changing 
little in the current quarter and that unemployment has 
increased. Part but not all of the weakness in over

all activity is attributable to the strike in the auto

mobile industry which apparently is now coming to an 

end. Wage rates generally are continuing to rise at a 
rapid pace, but gains in productivity appear to be slow

ing the increase in unit labor costs. Recent movements 

in major price measures have been erratic but the 
general pace of advance in these measures has tended to 

slow. Most interest rates declined considerably in the 

past few weeks, and Federal Reserve discount rates were 

reduced by one-quarter of a percentage point in the 

week of November 9. Demands for funds in capital mar

kets have continued heavy, but business loan demands 

at banks have weakened. The money supply changed little 
on average in October for the second consecutive month; 

bank credit also was about unchanged, following a slow

ing of growth in September. The balance of payments 

deficit on the liquidity basis was at a lower rate in 
the third quarter and in October than the very high 

second-quarter rate, but the deficit on the official 

settlements basis remained high as banks repaid Euro

dollar liabilities. In light of the foregoing devel

opments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 

Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 

orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, while 

encouraging the resumption of sustainable economic 

growth and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in 

the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 

promote some easing of conditions in credit markets 

and moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit 

expansion over the months ahead, with allowance for 

temporary shifts in money and credit demands related 

to the auto strike. System open market operations 

until the next meeting of the Committee shall he 

conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and 

money market conditions consistent with those objectives.



11/17/70 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, December 15, 1970, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


