











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 10, 1970, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Heflin 

Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 

Sherrill 
Swan 
Kimbrel, Alternate for 

Mr. Francis

Messrs. Galusha and Morris, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Garvy, Hocter, 

Jones, Parthemos, and Solomon, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



3/10/70

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Nichols, Special Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 

of Governors 
Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lewis, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Baughman and Tow, Senior Vice Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Chicago and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt and Green, Vice Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 

Dallas, respectively 
Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Phila
delphia and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Friedman, Consultant, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Boston 
Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of the 

election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate mem

bers of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one year 

beginning March 1, 1970, that it appeared that such persons were 

legally qualified to serve, and that they had executed their oaths

of office.



3/10/70

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

W. Braddock Hickman, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland, with Charles J. Scanlon, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

Aubrey N. Heflin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Richmond, with Frank E. Morris, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate; 

Darryl R. Francis, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis, with Monroe Kimbrel, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate; 

Eliot J. Swan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, with Hugh D. Galusha, Jr., President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after Febru

ary 28, 1971, with the understanding that in the event of the 

discontinuance of their official connection with the Board of 

Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee: 

Arthur F. Burns Chairman 
Alfred Hayes Vice Chairman 
Robert C. Holland Secretary 
Arthur L. Broida Deputy Secretary 
Kenneth A. Kenyon and Charles Molony Assistant Secretaries 
Howard H. Hackley General Counsel 
David B. Hexter Assistant General Counsel



3/10/70 -4

J. Charles Partee Economist 
Stephen H. Axilrod, J. Howard 

Craven, George Garvy, Lyle E.  
Gramley, A. B. Hersey, William J.  
Hocter, Homer Jones, John E.  
Reynolds, James Parthemos, and 
Robert Solomon Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market 

Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee after February 28, 1971.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes and Charles A. Coombs 

were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Federal Open Market 

Committee as Manager of the System Open Market Account and as 

Special Manager for foreign currency operations for such Account, 

respectively, it being understood that their selection was subject 

to their being satisfactory to the Board of Directors of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently 
was received that Messrs. Holmes and 
Coombs were satisfactory to the Board of 
Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York for service in the respec

tive capacities indicated.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 10, 

1970, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on February 10, 1970, was accepted.



3/10/70

Consideration was then given to the continuing authoriza

tions of the Committee, according to the customary practice of 

reviewing such matters at the first meeting in March of every 

year.  

By unanimous vote, the following procedures with respect 

to allocations of securities in the System Open Market Account 

were approved without change: 

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account 
shall be reallocated on the last business day of each 
month by means of adjustments proportionate to the 
adjustments that would have been required to equalize 
approximately the average ratios of gold holdings to 
note liabilities of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks 
based on the ratios of gold to notes for the most 
recent five business days.  

2. Until the next reallocation the Account shall 
be apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined 
in paragraph 1.  

3. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of 
delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 
Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 
that day.  

By unanimous vote, the following list for distribution of 

periodic reports prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

for the Federal Open Market Committee was approved without 

change: 

1. Members and Alternate Members of the Committee, 
other Reserve Bank Presidents, and officers 
of the Committee.



3/10/70 -6

*2. The Secretary of the Treasury.  
*3. The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary 

Affairs and the Deputy Under Secretary for 
Monetary Affairs.  

*4. The Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury 
working on debt management problems.  

*5. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.  
6. The Director of the Division of Federal Reserve 

Bank Operations, Board of Governors.  
7. The officer in charge of research at each of the 

Federal Reserve Banks not represented by its 
President on the Committee.  

8. The officers of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
working under the Manager and Special Manager of 
the System Open Market Account.  

9. With the approval of a member of the Committee or 
any other President of a Federal Reserve Bank, 
with notice to the Secretary, any other employee 
of the Board of Governors or of a Federal Reserve 
Bank.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the authoriza

tion, first given on March 1, 1951, for the Chairman to appoint a 

Federal Reserve Bank to operate the System Open Market Account 

temporarily in case the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is unable 

to function.  

By unanimous vote, the following resolution to provide for 

the continued operation of the Federal Open Market Committee during 

an emergency was reaffirmed: 

In the event of war or defense emergency, if the 
Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (or in the event of the unavailability 
of both of them, the Secretary or Acting Secretary of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) 
certifies that as a result of the emergency the avail
able number of regular members and regular alternates

* Weekly reports only.



3/10/70

of the Federal Open Market Committee is less than seven, 
all powers and functions of the said Committee shall be 

performed and exercised by, and authority to exercise 
such powers and functions is hereby delegated to, an 
Interim Committee, subject to the following terms and 

conditions: 

Such Interim Committee shall consist of seven mem

bers, comprising each regular member and regular 

alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee then 

available, together with an additional number, suffi

cient to make a total of seven, which shall be made up 

in the following order or priority from those available: 
(1) each alternate at large (as defined below); (2) each 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank not then either a 

regular member or an alternate; (3) each First Vice 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank; provided that 
(a) within each of the groups referred to in clauses 

(1), (2), and (3) priority of selection shall be in 
numerical order according to the numbers of the Federal 

Reserve Districts, (b) the President and the First Vice 
President of the same Federal Reserve Bank shall not 

serve at the same time as members of the Interim Committee, 
and (c) whenever a regular member or regular alternate of 

the Federal Open Market Committee or a person having a 
higher priority as indicated in clauses (1), (2), and 
(3) becomes available he shall become a member of the 

Interim Committee in the place of the person then on 
the Interim Committee having the lowest priority. The 
Interim Committee is hereby authorized to take action by 
majority vote of those present whenever one or more mem
bers thereof are present, provided that an affirmative 
vote for the action taken is cast by at least one regular 

member, regular alternate, or President of a Federal 
Reserve Bank. The delegation of authority and other 

procedures set forth above shall be effective only during 

such period or periods as there are available less than 

a total of seven regular members and regular alternates 
of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

As used herein the term "regular member" refers to 

a member of the Federal Open Market Committee duly 

appointed or elected in accordance with existing law; 
the term "regular alternate" refers to an alternate of 
the Committee duly elected in accordance with existing 

law and serving in the absence of the regular member for



3/10/70

whom he was elected; and the term "alternate at large" 
refers to any other duly elected alternate of the Com
mittee at a time when the member in whose absence he 
was elected to serve is available.  

By unanimous vote, the following resolution authorizing 

certain actions by the Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency 

was reaffirmed: 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby author
izes each Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of 
the actions set forth below during war or defense 
emergency when such Federal Reserve Bank finds itself 
unable after reasonable efforts to be in communication 
with the Federal Open Market Committee (or with the 
Interim Committee acting in lieu of the Federal Open 
Market Committee) or when the Federal Open Market Com
mittee (or such Interim Committee) is unable to 
function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light 
of economic conditions and the general credit situation 
then prevailing (after taking into account the possi
bility of providing necessary credit through advances 
secured by direct obligations of the United States under 
the last paragraph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve 
Act), such Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and sell 
obligations of the United States for its own account, 
either outright or under repurchase agreement, from and 
to banks, dealers, or other holders of such obligations.  

(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations 
of the United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable 
to tender the actual securities representing such obliga
tions because of conditions resulting from the emergency, 
such Federal Reserve Bank may, in its discretion and 
subject to such safeguards as it deems necessary, accept 
from such seller, in lieu of the actual securities, a 
"due bill" executed by the seller in form acceptable to 
such Federal Reserve Bank stating in substantial effect 
that the seller is the owner of the obligations which are 
the subject of the purchase, that ownership of such 
obligations is thereby transferred to the Federal Reserve 
Bank, and that the obligations themselves will be delivered 
to the Federal Reserve Bank as soon as possible.



3/10/70

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discre
tion purchase special certificates of indebtedness 
directly from the United States in such amounts as may 
be needed to cover overdrafts in the general account of 
the Treasurer of the United States on the books of such 
Bank or for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, 
but such Bank shall take all steps practicable at the 
time to insure as far as possible that the amount of 
obligations acquired directly from the United States 
and held by it, together with the amount of such obliga
tions so acquired and held by all other Federal Reserve 
Banks, does not exceed $5 billion at any one time.  

Authority to take the actions set forth shall be 
effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve 
Bank is able again to establish communications with 
the Federal Open Market Committee (or the Interim Com
mittee), and such Committee is then functioning.  

There was unanimous agreement that no action should be 

taken to change the existing procedure, as called for by resolu

tion adopted June 21, 1939, requesting the Board of Governors to 

cause its examining force to furnish the Secretary of the Federal 

Open Market Committee a report of each examination of the System 

Open Market Account.  

It was agreed unanimously that no action should be taken 

at this time to amend the procedure authorized at the meeting of 

the Committee on March 2, 1955, and most recently reaffirmed on 

March 4, 1969, whereby, in addition to members and officers of the 

Committee and Reserve Bank Presidents not currently members of the 

Committee, minutes and other records could be made available to 

any other employee of the Board of Governors or of a Federal



3/10/70 -10-

Reserve Bank with the approval of a member of the Committee or 

another Reserve BankPresident, with notice to the Secretary.  

By unanimous vote, the continuing authority directive to 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with regard to transactions 

in U.S. Government securities, bankers' acceptances, and agency 

issues was amended to read as follows: 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent cur
rent economic policy directive adopted at a meeting 
of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government 
securities in the open market, from or to 
Government securities dealers and foreign 
and international accounts maintained at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the System Open Market Account at market 
prices and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U.S. Government securities with the 
Treasury or allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate 
amount of such securities held in such 
Account at the close of business on the day 
of a meeting of the Committee at which 
action is taken with respect to a current 
economic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $2.0 
billion during the period commencing with the 
opening of business on the day following such 
meeting and ending with the close of business 
on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' ac
ceptances of the kinds designated in the 

Regulation of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a 
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank



3/10/70

of New York at market discount rates; pro
vided that the aggregate amount of bankers' 
acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed (1) $125 million or (2) 10 per cent of 
the total of bankers' acceptances outstanding 
as shown in the most recent acceptance survey 
conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, whichever is the lower; 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, 

obligations that are direct obligations of, 
or fully guaranteed as to principal and 
interest by, any agency of the United States, 
and prime bankers' acceptances with maturities 

of 6 months or less at the time of purchase, 
from nonbank dealers for the account of the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agree
ments for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar 

days or less, at rates not less than (1) the 
discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York at the time such agreement is entered 

into, or (2) the average issuing rate on the 

most recent issue of 3-month Treasury bills, 
whichever is the lower; provided that in the 
event Government securities or agency issues 

covered by any such agreement are not repur

chased by the dealer pursuant to the 
agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be 
sold in the market or transferred to the 

System Open Market Account; and provided 
further that in the event bankers' acceptances 

covered by any such agreement are not 
repurchased by the seller, they shall continue 

to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or 

shall be sold in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 

and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, if 

the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal 
Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury for 

its own account (with discretion, in cases where it seems 
desirable, to issue participations to one or more Federal 

Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term 
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from

-11-



3/10/70

time to time for the temporary accommodation of the 
Treasury; provided that the rate charged on such 
certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below 
the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York at the time of such purchases, and provided 
further that the total amount of such certificates 
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall 
not exceed $1 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of 
open market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee 
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend 
U.S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to 
Banks participating in Government securities clearing 
arrangements conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, 
under such instructions as the Committee may specify 
from time to time.  

By unanimous vote, the authorization for System foreign 

currency operations given below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System 
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out 
the Committee's foreign currency directive and express 
authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home and abroad, 
including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization Fund 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, 
with foreign monetary authorities, and with the Bank for 
International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks

-12-



3/10/70

Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in para
graph A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, in
cluding currencies purchased from the Stabiliza
tion Fund, and sold forward to the Stabilization 
Fund, up to $1 billion equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or 
forward, up to the amounts necessary to fulfill 
other forward commitments; 

(3) Additional currencies purchased 
spot or forward, up to the amount necessary for 
System operations to exert a market influence 
but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered 
or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under 
agreement with the Bank of England, up to $300 
million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments under
taken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign currencies, 
up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign 
currencies to the Stabilization Fund, up to 
the limit specified in paragraph 1B(1) above; 

(2) Commitments to deliver Italian 
lire, under special arrangements with the 
Bank of Italy, up to $500 million equivalent; 
and 

(3) Other forward commitments to 
deliver foreign currencies, up to $550 million 
equivalent.

-13-



3/10/70

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal cur
rency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided 
that drawings by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any 
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless 
the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System 
Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 
months with the following foreign banks, which are among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements on 
maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 500 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 

Bank of England 2,000 

Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 

Bank of Italy 1,000 

Bank of Japan 1,000 

Bank of Mexico 130 

Netherlands Bank 300 

Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 

Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000

-14-



3/10/70

3. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, all transactions in foreign currencies under
taken under paragraph 1(A) above shall be at prevailing 
market rates and no attempt shall be made to establish 
rates that appear to be out of line with underlying 
market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 
transactions. In making operating arrangements with 
foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall 
not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, 
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  
Any agreements or understandings concerning the admin
istration of the accounts maintained by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign banks designated 
by the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval 
to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested 
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum 
working balances. Such investments shall be in accord
ance with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman and 
the Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman 
of the Board of Governors (or in the absence of the 
Chairman or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of 
Governors the members of the Board designated by the 
Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee his alternate) is authorized 
to act on behalf of the Committee when it is necessary 
to enable the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage 
in foreign currency operations before the Committee can 
be consulted. All actions taken by the Subcommittee 
under this paragraph shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice Chair
man of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the 

Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized:

-15-



3/10/70

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with the 
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of respon
sibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury 
fully advised concerning System foreign currency opera
tions, and to consult with the Secretary on such policy 
matters as may relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; 
and 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory Council 
on International Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized 
to transmit pertinent information on System foreign 
currency operations to appropriate officials of the 
Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in 
the foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of 
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to 
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated 
January 1, 1944.  

10. The Special Manager of the System Open Market 
Account for foreign currency operations shall keep the 
Committee informed on conditions in foreign exchange 
markets and on transactions he has made and shall render 
such reports as the Committee may specify.  

By unanimous vote, the foreign currency directive given 

below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in 
foreign currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar 
in international exchange markets;

-16-



3/10/70

B. To aid in making the system of 

international payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with 
central banks of other countries having convertible 
currencies, with the International Monetary Fund, 
and with other international payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements 
in exchange rates, within the limits stated in the 
International Monetary Fund Agreement or established 
by central bank practices, reflect the interaction 

of underlying economic forces and thus serve as 

efficient guides to current financial decisions, 
private and public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international 
liquidity in accordance with the needs of an expand

ing world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 

Federal Open Market Committee, System operations in 

foreign currencies shall be undertaken only when 

necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in 

the flows of international payments, if such fluctu

ations (1) are deemed to reflect transitional market 

unsettlement or other temporary forces and therefore 

are expected to be reversed in the foreseeable future; 
and (2) are deemed to be disequilibrating or otherwise 

to have potentially destabilizing effects on U.S. or 

foreign official reserves or on exchange markets, for 

example, by occasioning market anxieties, undesirable 

speculative activity, or excessive leads and lags in 

international payments; 

B, To temper and smooth out abrupt changes 

in spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums 

and discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever 

supply or demand persists in influencing exchange rates 

in one direction, System transactions should be modified 

or curtailed unless upon review and reassessment of the 
situation the Committee directs otherwise;

-17-



3/10/70

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly 

conditions in exchange markets. Special factors that 

might make for exchange market instabilities include 

(1) responses to short-run increases in international 
political tension, (2) differences in phasing of 

international economic activity that give rise to 

unusually large interest rate differentials between 

major markets, and (3) market rumors of a character 

likely to stimulate speculative transactions. When

ever exchange market instability threatens to produce 

disorderly conditions, System transactions may be 

undertaken if the Special Manager reaches a judgment 

that they may help to reestablish supply and demand 

balance at a level more consistent with the prevailing 

flow of underlying payments. In such cases, the 

Special Manager shall consult as soon as practicable 

with the Committee or, in an emergency, with the 

members of the Subcommittee designated for that 

purpose in paragraph 6 of the Authorization for 

System foreign currency operations; and 

D. To adjust System balances within the 

limits established in the Authorization for System 

foreign currency operations in light of probable 

future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements 

are appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign 

currencies for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 

Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either 

outright or in conjunction with spot transactions, may 

be undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or 

discounts from giving rise to disequilibrating move

ments of short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative 

disturbances; (iii) to supplement existing market 

supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly, as 

a means of encouraging the retention or accumulation 

of dollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) 

to allow greater flexibility in covering System or 

Treasury commitments, including commitments under swap 

arrangements, and to facilitate operations of the 

Stabilization Fund; (v) to facilitate the use of one 

currency for the settlement of System or Treasury

-19-



3/10/70 -19

commitments denominated in other currencies; and 
(vi) to provide cover for System holdings of foreign 
currencies.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 10 through March 9, 

1970, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, an increase of $250 million, to $1,250 

million, in the swap arrangement with the Bank of Italy, together 

with the conforming amendment to paragraph 2 of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations, was approved, subject to 

the understanding that the action would become effective upon a 

determination by Chairman Burns that it was in the national 

interest.  

Secretary's note: Chairman Burns 
made the indicated determination 
later on the day of this meeting.  
Accordingly, effective March 10, 
1970, paragraph 2 of the authori
zation was amended to read as 
follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for 
System Open Market Account for periods up to a 
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign 
banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations 
with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the ap
proval of the Committee to renew such arrangements 
on maturity:



3/10/70

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 
Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 500 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,250 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300 
Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 
European currencies other than 

Swiss francs 1,000 

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period February 10 through March 9, 1970, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive:

-20-



3/10/70

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real economic activity, which leveled off in the 
fourth quarter of 1969, is weakening further in early 
1970. Prices and costs, however, are continuing to 
rise at a rapid pace. Market interest rates have 
declined considerably in recent weeks, partly as a 
result of changing investor attitudes regarding the 
outlook for economic activity and monetary policy.  
Both bank credit and the money supply declined on 
average in February, but both were tending upward in 
the latter part of the month. Outflows of time and 
savings funds at banks and nonbank thrift institutions, 
which had been sizable in January, apparently ceased in 
February, reflecting advances in rates offered on such 
funds following the recent increases in regulatory 
ceilings, together with declines in short-term market 
interest rates. The U.S. foreign trade surplus 
narrowed in January and the over-all balance of payments 
deficit has remained large in recent weeks. In light of 
the foregoing developments, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con
ditions conducive to orderly reduction in the rate of 
inflation, while encouraging the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth and the attainment of reasonable equi
librium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee desires to 
see moderate growth in money and bank credit over the 
months ahead. System open market operations until the 
next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to maintaining money market conditions consistent 
with that objective.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 7, 1970, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-21-


