











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 23, 1970 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 23, 1970, at 9:00 a.m.

Present: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Hickman 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Kimbrel and Morris, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Craven, Gramley, Hersey, Hocter, Jones, 

Parthemos, and Solomon, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors



6/23/70

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Baughman and Strothman, First Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Chicago and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Taylor, and Tow, Senior 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Atlanta, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Scheld and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 

Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Davis, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 26, 1970, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on May 26, 1970, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 26 through June 22, 1970,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



6/23/70

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during th 

period May 26 through June 22, 1970, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that real economic activity is changing little in the 

current quarter after declining appreciably earlier in 

the year. Prices and costs generally are continuing to 

rise at a rapid pace, although some components of major 
price indexes recently have shown moderating tendencies.  

Since late May market interest rates have shown mixed 
changes following earlier sharp advances, and prices of 
common stocks have recovered part of the large decline 
of preceding weeks. Attitudes in financial markets 
continue to be affected by uncertainties and conditions 
remain sensitive, particularly in light of the insolvency 
of a major railroad. In May bank credit changed little 
and the money supply rose moderately on average, follow
ing substantial increases in both measures in March and 
April. Inflows of consumer-type time and savings funds 
at banks and nonbank thrift institutions have been sizable 
in recent months, but the brief spring upturn in large
denomination CD's outstanding at banks has ceased. The 
over-all balance of payments was in heavy deficit in 
April and May. In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions conducive to orderly 
reduction in the rate of inflation, while encouraging 
the resumption of sustainable economic growth and the 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, in view of persisting 
market uncertainties and liquidity strains, open market



6/23/70

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
continue to be conducted with a view to moderating 
pressures on financial markets. To the extent compatible 
therewith, the bank reserves and money market conditions 
maintained shall be consistent with the Committee's 
longer-run objective of moderate growth in money and 
bank credit, taking account of the Board's regulatory 
action effective June 24 and some possible consequent 
shifting of credit flows from market to banking channels.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 21, 1970, at 

9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


