











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 14. 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 14, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, Swan, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and MacLaury, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Garvy, Gramley, 

Hersey, Scheld, Solomon, and Tow, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



12/14/71

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Craven, Senior Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Boehne, Hocter, Snellings, and 
Green, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Richmond, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Bowsher, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Supel, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Dill, Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 16, 1971, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on November 16, 1971, was accepted.



12/14/71

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 16 through December 13, 

1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the five System drawings on 

the National Bank of Belgium maturing in the period January 3-28, 

1972, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period November 16 through December 13, 1971, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services is increasing more 
rapidly in the current quarter than it had in the third 
quarter, but the unemployment rate remains high. Increases 
in prices and wages were effectively limited by the 90
day freeze, which ended in mid-November. Since then some 
wage and price increases have occurred, but other increases 
requested have been cut back or not approved by the Pay 
Board and the Price Commission. The narrowly defined 
money stock changed little in November and has not grown 
on balance since August. Inflows of consumer-type time 
and savings deposits to banks remained rapid in November 
and the broadly defined money stock continued to increase 
moderately. Expansion in the bank credit proxy stepped 
up as U.S. Government deposits and nondeposit liabilities 
increased on average. After advancing in the latter part

-3-



12/14/71

of November, most market interest rates have been declining 
recently, and discount rates at four Federal Reserve Banks 
were reduced by an additional one-quarter of a percentage 
point. The U.S. foreign trade balance was heavily in 
deficit in October. In recent weeks net outflows of short
term capital apparently have been substantial, market 
exchange rates for foreign currencies against the dollar 
on average have risen further, and official reserve holdings 
of some countries have increased considerably. In light 
of the foregoing developments, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
consistent with the aims of the new governmental program, 
including sustainable real economic growth and increased 
employment, abatement of inflationary pressures, and 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
promote the degree of ease in bank reserve and money 
market conditions essential to greater growth in monetary 
aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, January 18, 1972.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of the 

minutes of the Committee for the year 1966, on the basis described 

in a memorandum from the Secretariat dated December 7, 1971, was 

authorized.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


