











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 21, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 21, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.  

As indicated below, only a limited number of staff members were in 

attendance during the first part of the meeting.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, Swan, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and MacLaury, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Hersey, and Solomon, 

Associate Economists 

Messrs. Bryant and Gemmill, Associate 
Advisers, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors



9/21/71 -2

Messrs. Bodner and Sternlight, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 24 through September 20, 

1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the six System drawings on 

the National Bank of Belgium maturing in the period October 7-28, 

1971, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account, contained 

in paragraph 3 of the continuing authority directive with respect to 

open market operations, should be retained at this time.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee's "Guide for Emergency 

Operations," initially approved on May 29, 1962, was amended in the 

manner recommended in Mr. Maisel's memorandum of September 14, 1971, 

primarily for the purpose of removing references to "due bills." 

By unanimous vote, the resolution authorizing certain actions 

by the Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency, which had last been 

revised on July 21, 1970, was amended to read as follows: 

RESOLUTION OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE AUTHORIZING 
CERTAIN ACTIONS BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS DURING AN EMERGENCY 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes 
each Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the 
actions set forth below during war or defense emergency 
when such Federal Reserve Bank finds itself unable after 
reasonable efforts to be in communication with the 
Federal Open Market Committee (or with the Interim Com
mittee acting in lieu of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee) or when the Federal Open Market Committee (or such 
Interim Committee) is unable to function.



9/21/71

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light 
of economic conditions and the general credit situation 
then prevailing (after taking into account the possi
bility of providing necessary credit through advances 
secured by direct obligations of the United States 
under the last paragraph of section 13 of the Federal 
Reserve Act), such Federal Reserve Bank may purchase 
and sell obligations of the United States for its own 
account, either outright or under repurchase agree
ment, from and to banks, dealers or other holders of 
such obligations.  

(2) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discre
tion purchase special certificates of indebtedness 
directly from the United States in such amounts as may 
be needed to cover overdrafts in the general account 
of the Treasurer of the United States on the books of 
such Bank or for the temporary accommodation of the 
Treasury, but such Bank shall take all steps practi
cable at the time to insure as far as possible that 
the amount of obligations acquired directly from the 
United States and held by it, together with the amount 
of such obligations so acquired and held by all other 
Federal Reserve Banks, does not exceed S5 billion at 
any one time.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may engage in 
operations of the types specified in the Committee's 
authorization for System foreign currency operations 
when requested to do so by an authorized official of 
the U.S. Treasury Department; provided, however, that 
such Bank shall take all steps practicable at the 
time to insure as far as possible that, in light of 
the information available on other System foreign 
currency operations, its own operations do no: 
result in the aggregate in breaching any of the sev
eral dollar limits specified in the authorization.  

The following persons then entered the meeting: 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Messrs. Eisenmenger, Gramley, Scheld, and 

Tow, Associate Economists 

Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors

-3-



9/21/71 -4

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos, Andersen, and Craven, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Willes, Hocter, Brandt, Nelson, and 
Green, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, 
Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Schadrack, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period August 24 through September 20, 1971, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the Government's new economic program has reduced 
inflationary expectations and has improved prospects 
for higher rates of growth in real economic activity 
and employment. In the current quarter, however, real



9/21/71

output of goods and services is expanding modestly and 
unemployment remains substantial. Prior to the imposi
tion of the 90-day freeze, prices and wages were rising 
rapidly on average. In August inflows of consumer-type 
time and savings funds to nonbank thrift institutions 
moderated and inflows to banks remained at a reduced 
rate. Growth in the narrowly defined money stock, 
which had been rapid through July, slowed sharply in 
August; and growth in broadly defined money continued 
to slacken. However, the rate of expansion in the bank 
credit proxy stepped up, mainly reflecting a marked rise 
in U.S. Government deposits. Market interest rates, 
which declined sharply following the announcement of the 
new program, have since fluctuated irregularly. The 
U.S. balance of payments continues to be in a position 
of substantial basic deficit. Speculative capital out
flows have diminished recently. Most major foreign 
currencies are trading in the exchange markets at rates 
against the dollar a few per cent higher than on Aug
ust 13. Negotiations have begun on additional measures 
to reduce payments imbalances and on other improvements 
in the international monetary system. In light of the 
foregoing developments, it is the policy of the Federal 
Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
consistent with the aims of the new governmental program, 
including sustainable real economic growth and increased 
employment, abatement of inflationary pressures, and 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggre
gates, taking account of developments in capital mar
kets. System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to achieving bank reserve and money market con
ditions consistent with that objective.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 19, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


