











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 9, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 9, 1971, at 9:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 1/ 
Sherrill 
Swan 
Mayo, Alternate

Messrs. Kimbrel and Morris, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coidwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Garvy, Gramley, Hersey, 

Hocter, Jones, Parthemos, Reynolds, and 
Solomon, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account

1/ Withdrew from the meeting at the point indicated.



2/9/71

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant 
Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. MacDonald and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Taylor, and Tow, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Atlanta, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Scheld and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 12, 1971, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the affirmative action 

the members had taken on the recommendation, transmitted by wire of



2/9/71 -3

January 22, 1971, to suspend a provision of paragraph 1(A) of the 

continuing authority directive (the provision limiting exchanges with 

the Treasury of securities held in System Account to maturing issues) 

to the extent of enabling the Account Management to prerefund $4 

billion of System Account holdings of the 7-3/4 per cent note of 

November 1971 in the current Treasury financing.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 12 through February 8, 

1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period January 12 through February 8, 1971, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

Mr. Robertson withdrew from the meeting prior to the action 

reported below.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services, which declined 
in the fourth quarter of 1970, is rising in the current 
quarter primarily because of the resumption of higher 
automobile production. The unemployment rate remained 
high in January. Wage rates in most sectors are con
tinuing to rise at a rapid pace, and recent increases 
in some major price measures have been relatively large.  
Interest rates have fallen considerably further in recent



2/9/71

weeks despite continued heavy demands for funds in 
capital markets, and differentials between interest 
rates in the United States and those in major foreign 
countries have widened further. Federal Reserve discount 
rates were reduced by an additional one-quarter of a 
percentage point to 5 per cent. Bank credit increased 
considerably further in January, as business loan demands 
strengthened somewhat and banks made substantial further 
additions to their holdings of securities. The money 
stock narrowly defined grew modestly in January following 
a stronger December rise, but money more broadly defined 
expanded sharply further as a result of continued rapid 
growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits. The 
over-all balance of payments deficit in the fourth 

quarter was about as large as in the third quarter on 
the liquidity basis; on the official settlements basis 
the deficit increased further from the very high third
quarter level as banks continued to repay Euro-dollar 

liabilities. More recently,the issuance of a special 
Export-Import Bank security to foreign branches of 
U.S. banks helped to moderate the flow of dollars to 
foreign central banks. In light of the foregoing devel
opments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive to 
the resumption of sustainable economic growth, while 
encouraging an orderly reduction in the rate of infla
tion and the attainment of reasonable equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 
be conducted with a view to maintaining prevailing 
money market conditions while accommodating additional 
downward movements in long-term rates; provided that 
money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat 
further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are 
falling short of the growth path desired.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, March 9, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


