











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 9, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 9, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin and Francis, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Gramley, Hersey, 

Reynolds, Scheld, Solomon, and Taylor, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



3/9/71

Mr. Kenyon, Deputy Secretary, Board of Governors 
Mr. Leonard, Assistant Secretary, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. MacDonald and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland and Minneapolis. respectively 

Messrs. Parthemos and Cravan, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Andersen, Billington, and Green, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Meek and Schadrack, Assistant Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one 

year beginning March 1, 1971, that it appeared that such persons 

were legally qualified to serve, and that they had executed their

oaths of office.



3/9/71

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bark of 
Boston, with David P. Eastburn, President of the rederal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate; 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Monroe Kimbrel, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta, with Philip E. Coldwell, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate; 

Robert V. Mayo, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with the person who shall become President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland as alternate; 

George H. Clay, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, with Eliot J. Swan, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 29, 1972, with the understanding that in the event of the 

discontinuance of their official connection with the Board of 

Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee: 

Arthur F. Burns Chairman 
Alfred Hayes Vice Chairman 
Robert C. Holland Secretary 
Arthur L. Broida Deputy Secretary 
Normand R.V. Bernard and Charles Molony Assistant Secretaries 
Howard H. Hackley General Counsel 
David B. Hexter Assistant General Counsel

-3-



3/9/71

J. Charles Partee Economist 
Stephen H. Axilrod, Robert M.  

Eisenmenger, George Garvy, 
Lyle E. Gramley, A.B. Hersey, 
John E. Reynolds, Karl A. Scheld, 
Robert Solomon, Charles T. Taylor, 
and Clarence W. Tow Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market 

Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee after February 29, 1972.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes and Charles A. Coombs 

were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Federal Open Market 

Committee as Manager of the Systen Open Market Account and as 

Special Manager for foreign currency operations for such Account, 

respectively, it being understood that their selection was subject 

to their being satisfactory to the Directors of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently was received 
that Messrs. Holmes and Coombs were satisfactory to 
the Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York for service in the respective capacities 
indicated.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 9, 1971, 

were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on January 12 and February 9, 1971, were 

accepted.

-4-



3/9/71 -5

The reports of audit of the System Open Market Account and 

of foreign currency transactions, made by the Board's Division 

of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as at the close of business 

on September 25, 1970, and submitted by Mr. Schaeffer, Chief 

Federal Reserve Examiner, were accepted.  

It was agreed to retain the procedure, most recently 

reaffirmed on March 10, 1970, whereby, in addition to members and 

officers of the Committee and Reserve Bank Presidents not currently 

members of the Committee, minutes and other records could be made 

available to any other employee of the Board of Governors or of a 

Federal Reserve Bank with the approval of a member of the Committee 

or another Reserve Bank President, with notice to the Secretary.  

It was also agreed to authorize the Secretary to act on the 

Chairman's behalf in considering proposals for the addition of 

members of the Board's staff to the list of those with access to 

Committee minutes and other records.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, according to the customary practice of reviewing 

such matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's Note: It had been agreed at the 
meeting on March 10, 1970, that certain authori
zations among those that the Committee had 
reviewed annually in the past would remain 
effective until otherwise directed by the Committee, 
and would no longer be submitted routinely for 
review each year. Instead,it was understood that 
these authorizations would be called to the 
Committee's attention before the first meeting in 
March of each year and that members would be given



3/9/71

an opportunity to raise any questions they had 
concerning them. Accordingly, copies of the autho
rizations in question (listcd below) had been 
distributed to the Committee on January 21, 1971, 
with a request that the members advise the 
Secretariat if they wished to have any placed on 
the agenda for consideration at today's meeting.  
No such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedure for allocations of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. Distribution list for periodic reports prepared 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System 
Account in case the New York Bank was unable 
to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued operation of 
the Committee, and for certain actions by the 
Reserve Banks, during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the 
System Open Market Account.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account, contained 

in paragraph 3 of the continuing authority directive with respect to 

domestic open market operations, should be retained at this time.  

By unanimous vote, the continuing authority directive to 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with respect to domestic 

open market operations, as shown below, was reaffirmed: 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent 
current economic policy directive adopted at a meeting 
of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government 
securities in the open market, from or to 
Government securities dealers and foreign 
and international accounts maintained at



3/9/71

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the System Open Market Account at market 
prices and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U.S. Government securities with the 
Treasury or allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate 
amount of such securities held in such Account 
at the close of business on the day of a 
meeting of the Committee at which action is 
taken with respect to a current economic policy 
directive shall not be increased or decreased 
by more than $2.0 billion during the period 
commencing with the opening of business on the 
day following such meeting and ending with the 
close of business on the day of the next such 
meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' 
acceptances of the kinds designated in the 
Regulation of the Federal Open Market Committee 
in the open market, from or to acceptance 
dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York at narket discount rates; provided 
that the aggregate amount of bankers' accep
tances held at any one time shall not exceed 
(1) $125 million or (2) 10 per cent of the 
total of bankers' acceptances outstanding as 
shown in the most recent acceptance survey 
conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, whichever is the lower; 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, 
obligations that are direct obligations of, or 
fully guaranteed as to principal and interest 
by, any agency of the United States, and prime 
bankers' acceptances with maturities of 
6 months or less at the time of purchase, from 
nonbank dealers for the account of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for 
repurchase of such securities, obligations, or 
acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates 
not less than (1) the discount rate of the



3/9/71

Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the 
time such agreement is entered into, or (2) 
the average issuing rate on the most recent 
issue of 3-month Treasury bills, whichever 
is the lower; provided that in the event 
Government securities or agency issues covered 
by any such agreement are not repurchased by the 
dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal 
thereof, they shall be sold in the market or 
transferred to the System Open Market Account; 
and provided further that in the event bankers' 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are 
not repurchased by the seller, they shall 
continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank 
or shall be sold in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, if the 
New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal Reserve 
Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury for its own 
account (with discretion, in cases where it seems desir
able, to issue participations to one or more Federal 
Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to 
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; 
provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such 
purchases, and provided further that the total amount of 
such certificates held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall not exceed $1 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee 
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend 
U.S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to 
banks participating in Government securities clearing 
arrangements conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, 
under such instructions as the Committee may specify 
from time to time.  

By unanimous vote, the authorization for System foreign 

currency operations was amended to read as follows:



3/9/71

AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System 
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out 
the Committee's foreign currency directive and express 
authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home and abroad, 
including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization Fund 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, 
with foreign monetary authorities, and with the Bank for 
International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in para
graph A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, 
including currencies purchased from the 
Stabilization Fund, and sold forward to the 
Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion equiva
lent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or 
forward, up to the amounts necessary to ful
fill other forward commitments;



3/9/71

(3) Additional currencies purchased 
spot or forward, up to the amount necessary for 
System operations to exert a market influence 
but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered 
or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, 
under agreement with the Bank of England, up 
to $200 million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments 
undertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign 
currencies, up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign 
currencies to the Stabilization Fund, up to 
the limit specified in paragraph 1B(1) 
above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to 
deliver foreign currencies, up to $550 
million equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal 
currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such 
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 
after any amount outstanding at that time was first 
drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System 
Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 
12 months with the following foreign banks, which are 
among those designated by the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, 
and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity:

-10-



3/9/71 -11-

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 500 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,250 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300 
Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 600 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System, 
swap commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 
purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions 
in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) 
above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, be at prevailing Market rates and no 
attempt shall be made to establish rates that appear to be 
out of line with underlying market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 
transactions. In making operating arrangements with 
foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign cur
rencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not 
commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless 
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any 
agreements or understandings concerning the adminis
tration of the accounts maintained by the Federal



3/9/71

Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign banks 
designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be 
invested insofar as practicable, considering 
needs for minimum working balances. Such invest
ments shall be in accordance with Section 14(e) 
of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman 
and the Vice Chairman of the Committee and the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors (or in the 
absence of the Chairman or of the Vice Chairman of 
the Board of Governors the members of the Board 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in 
the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee 
his alternate) is authorized to act on behalf of 
the Committee when it is necessary to enable the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage in 
foreign currency operations before the Committee 
can be consulted. All actions taken by the 
Subcommittee under this paragraph shall be reported 
promptly to the Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the 
Vice Chairman of the Committee, and in the absence 
of both, the Vice Chairman of the Board of 
Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, 
to enter into any needed agreement or understanding 
with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency 
operations between the System and the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the 
Treasury fully advised concerning System foreign 
currency operations, and to consult with the 
Secretary on such policy matters as may relate to 
the Secretary's responsibilities; and 

C. From time to time, to transmit 
appropriate reports and information to the National 
Advisory Council on International Monetary and 
Financial Policies.

-12-



3/9/71 -13

8. Staff officers of the Committee are 
authorized to transmit pertinent information on 
System foreign currency operations to appropriate 
officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate 
in the foreign currency operations for System 
Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with 
Respect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve 
Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

10. The Special Manager of the System Open 
Market Account for foreign currency operations shall 
keep the Committee informed on conditions in foreign 
exchange markets and on transactions he has made and 
shall render such reports as the Committee may 
specify.  

By unanimous vote, the foreign currency directive shown 

below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in 
foreign currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the 
dollar in international exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of 
international payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with 
central banks of other countries having convertible 
currencies, with the International Monetary Fund, 
and with other international payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements 
in exchange rates, within the limits stated in the 
International Monetary Fund Agreement or established 
by central bank practices. reflect the interaction 
of underlying economic forces and thus serve as 
efficient guides to current financial decisions, 
private and public; and



3/9/71

E. To facilitate growth in international 
liquidity in accordance with the needs of an 
expanding world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee, System operations in 
foreign currencies shall be undertaken only when 
necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in 
the flows of international payments if such fluc
tuations (1) are deemed to reflect transitional 
market unsettlement or other temporary forces and 
therefore are expected to be reversed in the fore
seeable future; and (2) are deemed to be disequil
ibrating or otherwise to have potentially destab
ilizing effects on U.S. or foreign official reserves 
or on exchange markets, for example, by occasioning 
market anxieties, undesirable speculative activity, 
or excessive leads and lags in international payments; 

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes 
in spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward 
premiums and discounts judged to be disequilibrating.  
Whenever supply or demand persists in influencing 
exchange rates in one direction. System transactions 
should be modified or curtailed unless upon review 
and reassessment of the situation the Committee 
directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions 
in exchange markets. Special factors that might make 
for exchange market instabilities include (1) responses 
to short-run increases in international political 
tension, (2) differences in phasing of international 
economic activity that give rise to unusually large 
interest rate differentials between major markets, and 
(3) market rumors of a character likely to stimulate 
speculative transactions. Whenever exchange market 
instability threatens to produce disorderly conditions, 
System transactions may be undertaken if the Special 
Manager reaches a judgment that they may help to 
reestablish supply and demand balance at a level more 
consistent with the prevailing flow of underlying 
payments. In such cases, the Special Manager shall 
consult as soon as practicable with the Committee or,

-14-



in an emergency, with the members of the 
Subcommittee designated for that purpose in 
paragraph 6 of the Authorization for System 
foreign currency operations; and 

D. To adjust System balances within the 
limits established in the Authorization for System 
foreign currency operations in light of probable 
future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements 
are appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign 
currencies for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 
above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, transactions in forward exchange, 
either outright or in conjunction with spot trans
actions, may be undertaken only (i) to prevent 
forward premiums or discounts from giving rise to 
disequilibrating movements of short-term funds; 
(ii) to minimize speculative disturbances; (iii) to 
supplement existing market supplies of forward cover, 
directly or indirectly, as a means of encouraging 
the retention or accumulation of dollar holdings by 
private foreign holders; (iv) to allow greater 
flexibility in covering System or Treasury commitments, 
including commitments under swap arrangements, and to 
facilitate operations of the Stabilization Fund; (v) 
to facilitate the use of one currency for the settle
ment of System or Treasury commitments denoninated in 
other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for 
System holdings of foreign currencies.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 9 through March 8, 1971, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period February 9 through March 8, 1971, were approved, ratified,

and confirmed.

3/9/71 -15-



By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accor

dance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services, which declined 
in the fourth quarter of 1970, is rising in the current 
quarter primarily because of the resumption of higher 
automobile production. Although the unemployment rate 
has edged down recently, it remains high. Wage rates in 
most sectors are continuing to rise at a rapid pace.  
Movements in major price measures have been diverse; 
most recently, the rate of advance moderated for con
sumer prices and wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities, but wholesale prices of farm products and 
foods rose sharply. Bank credit increased considerably 
further in February, as business loans strengthened 
substantially and banks again made sizeable additions to 
their holdings of securities. The money stock both 
narrowly and broadly defined expanded sharply in February.  
Short-term interest rates and mortgage rates have 
fallen further in recent weeks but yields on new issues 
of corporate and municipal bonds have risen considerably, 
in part as a result of the very heavy calendar of 
offerings. The over-all balance of payments deficit in 
January and February was exceptionally large. Imports 
increased more rapidly than exports in January, and 
capital outflows have been stimulated by widened short
term interest rate differentials. In light of the 
foregoing developments, it is the policy of the Federal 
Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
conducive to the resumption of sustainable economic 
growth, while encouraging an orderly reduction in the 
rate of inflation and the attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining 
prevailing money market conditions while accommodating

3/9/71 -16-



any downward movements in long-term rates; provided 
that money market conditions shall be modified if 
it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates 

are deviating significantly from the growth paths 
expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 6, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

3/9/71 -17-


