











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 8, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 8, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mt.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 

Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Heflin and Francis, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Hersey, 

Scheld, Solomon, Taylor, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



6/8/71 -2

Mr. Leonard, Assistant Secretary, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Wernick, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. MacDonald and Strothman, First 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Cleveland and Minneapolis, respec
tively 

Messrs. Link, Parthemos, and Craven, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Willes, Hocter, Andersen, and 
Green, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleve
land, St. Louis, and Dallas, respec
tively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 11,

1971, were approved.



6/8/71 -3

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on May 11, 1971, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period May 11 through June 7, 

1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, a delay in the liquidation of out

standing System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium beyond 

June 30, 1971, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of three 

months of the System drawing on the National Bank of Belgium 

maturing on July 7, 1971, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period May 11 through June 7, 1971, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the dollar limit specified in para

graph 2 of the continuing authority directive, on Federal 

Reserve Bank holdings of short-term certificates of indebtedness 

purchased directly from the Treasury, was increased from $1 bil

lion to $2 billion. As amended, paragraph 2 read as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, if 
the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal 
Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury 
for its own account (with discretion, in cases where 
it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or



6/8/71

more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special 
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be nec
sary from time to time for the temporary accommodation 
of the Treasury; provided that the rate charged on such 
certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below 
the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York at the time of such purchases, and provided 
further that the total amount of such certificates 
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks 
shall not exceed $2 billion.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services is expanding 
moderately in the current quarter, following the first
quarter surge that primarily reflected the resumption 
of higher automobile production. The unemployment 
rate remained high in May. Wage rates in most sectors 
are continuing to rise at a rapid pace. in the first 
four months of 1971 the consumer price index increased 
at a slower pace than earlier, in considerable part 
because of a decline in mortgage interest rates; the 
rate of advance in wholesale prices of industrial com
modities, which had moderated in the first quarter, 
stepped up again in April and May. The money stock 
both narrowly and broadly defined expanded even more 
rapidly in May than in April but growth in the bank 
credit proxy remained moderate. Interest rates on 
most types of market securities rose sharply further 
during much of May, reflecting continuing uncertain
ties about domestic and international financial 
prospects; more recently rates on long-term securities 
have declined on balance, but mortgage rates have 
risen. The U.S. merchandise trade balance, which was 

in small surplus in the first quarter, worsened in April.  
The deficit in the over-all balance of payments has 
diminished since early May, when capital outflows were 

swollen by expectations of changes in foreign exchange



6/8/71

rates, but it remains large. Differentials between 
short-term interest rates in the United States and in 
major foreign countries narrowed on balance in April 
and May, but differentials between rates in the 
United States and in the Euro-dollar market recently 
have widened as rates in that market moved up sharply 
in early May. In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions conducive to the resump
tion of sustainable economic growth, while encouraging 
an orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, modera
tion of short-term capital outflows, and attainment of 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months 
ahead, taking account of developments in capital mar
kets. System open market operations until the next 
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a 
view to achieving bank reserve and money market con
ditions consistent with those objectives.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, 

June 29, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


