











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 11, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 11, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin and Francis, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Gramley, Hersey, 

Reynolds, Scheld, Taylor, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account.  
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



5/11/71

Mr. Leonard, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 

of Governors 
Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Bryant and Gemmill, Associate Advisers, 
Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. MacDonald and Strothman, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Link and Craven, Senior Vice Presi
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Snellings, Andersen, and Green, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Richmond, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 6, 1971, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on April 6, 1971, was accepted.



5/11/71 -3

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 6 through May 10, 1971, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

It was agreed that a subcommittee consisting of the Chairman 

and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the Board 

of Governors, or designated alternates, should be authorized to act 

on behalf of the Committee with respect to any response that might be 

made to central banks in the System's swap network raising questions 

similar to that raised recently by one such central bank concerning 

the appropriate interpretation of certain language in the swap con

tracts.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during th.  

period April 6 through May 10, 1971, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services rose substan
tially in the first quarter primarily because of the 
resumption of higher automobile production, and more 
moderate growth appears to be in prospect for the cur
rent quarter. The unemployment rate remained high in



5/11/71

April. Wage rates in most sectors are continuing to 
rise at a rapid pace. The rate of advance in consumer 
prices and in wholesale prices of industrial commodi
ties moderated in the first quarter, but the rise in 
industrial prices stepped up again in April. The money 
stock both narrowly and broadly defined expanded sub
stantially further in April but growth in bank credit 
slowed. Inflows of consumer-type time and savings 
funds to banks moderated, partly as a result of reduc
tions in the interest rates offered by banks, but flows 
to nonbank thrift institutions continued heavy. Inter
est rates on most types of short- and long-term market 
securities rose sharply in April and early May, reflect
ing uncertainties about domestic, and more recently 
international, financial prospects. The over-all bal
ance of payments deficit in the first four months of 
1971 was exceptionally large, in great part reflecting 
short-term capital outflows. Recently, after further 
large international flows of funds, several European 
central banks suspended sales of their currencies for 
dollars; subsequently, announcements were made that 
the German mark and Dutch guilder would be permitted 
to float for the time being, and that the Swiss franc 
and Austrian schilling were being revalued. In light 
of the foregoing developments, it is the policy of 
the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth, while encouraging an orderly reduction 
in the rate of inflation, moderation of short-term 
capital outflows, and attainment of reasonable equi
librium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over 
the months ahead, taking account of the current Treasury 
financing, developments in capital markets, and uncer
tainties in foreign exchange markets. System open 
market operations until the next meeting of the Commit
tee shall be aimed initially at maintaining currently 
prevailing money market conditions, and thereafter 
conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and 
money market conditions consistent with the above-cited 
objectives.



5/11/71 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, June 8, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


