











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 12, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 12, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Daane 
Francis 
Heflin 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Swan 
Mayo, Alternate 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Galusha, Kimbrel, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Clay, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Kenyon and Molony, Assistant Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Craven, Gramley, Hersey, Hocter, 

Jones, Parthemos, Reynolds, and Solomon, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



1/12/71

Messrs. Bernard and Leonard, Assistant 
Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Messrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Taylor, and Tow, 

Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, Atlanta, and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Scheld and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Geng, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 15, 

1970, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on December 15, 1970, was accepted.

-2-



1/12/71

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 15, 1970, through 

January 11, 1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during 

the period December 15, 1970, through January 11, 1971, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services declined in the 
fourth quarter of 1970, largely as a consequence of 

the recent strike in the automobile industry. Unemploy
ment increased further in December. The resumption of 

higher automobile production is expected to result in 

a bulge in activity in early 1971. Wage rates generally 

are continuing to rise at a rapid pace, but gains in 
productivity appear to be slowing the increase in unit 

labor costs. The rise in both wholesale and consumer 

prices appears to have moderated recently, following 

substantial increases earlier in the fall. Most market 

interest rates turned down again in recent days, and 

Federal Reserve discount rates were reduced by an 

additional one-quarter of a percentage point. Demands 

for funds in capital markets have continued heavy, but 

business loan demands at banks remain weak. Although 
growth in the money supply accelerated in December, 
over the fourth quarter as a whole it was at a rate 
below that prevailing in the preceding three quarters.  
Banks made substantial further additions to their hold
ings of securities in December, and bank credit 
increased sharply. The foreign trade surplus has 
declined markedly in recent months. The over-all balance 
of payments deficit on the liquidity basis in the fourth



1/12/71

quarter was apparently about as large as in the third 
quarter. The deficit on the official settlements basis 
was very large as banks continued to repay Euro-dollar 
liabilities. In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions conducive to the resump
tion of sustainable economic growth, while encouraging 
an orderly reduction in the rate of inflation and the 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
promote accommodative conditions in credit markets and 
moderate expansion in monetary and credit aggregates.  
System open market operations until the next meeting 
of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to 
maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions 
consistent with those objectives, taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury financing.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 9, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


