











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 29, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 29, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Maisel 
Mayo 

Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill 
Coldwell, Alternate for Mr. Kimbrel

Mr. Swan. Alternate Member of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin and Francis, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Garvy, Gramley, Hersey, Scheld, 

Taylor, and Tow, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, Syster Open 

Market Account



6/29/71

Mr. Leonard, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Zeisel, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Melnicoff, MacDonald, Fossum, and 
Strothman, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Parthemos and Craven, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Willes, Hocter, Jordan, Nelson, and 
Green, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Anderson, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities and 
Acceptance Departments, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York



6/29/71 -3

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period June 8 through 28, 1971, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal if necessary of the three 

System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing in the 

period July 26-August 3, 1971, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period June 8 through 28, 1971, were approve, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the dollar limit specified in para

graph 2 of the continuing authority directive, on Federal Reserve 

Bank holdings of short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased 

directly from the Treasury, was decreased from $2 billion to $1 

billion. As amended, paragraph 2 read as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, if 
the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal 
Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury 
for its own account (with discretion, in cases where 
it seems desirable, to issue participations to one 
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special 
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be 
necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the rate 
charged on such certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 
1 per cent below the discount rate of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, 
and provided further that the total amount of such 
certificates held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall not exceed $1 billion.



6/29/71

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services is expanding 
moderately in the current quarter and that the unem
ployment rate has remained high. Wage rates in most 
sectors are continuing to rise at a rapid pace. The 
rate of advance in both consumer prices and wholesale 
prices of industrial commodities has stepped up again 
recently after moderating earlier in the year. In 
June, according to tentative estimates, the money 
stock both narrowly and broadly defined is still grow
ing rapidly on average, although less than in May; 
growth in the bank credit proxy remains below the 
first-quarter rate. Interest rates on most types of 
market securities have increased on balance in recent 
weeks. The market exchange rate for the German mark 
has advanced, and a substantial flow of funds from 
Germany to other markets has occurred in recent weeks.  
In consequence of a partial reversal of the earlier 
speculative outflows of short-term capital from the 
United States and of an increase in Euro-dollar bor
rowings of U.S. banks, there has been a surplus in 
the U.S. payments balance on the official settlements 
basis in this period. The U.S. merchandise trade 
balance, which had been in small surplus in the first 
quarter, was in deficit in April and May. In light 
of the foregoing developments, it is the policy of 
the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth, while encouraging an orderly reduction 
in the rate of inflation, moderation of short-term 
capital outflows, and attainment of reasonable equi
librium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
achieve more moderate growth in monetary aggregates 
over the months ahead, taking account of developments 
in capital markets. System open market operations



6/29/71

until the next meeting of the Committee shall be 
conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with those 
objectives.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 27, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


