











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 27, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 27, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and MacLaury, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Garvy, Scheld, Solomon, 

Taylor, and Tow, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Kenyon, Deputy Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Altmann and Leonard, Assistant 
Secretaries, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors



7/27/71

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and O'Brien, Special Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Chase, Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of 

Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Parthemos and Craven, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Richmond and San Francisco, respectively 
Messrs. Bodner, Willes, Hocter, Andersen, 

and Green, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Fieleke and Geng, Assistant Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston and New York, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ings of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 8 and June 29,

1971, were approved.



7/27/71

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 8 and June 29, 1971, were 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 29 through July 26, 1971, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the four System drawings on 

the National Bank of Belgium maturing in the period August 10-26, 

1971, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period June 29 through July 26, 1971, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Com

mittee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that moderate expansion in real output of goods and 
services is continuing and that unemployment remains 
substantial. Wage rates in most sectors are continuing 
to rise at a rapid pace. The rate of advance in both 
consumer prices and wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities has stepped up again recently after moder
ating earlier in the year. In the second quarter 
inflows of consumer-type time and savings funds at 
banks and nonbank thrift institutions were large, but 
below the unusually rapid first-quarter pace. Growth



7/27/71

in bank credit and the broadly defined money stock 
slowed in the second quarter, but the rate of expansion 
in the narrowly defined money stock increased. In July, 
according to partial data, it appears that both bank 
credit and the narrowly defined money stock are growing 
at rates close to those of the second quarter, but that 
expansion in broadly defined money is slowing. While 
interest rates on most types of long-term market securi
ties have changed relatively little on balance in recent 
weeks, short-term interest rates have risen further. In 
mid-July Federal Reserve discount rates were increased by 
one-quarter of a percentage point to 5 per cent. The 
deficit in the U.S. balance of payments remained extraor
dinarily large in the second quarter, mainly reflecting 
capital outflows related to expectations of shifts in 
foreign exchange rates and the development of a substan
tial deficit in the merchandise trade balance. In light 
of the foregoing developments, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial condi
tions conducive to sustainable economic growth, while 
encouraging an orderly reduction in the rate of inflation, 
moderation of short-term capital outflows, and attainment 
of reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, taking account of the 
current Treasury financing and of developments in capital 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve more moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  
System open market operations until the next meeting of 
the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving 
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with 
those objectives.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 24, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary


