











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

August 24, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 24, 1971, at 9:30 a.m. As 

indicated below, only a limited number of staff members were in 

attendance during the first part of the meeting.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Clay 
Mr. Daane 

Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Maisel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Sherrill 

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and MacLaury, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Molony, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 1/ 
Mr. Solomon, Associate Economist 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.



8/24/71 -2

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Katz, Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 1/ 

Messrs. Bryant and Pizer, Associate 
Advisers, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the actions of 

members on August 9 and 11, 1971, respectively, approving increases 

in the Federal Reserve swap lines with the National Bank of Belgium 

from $500 million to $600 million and with the Swiss National Bank 

from $600 million to $1 billion, and the conforming amendments to 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency opera

tions, with these several actions effective on August 12, 1971.  

As a result of these actions, paragraph 2 of the authoriza

tion for System foreign currency operations was amended, effective 

August 12, 1971, to read as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System 
Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 
months with the following foreign banks, which are among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Rela
tions with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 600

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



8/24/71

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 
Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,250 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300 
Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 1,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 27 through August 23, 

1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of a $35 million System drawing 

on the National Bank of Belguim maturing September 10, 1971, was 

authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved an increase in 

the Federal Reserve swap line with the Swiss National Bank from 

$1 billion to $1,333 million, and the conforming amendment to 

paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency oper

ations, to become effective if and when Chairman Burns determined 

that such action was in the national interest.1 / 

1/ Mr. Katz was present during the discussion of this matter.



8/24/71

Secretary's Note: After 
subsequent discussions among 
Federal Reserve, Treasury, 
and Swiss National Bank offi

cials, it was determined that 
alternative means for accom

plishing the objective in view 
would be preferable. Accord
ingly, the increase in the 
swap line was not effectuated.  

The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:25 p.m. In 

attendance were those present at the morning session as well as 

the following: 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Garvey, 

Scheld, Taylor, and Tow, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary, Office 

of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 

of Governors 

Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Pierce, Associate Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Baker, Economist, Government Finance 

Section, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Craven, Senior Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco



8/24/71 -5

Messrs. Sternlight, Willes, Hocter, 
Snellings, Jordan, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Richmond, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 27, 1971, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on July 27, 1971, was 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period July 27 through August 23, 1971, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.1/ 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Com

mittee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accor

dance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real output of goods and services has been expanding 
moderately, that unemployment has remained substantial, 
and that prices and wages have been rising rapidly on 

1/ Mr. Partee left the meeting before the discussion of the 

following matter.



8/24/71

average in recent months. However, the economic program 

announced by the President on August 15 enhances pros

pects for higher rates of growth in real economic 

activity, increased job opportunities, and curtailed 
inflationary pressures. In July inflows of consumer
type time and savings funds slowed markedly at banks 
but inflows to nonbank thrift institutions continued 
large. Growth in the narrowly defined money stock 

remained rapid in July, but growth in broadly defined 

money slowed and bank credit continued to expand at 

about the second-quarter pace. Interest rates on 

most types of market securities declined sharply in 
the days following the announcement of the new program.  

The deficit in the U.S. balance of payments reached 
extraordinarily large proportions in early August, 
mainly reflecting an acceleration of capital outflows 

related to expectations of shifts in foreign exchange 

rates. Following the suspension of convertibility 

of the dollar into gold and other reserve assets, 
major European central banks discontinued foreign 

exchange market operations for a week. When most of 
the European markets were reopened on August 23 these 

central banks pursued diverse exchange rate policies, 
but all allowed at least some types of market transac
tions to take place at rates of exchange for their 
currencies relative to the dollar above previous upper 
intervention limits. In light of the foregoing develop

ments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions consistent 

with the aims of the new governmental program, includ

ing sustainable real economic growth and increased 
employment, abatement of inflationary pressures, and 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
achieve more moderate growth in monetary and credit 
aggregates over the months ahead. System open market 

operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall 

be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and 
money market conditions consistent with that objective.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the continuing author

ity directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with respect 

to domestic open market operations was amended to read as follows:



8/24/71

To buy or sell U.S. Government securities and securi
ties that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed 
as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States in the open market, from or to securities dealers 
and foreign and international accounts maintained at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or 
deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market 
Account at market prices and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 
with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to allow 
them to mature without replacement; provided that the 
aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account at the close of business 
on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action is 
taken with respect to a current economic policy directive 
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $2.0 bil
lion during the period commencing with the opening of 
business on the day following such meeting and ending 
with the close of business on the day of the next such 
meeting.  

In connection with the foregoing action, the Committee 

approved certain guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 

the securities of Federal agencies.  

Secretary's Note: It was understood 
that decisions with respect to the 
implementation of outright operations 
in agency issues, and the announce
ment thereof, would be made by Chair
man Burns after consultation with the 
System Account Manager.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Mar

ket Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 21, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


