











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 19, 1971 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 19, 1971, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sherrill

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, Swan, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Francis and MacLaury, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Gramley, 

Hersey, Scheld, Taylor, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



10/19/71

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Black, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Link, Parthemos, Andersen, and 
Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Sternlight, Boehne, Hocter, and 
Green, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 24 

and September 21, 1971, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on August 24 and September 21, 1971, were

accepted.



10/19/71 -3

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 21 through October 

18, 1971, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the ten System drawings on 

the National Bank of Belgium maturing in the period November 3-26, 

1971, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during 

the period September 21 through October 18, 1971, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indi
cates that real output of goods and services expanded 
modestly in the third quarter and that unemployment 
remained substantial. However, there are indications 
of a strengthening in economic activity since the 
mid-August announcement of the Government's new 
economic program. The 90-day freeze has thus far 
effectively limited increases in prices and wages, 
and the general framework of the post-freeze 
stabilization program has been established. The 
narrowly defined money stock, which had grown rapidly 
through July, increased much less in August and 
declined in September. The broadly defined money 
stock increased slightly in September as inflows of 
consumer-type time and savings deposits to banks 
continued at the moderate August rate. However, the 
volume of large-denomination CD's outstanding rose 
sharply, and the rate of expansion in the bank credit



10/19/71

proxy remained relatively rapid. Market interest rates 
have declined in recent weeks and are appreciably below 
their mid-August levels. The U.S. foreign trade balance 
remained in heavy deficit in August. Outflows of short
term capital, which had been massive in August, were 
much smaller in September. In recent weeks the market 
exchange rates for some foreign currencies against the 
dollar rose further, while foreign official reserve 
holdings increased substantially. In light of the 
foregoing developments, it is the policy of the Federal 
Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
consistent with the aims of the new governmental program, 
including sustainable real economic growth and increased 
employment, abatement of inflationary pressures, and 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to 
achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggre
gates over the months ahead. System open market 
operations until the next meeting of the Committee 
shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank 
reserve and money market conditions consistent with 
that objective, taking account of the forthcoming 
Treasury financing.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, November 16, 1971, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


