







































Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 6, 1971

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 6, 1971, at

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Burns, Chairman
Hayes, Vice Chairman
Brimmer
Clay
Daane
Kimbrel
Maisel
Mayo
Morris
Robertson
Sherrill

Messrs. Coldwell and Swan, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Heflin and Francis, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and St. Louis,
respectively

Mr. Holland, Secretary
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant

Secretaries
Mr. Hackley, General Coursel
Mr. Partee, Economist
Messrs. Axilrod, Liseameuger, Garvy, Gramley,

Hersey, Reynolds, Scheld, Solomon, and
Tow, Assocciate Economists

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market
Account

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open
Market Account



Mr. Kenyon, Deputy Secretary, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors

Mr. Leonard, Assistant Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board
of Governors

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

Mr. Keir, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of

Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Adviser, Division of

International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance

Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors

Miss Ormsby, Special Assistant, Office of

the Secretary, Board of Governors
Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat

Assistant, Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors

Miss Orr, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors

Messrs. Melnicoff, MacDonald, and Strothman,

First Vice Presidents, Feeral Reserve
Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and

Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Craven, Senior Vice President, Federal

Reserve Bank of San Francisco

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, Andersen, and Green,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks

of Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis, and
Dallas, respectively

Messrs. Gustus and Kareken, Economic Advisers,

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and

Minneapolis, respectively
Messrs. Geng and Wallace, Assistant Vice

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of

New York and Richmond, respectively

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 9, 1971,

were approved.

4/6/71 -2-



The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal

Open Market Committee held on March 9, 1971, was accepted.

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in

foreign currencies during the period March 9 through April 5, 1971,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern-

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances

during the period March 9 through April 5, 1971, were approved,

ratified, and confirmed.

With Messrs. Hayes and Kimbrel dissenting, the Federal

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other-

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the

System Account in accordance with the following current economic

policy directive:

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that real output of goods and services rose substan-
tially in the first quarter primarily because of the
resumption of higher automobile production, but that
the unemployment rate remained high. More moderate
growth in real GNP appears to be in prospect for the
current quarter. Wage rates in most sectors are con-
tinuing to rise at a rapid pace. The rate of advance
in consumer prices and in wholesale prices of indus-
trial commodities appears to have moderated recently.
In March bank credit and the money stock both narrowly
and broadly defined again expanded substantially,
although the increases were less sharp than in February.
Inflows of consumer-type time and savings funds to banks
and nonbank thrift institutions reached unusually high
levels in the first quarter as interest rates on com-
petitive short-term market instruments declined con-
siderably further. In recent weeks, however, key short-
term interest rates have moved up somewhat on balance.
Yields on new issues of corporate and municipal bonds

4/6/71 -3-



4/6/71 -4-

declined during much of March despite a continuing
heavy calendar of offerings, but most recently long-
term market yields have also risen somewhat. The over-
all balance of payments deficit in the first quarter
was exceptionally large. The trade surplus for the
first two months was very small, and capital outflows
have been stimulated by wide short-term interest rate
differentials. Despite recent reductions in the dis-
count rates of several European central banks, these
differentials remain wide. In light of the foregoing
developments, it is the policy of the Federal Open
Market Committee to foster financial conditions con-
ducive to the resumption of sustainable economic growth,
while encouraging an orderly reduction in the rate of
inflation, moderation of short-term capital outflows,
and attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the
country's balance of payments.

To implement this policy, while taking account of
the Treasury financing the terms of which are to be
announced late in the month, System open market opera-
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be
conducted with a view to attaining temporarily some
minor firming in money market conditions, while con-
tinuing to meet some part of reserve needs through
purchases of coupon issues in the interest of promoting
accommodative conditions in long-term credit markets;
provided that money market conditions shall be modified
if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates
are deviating significantly from the growth paths
desired.

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 4, 1971, at

9:30 a.m.

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


