











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 23, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 23, 1972, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. MacLaury 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Sheehan 
Mr. Winn 

Mr. Mayo, Alternate Member of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs, Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr, Holland, Secretary 
Mr, Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Mr, Altmann, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr, Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, 

Hocter, Kareken, and Link, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



5/23/72

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 

of Governors 
Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 

Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr, Pizer, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Black, Leonard, and Merritt, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Scheld, Andersen, 
Tow, and Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Debs and Brandt, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 

Atlanta, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ings of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 21 and April 17, 

1972, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on March 21 and April 17, 1972 were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 18 through May 22, 1972,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



5/23/72

It was agreed that a subcommittee, consisting of the Chairman 

and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the Board 

of Governors, or designated alternates, should be authorized to act 

on behalf of the Committee with respect to the repayment of the 

System's swap debt to the Bank of England.  

It was agreed that the subcommittee indicated above should 

be authorized to act on behalf of the Committee with respect to 

repayments on the System's Swiss franc swap debt.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the renewal for 

further periods of six months of the following swap arrangements, 

having the indicated amounts and maturity dates: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

dollars Maturity 
Foreign bank equivalent) date 

Bank of France 1,000 June 28, 1972 
German Federal Bank 1,000 June 15, 1972 
Bank of Italy 1,250 June 30, 1972 
Netherlands Bank 300 June 30, 1972 

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances dur

ing the period April 18 through May 22, 1972, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee,



5/23/72

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting, including 
recent data for such measures of business activity as 
industrial production and employment, suggests that real 
output of goods and services may be growing at a faster 
rate in the current quarter than in the two preceding 
quarters, but the unemployment rate remains high. In 
April wholesale prices of farm and food products changed 
little--after having declined in March--but the rise in 
prices of industrial commodities remained substantial.  
The consumer price index, which had been stable in March, 
increased somewhat. Wage rates continued to rise at a 
substantial pace. The U.S. balance of payments on the 
official settlements basis has been in small surplus 
since mid-March, but the payments balance on the net 
liquidity basis has apparently remained in deficit. In 
March merchandise imports continued to be considerably 

in excess of exports.  

Growth in both the narrowly and broadly defined 
money stock slowed in April from the rapid rates in 
February and March, Inflows of savings funds to nonbank 
thrift institutions also slowed, but they remained at a 
relatively advanced pace. Reflecting a further increase 
in U.S. Government deposits and a rise in the outstanding 
volume of large-denomination CD's, the bank credit proxy 
continued to expand at a rapid rate. In recent weeks, 
market interest rates have fluctuated in a narrow range.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real 

economic growth and increased employment, abatement of 
inflationary pressures, and attainment of reasonable 

equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
capital market developments and possible Treasury refund
ing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and 

money market conditions that will support somewhat slower 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.



5/23/72 -5

It was agreed that the next meetings of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Monday and Tuesday, June 19-20, 

1972.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


