











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 17, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Monday, April 17, 1972, at 4:30 p.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, Mayo, and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents of 

Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 

Kansas City, respectively

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 

Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Green, Hersey, 

and Hocter, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account



4/17/72

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Pierce, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 

of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos, Taylor, Scheld, Tow, and 
Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
Kansas City, and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Nelson, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 

Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mrs. Greenwald, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

The Secretariat's recommendations for making historical 

Committee records available to the public, as contained in the 

memorandum dated April 11, 1972, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(c) of the continuing authority 

directive with respect to domestic open market operations was amended 

to read as follows: 

To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that 
are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to 
principal and interest by, any agency of the United States, 
and prime bankers' acceptances with maturities of 6 months 
or less at the time of purchase, from nonbank dealers for 
the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under 
agreements for repurchase of such securities, obligations, 
or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates that, 
unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying



4/17/72

reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with 
individual dealers; provided that in the event Govern
ment securities or agency issues covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant 
to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be 
sold in the market or transferred to the System Open 
Market Account; and provided further that in the event 
bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement are 
not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to 

be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 

in the open market.  

By unanimous vote, guideline 6 for the conduct of System 

operations in Federal agency issues was amended to read as follows: 

System holdings of any one issue at any one time 

will not exceed 20 per cent of the amount of the issue 

outstanding. Aggregate holdings of the issues of any 

one agency will not exceed 10 per cent of the amount of 
outstanding issues of that agency.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


