











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

March 21, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 21, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 
Alternate Members of 
Market Committee

Mayo, and Swan, 
the Federal Open

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann, Bernard, and Molony, 

Assistant Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, 

Hersey, Hocter, Kareken, and Link, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



3/21/72

Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and 
Williams, Advisers, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, 
Scheld, Andersen, and Tow, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Debs, Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Lynn, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Cooper, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one 

year beginning March 1, 1972; that it appeared that such persons 

were legally qualified to serve; and that they had executed their 

oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

David P. Eastburn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia, with Aubrey N. Heflin, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate;



3/21/72 -3

Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland, with Robert P. Mayo, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

Bruce K. MacLaury, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis, with Eliot J. Swan, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate; 

Philip E. Coldwell, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Dallas, with Darryl R. Francis, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1973, with the understandings (1) that in the event 

of the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board 

of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee; and (2) that insofar as the titles of the 

positions to which they were elected differed from those hereto

fore specified in the Committee's By-Laws and Rules of Organization, 

conforming changes were to be made in those documents: 

Arthur F. Burns Chairman 
Alfred Hayes Vice Chairman 
Robert C. Holland Secretary 
Arthur L. Broida Deputy Secretary 
Murray Altmann, 
Normand R.V. Bernard, 
and Charles Molony Assistant Secretaries 

Howard H. Hackley General Counsel 
David B. Hexter Assistant General Counsel 
J. Charles Partee Senior Economist 
Stephen H. Axilrod Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Robert Solomon Economist (International 

Finance)



3/21/72 -4

Edward G. Boehne, Ralph C.  
Bryant, Lyle E. Gramley, 
Ralph T. Green, A.B. Hersey, 
William J. Hocter, John H.  
Kareken, and Robert G. Link Associate Economists 

Secretary's Note: In consequence of the 
foregoing action, the opening sentences of 
Sections 2, 3, and 6 of Article II of the 
Committee's By-Laws, and the first sentence 
of Section 3 of the Committee's Rules of 
Organization, were amended to read as follows: 

By-Laws: 

* * * 

ARTICLE II. OFFICERS 

Section 2. Secretary and Deputy and Assistant 
Secretaries - At its first meeting on or after March 1 
of each year, the Committee shall elect a Secretary 
and one or more Deputy and Assistant Secretaries to 
serve until the first meeting on or after March 1 of 
the next year. . .  

Section 3. Economists - At its first meeting on 
or after March 1 of each year, the Committee shall 
elect one or more Economists to serve until the first 
meeting on or after March 1 of the next year. The 
Committee shall also from time to time, as it may decide, 
designate one or more of its elected Economists as 
Senior or Associate Economists, or otherwise qualify 
their titles. The Economists shall prepare for the 
use of the Committee and present to it such informa
tion about business and credit conditions as will 
assist the Committee in the determination of open
market policies, and shall perform such other duties 
as the Committee may require.

* * *



3/21/72 -5

Section 6. Filling Vacancies - At any meeting the 
Committee may fill any vacancy in the offices described 
in this Article.  

Rules of Organization: 

SECTION 3 - PERSONNEL 

(a) Official Staff.-The official staff of the Federal 
Open Market Committee includes its Secretary, Deputy 
Secretary, and Assistant Secretaries, General Counsel and 
Assistant General Counsel, and Senior Economist, Economists, 
and Associate Economists, who perform the duties indicated 
by their titles . . .  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account 

until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee after February 28, 1973.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes and Charles A. Coombs 

were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Federal Open Market 

Committee as Manager of the System Open Market Account and as 

Special Manager for foreign currency operations for such Account, 

respectively, it being understood that their selection was subject 

to their being satisfactory to the Directors of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently 
was received that Messrs. Holmes and 
Coombs were satisfactory to the Board of 
Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York for service in the respective 
capacities indicated.



3/21/72 -6

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members on 

February 29, 1972, increasing from $2 billion to $3 billion the 

limit on changes between Committee meetings in System Account 

holdings of U.S. Government and Federal agency securities specified 

in paragraph 1(a) of the continuing authority directive, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the limit on changes between Committee 

meetings in System Account holdings of U.S. Government and Federal 

agency securities specified in paragraph 1(a) of the continuing 

authority directive was reduced from $3 billion to $2 billion.  

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members on 

March 7, 1972, suspending until close of business on March 21, 

1972, the lower limit on repurchase agreement rates specified in 
1/ 

paragraph 1(c) of continuing authority directive, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 11, 1972, 

were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on January 11 and February 14, 1972, were 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 15 through March 20, 

1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

1/ Messrs. Brimmer and Robertson dissented from the March 7 
action. Having so recorded their positions they did not consider 
it necessary to dissent also from the ratification.



3/21/72

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of the four System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium 

maturing in the period April 4-28, 1972, was authorized.  

It was agreed that a subcommittee, consisting of the 

Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice 

Chairman of the Board of Governors, or designated alternates, 

should be authorized to act on behalf of the Committee with 

respect to the manner of effectuating the revaluation clause 

in the System's swap contract with the National Bank of Belgium.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period February 15 through March 20, 1972, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
is increasing in the current quarter at about the 
stepped-up rate attained in the fourth quarter of 
1971. Several measures of business activity have 
strengthened recently and demands for labor have 
improved somewhat, but the unemployment rate 
remains high. Wholesale prices continued to rise 
rapidly in January and February, in part because



3/21/72

of large increases in prices of foods. However, the 
advance in wage rates slowed markedly after the post
freeze surge in December. Following a period of slug
gish growth, the narrowly defined money stock increased 
sharply in February, partly reflecting a substantial 
reduction in U.S. Government deposits. Inflows of time 
and savings funds at bank and nonbank thrift institutions 
continued rapid in February, although below January's 
extraordinary pace. Short-term interest rates have 
risen considerably in recent weeks while yields on 
long-term securities have changed little on balance.  
Exchange rates for most major foreign currencies 
against the dollar appreciated further in February and 
early March, as recurrent speculative outflows of 
capital added to the U.S. balance of payments deficit.  
In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real 
economic growth and increased employment, abatement 
of inflationary pressures, and attainment of reason
able equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international developments and possible Treasury 
financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions that will support moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account should 

be retained at this time.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authori

zations of the Committee, according to the customary practice of 

reviewing such matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's Note: It had been agreed at 
the meeting on March 10, 1970, that certain 
authorizations among those that the Commit
tee had reviewed annually in the past would 
remain effective until otherwise directed 
by the Committee, and would no longer be 
submitted routinely for review each year.  
Instead, it was understood that these 
authorizations would be called to the



3/21/72

Committee's attention before the first 
meeting in March of each year and that 
members would be given an opportunity to 
raise any questions they had concerning 
them. Accordingly, copies of the autho

rizations in question (listed below) had 
been distributed to the Committee on 
February 28, 1972, with a request that 
members advise the Secretariat if they 
wished to have any placed on the agenda 
for consideration at today's meeting. No 
such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedure for allocations of securities in the System 
Open Market Account.  

2. Distribution list for periodic reports prepared by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal Reserve 
Bank as agent to operate the System Account in case 
the New York Bank was unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued operation of the 
Committee, and for certain actions by the Reserve 
Banks, during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System 
Open Market Account.  

It was agreed to retain the existing procedure for making 

minutes and other records of the Committee available to employees 

of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, including 

authorization to the Secretary to act on the Chairman's behalf in 

considering proposals for the addition of members of the Board's 

staff to the list of those having access to Committee minutes and 

other records.  

By unanimous vote, the continuing authority directive to 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with respect to domestic open

market operations, as shown below, was reaffirmed;



3/21/72

CONTINUING AUTHORITY DIRECTIVE WITH RESPECT TO 
DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the most recent current economic 
policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities 
and securities that are direct obligations of, or 
fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, 
any agency of the United States in the open market, 
from or to securities dealers and foreign and inter
national accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred 
delivery basis, for the System Open Market Account 
at market prices and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 

with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to 
allow them to mature without replacement; provided 
that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and 
Federal agency securities held in such Account at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Com
mittee at which action is taken with respect to a 
current economic policy directive shall not be increased 
or decreased by more than $2.0 billion during the period 
commencing with the opening of business on the day fol
lowing such meeting and ending with the close of busi

ness on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' acceptances of 
the kinds designated in the Regulation of the Federal 

Open Market Committee in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regu
lar, or deferred delivery basis, for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market dis
count rates; provided that the aggregate amount of 
bankers' acceptances held at any one time shall not 

exceed (1) $125 million or (2) 10 per cent of the 
total of bankers' acceptances outstanding as shown in 
the most recent acceptance survey conducted by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, whichever is the 

lower;

-10-



3/21/72

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers' acceptances with maturities 
of 6 months or less at the time of purchase, from non
bank dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 
calendar days or less, at rates not less than (1) the 
discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
at the time such agreement is entered into, or (2) the 
average issuing rate on the most recent issue of 3
month Treasury bills, whichever is the lower; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues 
covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by 
the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, 
they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that 
in the event bankers' acceptances covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they shall 
continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall 
be sold in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or, if the 
New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal Reserve 
Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury for its own 
account (with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, 

to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve 

Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates of 
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for the 
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the 
rate charged on such certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 
1 per cent below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York at the time of such purchases, and pro
vided further that the total amount of such certificates 

held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall 
not exceed $1 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee 
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to 
lend U.S. Government securities held in the System 
Open Market Account to Government securities dealers 
and to banks participating in Government securities 
clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee 
may specify from time to time.

-11-



3/21/72

By unanimous vote, the authorization for System foreign 

currency operations, as shown below, was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System 

Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out 
the Committee's foreign currency directive and express 

authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot 

or forward transactions on the open market at home and 

abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization 
Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act 

of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, and with the 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 

Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 

French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 

Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 

Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in paragraph 

A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, including 

currencies purchased from the Stabliization Fund, 
and sold forward to the Stabilization Fund, up to 

$1 billion equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or forward, 
up to the amounts necessary to fulfill other forward 

commitments;

-12-



3/21/72

(3) Additional currencies purchased spot or 
forward, up to the amount necessary for System opera
tions to exert a market influence but not exceeding 
$250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered or 
guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under agree
ment with the Bank of England, up to $200 million 
equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments under
taken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign currencies, 
up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign currencies 
to the Stabilization Fund, up to the limit specified 

in paragraph 1B(1) above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to deliver 
foreign currencies, up to $550 million equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign 
banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency arrange
ments listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings by 
either party to any such arrangement shall be fully liquidated 

within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 

arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System Open Market 

Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months with the 
following foreign banks, which are among those designated 
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign 

Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee 
to renew such arrangements on maturity:

-13-



3/21/72

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 600 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,250 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300 
Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 1,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System 
swap commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such pur
chases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions in 
foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) above 
shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Com
mittee, be at prevailing market rates and no attempt shall 
be made to establish rates that appear to be out of line 
with underlying market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 
transactions. In making operating arrangements with 
foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign cur
rencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not 
commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless 
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any 
agreements or understandings concerning the administration 
of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board 
of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be 
referred for review and approval to the Committee.

-14-



3/21/72

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar 
as practicable, considering needs for minimum working bal
ances. Such investments shall be in accordance with Sec
tion 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman and the 
Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of 
the Board of Governors (or in the absence of the Chairman 
or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors the 
members of the Board designated by the Chairman as alter
nates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the 
Committee his alternate) is authorized to act on behalf 
of the Committee when it is necessary to enable the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to engage in foreign currency 
operations before the Committee can be consulted. All 
actions taken by the Subcommittee under this paragraph 
shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the Vice 
Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with the Sec
retary of the Treasury about the division of responsibility 
for foreign currency operations between the System and 
the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency operations, 
and to consult with the Secretary on such policy matters 
as may relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; and 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory Council 
on International Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency 
operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury Depart
ment.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in accord
ance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of Governors' 
Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relation
ships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

-15-



10. The Special Manager of the System Open Market Account 
for foreign currency operations shall keep the Committee 
informed on conditions in foreign exchange markets and on 
transactions he has made and shall render such reports as 
the Committee may specify.  

By unanimous vote, the foreign currency directive, as shown 

below, was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in foreign 
currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar in 
international exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of international 
payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with central 
banks of other countries having convertible currencies, 
with the International Monetary Fund, and with other inter
national payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements in exchange 
rates, within the limits stated in the International Monetary 
Fund Agreement or established by central bank practices, 
reflect the interaction of underlying economic forces and 
thus serve as efficient guides to current financial decisions, 
private and public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international liquidity 
in accordance with the needs of an expanding world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Federal 
Open Market Committee, System operations in foreign currencies 
shall be undertaken only when necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the flows 
of international payments, if such fluctuations (1) are 
deemed to reflect transitional market unsettlement or other 
temporary forces and therefore are expected to be reversed 
in the foreseeable future; and (2) are deemed to be dis
equilibrating or otherwise to have potentially destabilizing

3/21/72 -16-



3/21/72

effects on U.S. or foreign official reserves or on exchange 
markets, for example, by occasioning market anxieties, un
desirable speculative activity, or excessive leads and 
lags in international payments; 

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in 
spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums and 
discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever supply 
or demand persists in influencing exchange rates in one 
direction, System transactions should be modified or 

curtailed unless upon review and reassessment of the sit
uation the Committee directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions in 
exchange markets. Special factors that might make for 

exchange market instabilities include (1) responses to 
short-run increases in international political tension, 
(2) differences in phasing of international economic 
activity that give rise to unusually large interest rate 
differentials between major markets, and (3) market rumors 

of a character likely to stimulate speculative transactions.  

Whenever exchange market instability threatens to produce 
disorderly conditions, System transactions may be under
taken if the Special Manager reaches a judgment that they 
may help to reestablish supply and demand balance at a 

level more consistent with the prevailing flow of under

lying payments. In such cases, the Special Manager shall 
consult as soon as practicable with the Committee or, in 

an emergency, with the members of the Subcommittee designated 

for that purpose in paragraph 6 of the Authorization for 

System foreign currency operations; and 

D. To adjust System balances within the limits 
established in the Authorization for System foreign cur
rency operations in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements are 

appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign currencies 

for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Com
mittee, transactions in forward exchange, either outright 
or in conjunction with spot transactions, may be under
taken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or discounts 
from giving rise to disequilibrating movements of short
term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative disturbances;

-17-



3/21/72

(iii) to supplement existing market supplies of forward 
cover, directly or indirectly, as a means of encouraging 
the retention or accumulation of dollar holdings by private 
foreign holders; (iv) to allow greater flexibility in 
covering System or Treasury commitments, including com
mitments under swap arrangements, and to facilitate opera
tions of the Stabilization Fund; (v) to facilitate the use 
of one currency for the settlement of System or Treasury 
commitments denominated in other currencies; and (vi) to 
provide cover for System holdings of foreign currencies.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 18, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-18-


