











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 19, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 19, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Bucher 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. MacLaury 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Robertson 
Mr. Sheehan 
Mr. Winn 1/ 

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr, Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, 

Hocter, Kareken, and Link, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.



9/19/72

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 

of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 

Governors 
Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 

Advisers, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Struble, Economist, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Merritt, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, Scheld, 

Andersen, Tow, and Craven, Senior Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Cooper, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 18, 1972, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on July 18, 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 15 through September 18, 

1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 4 System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing 

in the period October 3-27, 1972, was authorized.



9/19/72

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period August 15 through September 18, 1972, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Winn left the meeting prior to the following action.  

With Messrs. MacLaury and Robertson dissenting, and with 

Mr. Mayo voting as alternate for Mr. Winn, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions for the System 

Account in accordance with the following current economic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
a substantial increase in real output of goods and 
services in the current quarter, although well below 
the unusually large rise recorded in the second quarter.  
In July and August, wages and prices advanced somewhat 
more rapidly on balance than in the immediately pre
ceding months, while the unemployment rate remained 
substantial. Foreign exchange market conditions have 
remained quiet in recent weeks and the central bank 
reserves of most industrial countries have continued 
to change little. In July, the large excess of U.S.  
merchandise imports over exports persisted.  

In August on average, growth slowed in the 
narrowly and broadly defined money stock and in 
the bank credit proxy, but in recent weeks the 
money stock has been expanding more strongly.  
Since mid-August, interest rates on Treasury bills 
have increased sharply, while yields on most other 
market securities have advanced more moderately.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to sustainable 
real economic growth and increased employment, abate
ment of inflationary pressures, and attainment of 
reasonable equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.



9/19/72

To implement this policy, while taking special 
account of the effects of possible bank regulatory 
changes, developments in credit markets, and 
international developments, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that will support more moderate growth in monetary 
aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 17, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

Secretary


