











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 19. 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 19, 1972, at 

10:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 
Alternate Members of 
Market Committee

Mayo, and Balles, 
the Federal Open

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 

Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, 

Hocter, Kareken, and Link, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account



12/19/72

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Chase, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, Scheld, 
and Andersen, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Doll, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Bisignano, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 21 through December 18,

1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



12/19/72

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the three System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium 

maturing in the period January 5-26, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 21 through December 18, 1972, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting, including 
strong recent gains in industrial production, employment, 
and retail sales, suggests that real output of goods and 
services is growing more rapidly in the current quarter 
than in the third quarter. The unemployment rate has 
declined. Wage rates increased little in November, 
following 2 months of large increases. Consumer prices 
rose considerably again in October, and wholesale 
prices rose sharply in November. The over-all deficit 
in the U.S. balance of payments has remained substantial 
in recent months, but there has been a moderate reduction 
in the excess of U.S. merchandise imports over exports 
since last spring and summer.  

In November rates of growth in the monetary aggre
gates generally remained moderate, but expansion in the 
narrowly defined money stock quickened in early December.  
In recent weeks most market interest rates have tended 
upward.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real 
economic growth and increased employment, abatement



12/19/72

of inflationary pressures, and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
Treasury financing operations and possible credit market 
developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions that will support slower 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead 
than appears indicated for the second half of this year.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, January 16, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

Secretary


