











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 18, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 18, 1972, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 

Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Maisel 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, 
Alternate Members of 

Market Committee

Mayo, and Swan, 
the Federal Open

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, 

and Hocter, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account



4/18/72

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 

Board of Governors 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Chase, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 

Advisers, Division of Research and Statistics, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Associate Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 

of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos, Taylor, Scheld, Andersen, 
Tow, and Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, 

Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and 

San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Nelson, Vice Presidents, 

Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 

Mr. Sandberg, Manager, Securities and Acceptance 

Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mrs. Greenwald, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Boston 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 15, 1972, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on February 15, 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 21 through April 17, 1972,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



4/18/72

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three months 

of the eight System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing 

in the period May 4-25, 1972, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three months 

of the three System drawings on the Swiss National Bank maturing in 

the period May 10-18, 1972, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three months 

of the three System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing on 

May 30, 1972, was approved.  

It was agreed that a subcommittee, consisting of the Chairman 

and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the Board 

of Governors, or designated alternates, should be authorized to act 

on behalf of the Committee with respect to terms of settlement of 

the outstanding System drawings on the German Federal Bank.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized, for a period up to one week from the date of this action, 

to employ the procedures for establishing rates on repurchase agree

ments that were in effect prior to the amendment on April 17, 1972, 

of paragraph 1(c) of the continuing authority directive with respect 

to domestic open market operations.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period March 21 through April 17, 1972, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.



4/18/72

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Com

mittee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services grew in the first 
quarter at about the stepped-up rate attained in the fourth 
quarter of 1971. Most measures of business activity have 
shown strength recently and demands for labor have improved 
further, but the unemployment rate remains high. The rise 
in wholesale prices slowed in March as some farm and food 
products declined sharply, but the rise in prices of indus
trial commodities remained substantial. Wage rates also 
rose substantially in March and over the first quarter 
as a whole. The dollar has strengthened somewhat in 
exchange markets in recent weeks, and the over-all U.S.  
balance of payments deficit on the official settlements 
basis has been small. In January and February merchandise 
imports continued to be considerably in excess of exports.  

The narrowly defined money stock expanded rapidly 
in February and March, bringing the annual rate of growth 
over the past 6 months to about 5-1/4 per cent. Inflows 
of consumer-type time and savings deposits to banks have 
been strong thus far this year, although they moderated 
as the first quarter progressed; inflows to nonbank thrift 
institutions remained very large. Mainly reflecting swings 
in U.S. Government deposits, a modest increase in the bank 
credit proxy in February was followed by a large increase 
in March. Market interest rates generally have continued 
to rise in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real economic 

growth and increased employment, abatement of inflationary 
pressures, and attainment of reasonable equilibrium in 

the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
capital market developments and the forthcoming Treasury 
financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions that will support somewhat 
more moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the 
months ahead.



4/18/72 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 23, 1972, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


