











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 11, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 11, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sheehan

Messrs. Coldwell and Swan, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 

Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and MacLaury, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Scheld, 

Solomon, Taylor, and Tow, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account



1/11/72

Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of 
the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Chase, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Pierce, Associate Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Bryant, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Willes and MacDonald, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Link, Parthemos, Andersen, and Craven, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, Richmond, St. Louis, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner, Hocter, and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, 
and Dallasrespectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Kaminow, Research Officer and Economist, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Sandberg, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on December 20, 1971, amending the second 

paragraph of the current economic policy directive issued 

December 14, 1971, by the addition of the words "while taking account



1/11/72 -3

of international developments" at the end of the last sentence, 

was ratified.  

With Mr. Robertson dissenting, the action of members 

of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 23, 1971, 

suspending until close of business on the day of the next 

meeting of the Committee the lower limit on interest rates on 

repurchase agreements specified in paragraph 1(c) of the con

tinuing authority directive, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period December 14, 1971, through January 10, 1972, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Hayes, Brimmer, and Kimbrel dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following current 

economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that real output of goods and services increased more 

rapidly in the fourth quarter than it had in the third 

quarter, but the unemployment rate remained high. In 

recent weeks wage and price developments have reflected 

some increases that had been deferred under the 90-day 

freeze. The narrowly defined money stock, which had 

not grown on balance from August to November, rose 

somewhat in December, while both the broadly defined 

money stock and the bank credit proxy increased sub

stantially. Market interest rates, particularly short

term rates, have declined in recent weeks. After inter

national agreement was reached in December on new central



1/11/72

exchange rates and on wider margins of permissible 
variation, market exchange rates for major foreign 
currencies against the dollar initially moved to 
levels a little above their new lower limits. The 
volume of capital reflows to the United States has 
been modest, however, and the underlying U.S. balance 
of payments remains in deficit. In light of the 
foregoing developments, it is the policy of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions consistent with the aims of the new 
governmental program, including sustainable real 
economic growth and increased employment, abatement 
of inflationary pressures, and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of international developments and the forthcoming 
Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to promote 
the degree of ease in bank reserve and money market 
conditions essential to greater growth in monetary 
aggregates over the months ahead.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 14, 1971, through 

January 10, 1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the nine System drawings 

on the National Bank of Belgium maturing in the period February 4-25, 

1972, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 15, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


