











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 15, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 15, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Clay 
Daane 
Kimbrel 
Maisel 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sheehan

Messrs. Coldwell, Eastburn, Swan,and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Heflin, Francis, and MacLaury, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Bernard and Molony, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Economist 
Messrs. Axilrod, Eisenmenger, Garvy, Gramley, 

Hersey, Scheld, Solomon, Taylor, and Tow, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



2/15/72

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
Mr. Bryant, Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 

Advisers, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos, Andersen, and Craven, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, Hocter, and Green, Vice Presi
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

With Mr. Robertson dissenting, the action of members of 

the Federal Open Market Committee on January 26, 1972, suspending 

until close of business on February 15, 1972, the lower limit on 

interest rates on repurchase agreements specified in paragraph 1(c) 

of the continuing authority directive, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 14,

1971, were approved.



2/15/72 -3

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on December 14, 1971, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 11 through February 14, 

1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of the three System drawings on the German Federal Bank 

maturing on February 29, 1972, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period January 11 through February 14, 1972, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Hayes dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real output of goods and services increased more 
rapidly in the fourth quarter than it had in the third 
quarter, but the unemployment rate remained high. For 
the current quarter, growth is projected at a rate close 
to that of the fourth quarter. Prices increased sharply 
in December, in part reflecting termination of the 90
day freeze. Wage rates also rose substantially in Dec
ember when some increases that had been deferred under 
the freeze were allowed to go into effect, but the rise 
slowed in January. The narrowly defined money stock, 
which had not grown on balance from August to November, 
rose somewhat in December and January. Inflows of 
time and savings funds at bank and nonbank thrift 
institutions increased sharply in January, and both



2/15/72

the broadly defined money stock and the bank credit 
proxy expanded rapidly. Some short-term interest 
rates have declined further in recent weeks while 
yields on long-term securities generally have 
increased from the lows reached around mid-January.  
Exchange rates for most major foreign currencies 
against the dollar have appreciated to levels near or 
above their new central values. Since the Smithsonian 
meeting, capital reflows to the United States have 
somewhat exceeded the underlying U.S. balance of 
payments deficit. In light of the foregoing develop
ments, it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster financial conditions conducive 
to sustainable real economic growth and increased 
employment, abatement of inflationary pressures, and 
attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of international developments, the Committee seeks 
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that will support moderate growth in monetary aggre
gates over the months ahead.  

By unanimous vote, guideline 5 for the conduct of System 

operations in Federal agency issues was amended to read as 

follows: 

Purchases will be limited to fully taxable issues 
for which there is an active secondary market. Pur
chases will also be limited to issues outstanding in 
amounts of $300 million or over in cases where the 
obligations have a maturity of five years or less at 
the time of issuance, and to issues outstanding in 
amounts of $200 million or over in cases where the 
securities have a maturity of more than five years 
at the time of issuance.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, March 21, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


