











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 17, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 17, 1972, at 

11:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, Clay, and Balles, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Atlanta, Kansas City, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, 

Hocter, and Link, Associate Economists



10/17/72

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Scheld, 
Andersen, Tow, and Craven, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt and Doll, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Manager, Acceptance and 
Securities Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 15, 1972, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal

Open Market Committee on August 15, 1972, was accepted.



10/17/72

The reports of audit of the System Open Market Account 

and of foreign currency transactions, made by the Board's Division 

of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as at the close of business 

August 18, 1972, and submitted by Mr. McWhirter, Chief Federal 

Reserve Examiner, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 19 through October 16, 

1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 8 System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing 

in the period November 3-24, 1972, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 2 System drawings on the Swiss National Bank maturing on 

November 10 and 17, 1972, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 2 System drawings on the Bank for International Settlements, 

in Swiss francs and Belgian francs and maturing on November 13 and 

17, 1972, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period September 19 through October 16, 1972, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.



10/17/72

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
a substantial increase in real output of goods and 
services in the third quarter, although well below the 
unusually large rise recorded in the second quarter.  
In September wages and prices advanced moderately, 
while the unemployment rate remained substantial. In 
the U.S. balance of payments, the current account 
deficit has been largely offset by capital inflows in 
recent weeks, and the central bank reserves of most 
industrial countries have continued to change little.  
In August, the excess of U.S. merchandise imports over 
exports declined somewhat.  

The narrowly and broadly defined money stock expanded 
at moderate rates in August and September, following large 
increases in July, but the bank credit proxy continued to 
grow rapidly. Since mid-September, short-term interest 
rates have increased somewhat, while yields on most long
term securities have changed little.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real 
economic growth and increased employment, abatement of 
inflationary pressures, and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the effects of possible bank regulatory changes, Treasury 
financing operations, and developments in credit markets, 
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money 
market conditions that will support more moderate growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead than recorded 
in the third quarter.



10/17/72 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Monday and Tuesday, November 
20

21, 1972.  

Thereupon the meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


