











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 19-20, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, June 19 and 20, 1972.  

The meeting began at 4:15 p.m. on Monday and continued at 9:30 a.m.  

on Tuesday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs, Francis, Heflin, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
Kansas City, respectively

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, 

Hocter, and Kareken, Associate Economists



6/19-20/72

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs,1/ Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board of 
Governor 

Mr. Sammons,- Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance Board of Governors 

Mr. Zeisel,2/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Stockwell 2/ and Messrs. Ettin 2 / and Taylor,2/ 
Assistant Advisers, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Junz,2/ Assistant Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Enzler 2/ and Peret,2/ Economist and 
Senior Economist, respectively, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Roxon,2/ Senior Economist, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Miss Eaton, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of he Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek,1/ Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Merritt, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Parthemos, Scheld, Andersen, Tow, and 
Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Bodner,2/ Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended Monday session only.



6/19-20/72 -3

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of ew York 

Mr. Cooper,1/ Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Cox, Senior Financial Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. McNees, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed below 
were taken on Tuesday, June 20, 1972.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 18, 1972, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on April 18. 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, Thomas J. O'Connell was elected Assistant 

General Counsel of the Federal Open Market Committee,to serve for the 

period from July 1, 1972, until the date of the first meeting of the 

Committee after February 28, 1973, with the understanding that in the 

event of the discontinuance of his official connection with the Board 

of Governors he would cease to have any official connection with the 

Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 23 through June 19, 1972, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 4 System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing 

in the period July 3-28, 1972 was authorized.  

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



6/20/72

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period May 23 through June 19, 1972, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with the 

following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting, including 
recent data for such measures of business activity as 
industrial production, employment, and retail sales, sug
gests that real output of goods and services is growing 
at a faster rate in the current quarter than in the two 
preceding quarters, but the unemployment rate remains 
high. In May wholesale prices of farm and food products 
advanced appreciably--after having changed little in 
April--and the rise in prices of industrial commodities 
remained substantial. The most recent data suggest some 
moderation in the pace of advance in wage rates. The 
U.S. balance of payments has been in surplus in recent 
weeks on both the official settlements basis and the net 
liquidity basis. In April, however, the excess of mer
chandise imports over exports was even larger than in 
February and March. Some strains have developed in 
international financial markets recently, involving 
European currencies.  

Growth in the narrowly defined money stock slowed 
further in May, while growth in the broadly defined 
money stock stepped up somewhat as inflows of consumer
type time and savings deposits to banks expanded con
siderably; over the April-May period, growth in both 
measures of the money stock was well below the high rates 
in the first quarter of the year. The outstanding volume 
of large-denomination CD's increased substantially further 
in May, and expansion in the bank credit proxy remained 
rapid. In recent weeks, market interest rates have con
tinued to fluctuate in a narrow range.



6/20/72

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con
ditions conducive to sustainable real economic growth and 
increased employment, abatement of inflationary pressures, 
and attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of pos
sible Treasury financing and developments in capital markets, 
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market 
conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary 
aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 18, 1972, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


