











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 18, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, DC., on Tuesday, July 18, 1972, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Heflin and Mayo, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
Kansas City, respectively

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 

Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 

Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 

Messrs. Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, and 

Hocter, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 
Account



7/18/72

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Kiley and Ring, Associate Director 
and Assistant Director, respectively, 
Division of Federal Reserve Ban 
Operations, Board of Governors 1/ 

Mr. Struble, Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Leonard and Merritt, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Parthemos, Taylor, Scheld, Tow, and 
Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
Kansas City, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Jordan, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis 

Mr. Fieleke, Assistant Vice President and 
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kaminow, Research Officer and Economist, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Sandberg, Manager, Acceptance and Securities 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee on July 6, 1972, amending the operational paragraph 

of the current economic policy directive issued on June 20, 1972, by

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.



7/18/72 -3

the addition of a reference to international developments was 

1/ 
ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meet

ing of the Federal Open Market Committee on May 23, 1972, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on May 23, 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 20 through July 17, 1972, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 8 System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing 

in the period August 4-25, 1972, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the 2 System drawings on the Swiss National Bank maturing on 

August 10 and 17, 1972, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the System drawings of Swiss and Belgian francs on the Bank for 

International Settlements maturing on August 11 and August 18, 1972, 

respectively, was approved.  

1/ With this amendment, the operational paragraph read as follows: 

To implement this policy, while taking account of possible 
Treasury financing, developments in capital markets, and inter
national developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank 
reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.



7/18/72

By unanimous vote, renewal for a further period of 3 months 

of the System drawing on the Bank of England maturing on August 17, 

1972, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period June 20 through July 17, 1972, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services increased at a 
faster rate in the second quarter than in the two pre
ceding quarters. In June the unemployment rate declined, 
but it was still substantial. Wholesale prices of farm 
and food products advanced appreciably further in June 
and the rise in prices of industrial commodities remained 
substantial. Recent data suggest moderation in the pace 
of advance in wage rates. In foreign exchange markets, 
following disturbances leading to a floating of the pound 
sterling, the dollar has come under pressure and the 
reserves of European central banks have increased sharply.  
In May, the excess of merchandise imports over exports 
remained large, though a little less than in April.  

Growth in the narrowly defined money stock was 
relatively slow in May and June, but preliminary weekly 
data suggest a pickup in early July. Growth in the 
broadly defined money stock was more substantial as 
inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits to 
banks remained strong. Expansion in the bank credit 
proxy slowed sharply in June as U.S. Government depos
its declined markedly. In recent weeks, long-term 
interest rates have changed little; rates in short
term markets have advanced, except for those on 
shorter-maturity Treasury bills.



7/18/72 -5

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real 
economic growth and increased employment, abatement of 
inflationary pressures, and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of the forthcoming Treasury financing, developments 
in capital markets, and international developments, 
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money 
market conditions that will support moderate growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

Messrs. Kiley and Ring entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the procedures for allocation of secu

rities in the System Open Market Account were revised to read as 

follows: 

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account 
shall be reallocated on the last business day of each 
month by means of adjustments proportionate to the 
adjustments that would have been required to equalize 
approximately the average ratios of gold holdings to 
note liabilities of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks based 
on the ratios of gold to notes for the most recent five 
business days.  

2. Until the next reallocation the Account shall 
be apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in 
paragraph 1, except that temporary interim adjustments 
may be made in the apportionments for two or more Banks 
when desirable in the judgment of the Director of the 
Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations and 
the Manager of the System Open Market Account.  

3. Profits and losses on the sale of securities 
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of 
delivery of the securities sold on the basis of each 
Bank's current holdings at the opening of business on 
that day.



7/18/72 -6

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 15, 1972, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary


