











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 15, 1972 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 15, 1972, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Heflin, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
Kansas City, respectively

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, 

Hocter, Kareken, and Link, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account



8/15/72

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Cardon, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Reynolds, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Chase, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, and Wernick, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Legal Division, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Merritt, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Taylor, Scheld, Tow, 
and Craven, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, 
Chicago, Kansas City, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Sternlight, Snellings, and Jordan, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of New York, Richmond, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 19-20, 1972,

were approved.



8/15/72

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on June 19-20, 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 18 through August 14, 

1972, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

It was agreed that a Subcommittee, consisting of the 

Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman 

of the Board of Governors, or designated alternates, should be 

authorized to act on behalf of the Committee with respect to a 

proposal for reducing the System's swap debt in Swiss francs.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period July 18 through August 14, 1972, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real output of goods and services increased at a 
rapid rate in the second quarter, and continued though 
less rapid growth appears in prospect for the current 
quarter. The unemployment rate was lower in June and 
July, but it was still substantial. The pace of 
advance in wage rates has slowed on balance in recent 
months, and the rate of increase in average prices 
of all goods and services in the private economy



8/15/72

moderated in the second quarter. In July, the rise in 
wholesale prices of industrial commodities slowed, but 
wholesale prices of farm and food products rose sharply 
further. Since mid-July foreign exchange market con
ditions have been quiet and the central bank reserves 
of most industrial countries have changed little. In 
June, the large excess of U.S. merchandise imports over 
exports persisted.  

The narrowly defined money stock grew at an unusually 
rapid rate in July, following relatively slow growth in 
May and June. Growth in the broadly defined money stock 
remained substantial, although inflows of consumer-type 
time and savings deposits to banks slowed appreciably.  
The bank credit proxy expanded sharply in July, reflecting 
strength in both private demand deposits and large-denom
ination CD's. In recent weeks, interest rates on most 
market securities have declined somewhat on balance, and 
the Treasury completed a highly successful refunding.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to sustainable real 
economic growth and increased employment, abatement of 
inflationary pressures, and attainment of reasonable 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in capital markets and international develop
ments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and 
money market conditions that will support moderate growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 19, 1972, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


