











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C. on Monday and Tuesday, June 18-19, 

1973, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Holland 
Mayo 
Mitchell 1/ 
Morris 
Sheehan 1/ 
Clay, Alternate for Mr. Balles 
Debs, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Minneapolis and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. O'Connell, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Nicoll,2 / Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Bryant, Eisenmenger, Gramley, 2/ Hersey, 

Reynolds, 1/ Scheld, and Sims, Associate 
Economists 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended Monday session only.



6/18-19/73

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Bodner, Deputy Special Manager, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill and Pizer, Advisers, Division 
of International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Zeisel, 1 / Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Stockwell 1/ and Messrs. Ettin 1/ and Taylor,1/ 
Assistant Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Junz,1/Assistant Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Peret 1/ and Wetzel, 1/ Senior Economists, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Roxon, 1/ Senior Economist, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Enzler 1/ and Wyss, 1/ Economists, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Govern rs 

Miss Morisse 1/ and Mr. Smith,1/ Economists, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Peters, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Black and Williams,1/ First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, Parthemos, Taylor, and Doll, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, 
and Kansas City, respectively 

1/ Attended Monday session only.



6-18/19-73

Messrs. Hocter and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Davis, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed 
below were taken on Tuesday, June 19, 1973.  

By unanimous vote, Arthur L. Broida was elected Secretary of 

the Federal Open Market Committee, effective immediately, to serve 

until the election of his successor at the first meeting of the 

Committee after February 28, 1974, with the understanding that in 

the event of the discontinuance of his official connection with the 

Board of Governors he would cease to have any official connection 

with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period May 15 through June 18, 1973, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting, including 
recent developments in industrial production, employment, 
and retail sales, suggests that growth in economic activity 
is slowing in the current quarter from an exceptionally rapid 
pace in the two preceding quarters. The unemployment rate



6-18/19-73

has remained at 5 per cent. Wage rates have advanced mode
rately thus far this year, but the rise in both wholesale 
and retail prices has been exceptionally rapid. On June 13 
the President announced that prices will be frozen for a 
maximum of 60 days while a new and more effective system 
of controls is developed. Phase III controls affecting 
wages, profit margins, dividends, and interest rates remain 
in effect. In foreign exchange markets, several European 
currencies have appreciated against the dollar by 7 to 10 
per cent since early May. The U.S. merchandise trade balance 
continued to improve in April, as exports other than 
agricultural products increased sharply further and imports 
dipped.  

Following relatively slow growth earlier in the year, 
the narrowly defined money stock rose sharply in May and 
early June. Growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits 
changed little, while banks' net sales of large-denomination 
CD's declined further. On May 16 marginal reserve requirements 
were imposed on large-denomination CD's and the remaining 
Regulation Q ceilings on such CD's were suspended. Business 
loan demands have remained strong, and since mid-May short
term market interest rates have advanced considerably further.  
Interest rates on long-term market securities in general have 
risen somewhat. On June 11 Federal Reserve discount rates 
were raised one-half point to 6-1/2 per cent.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to abatement of inflationary pressures, 
a more sustainable rate of advance in economic activity, and 
progress toward equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international and domestic financial market developments, the 
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market 
conditions consistent with somewhat slower growth in monetary 

aggregates over the months immediately ahead than appears 
indicated for the first half of the year.



6/18-19/73

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period May 15 through June 18, 1973, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman 

and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the Board 

of Governors, or designated alternates, was authorized to act on 

behalf of the Committee with respect to questions relating to possible 

resumption of System foreign currency operations.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the Special 

Manager to negotiate increases of $50 million each in the System's 

swap lines with the central banks of Austria, Denmark, Mexico, Norway, 

and Sweden, on the understanding that those increases, and the corre

sponding amendments to paragraph 2 of the foreign currency authorization, 

would become effective on the same date as the swap line increases 

aggregating up to $6 billion for which negotiations had been authorized 

by the Committee on March 20, 1973.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of the two System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium 

maturing on July 19 and 26, 1973, respectively, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 17, 1973, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


