











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C. on Tuesday, May 15, 1973, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Brimmer 
Mr. Bucher 
Mr. Daane 
Mr. Francis 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Morris 

Mr. Sheehan 

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Minneapolis and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Andersen, Bryant, Eisenmenger, 

Hersey, Reynolds, Scheld, and Sims, 

Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 

Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account



5/15/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Peters, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Stanier, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Black, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Link, Boehne, Parthemos, Taylor, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, 
Richmond, Atlanta, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Sandberg, Manager, Acceptance and 
Securities Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 19-20 and

April 17, 1973, were approved.



5/15/73 -3

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on March 19-20 and April 17, 1973, were 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 17 through May 14, 1973, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period April 17 through May 14, 1973, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services is 
likely to moderate somewhat in the current quarter from 
an exceptionally rapid pace in the two preceding quar
ters. Over the first 4 months of this year, employment 
rose considerably but the unemployment rate remained 
about 5 per cent. Retail prices of foods continued 
upward at an extraordinary pace in March, and in April 
average wholesale prices of consumer foods rose further.  
Increases in wholesale prices of industrial commodities 
were large and widespread in April, as in the two pre
ceding months. In foreign exchange markets, which had 
been relatively quiet since mid-March, speculative 
pressures have developed in recent days and exchange 
rates for major European currencies have appreciated



5/15/73

against the dollar. The U.S. merchandise trade balance 
improved considerably in the first quarter, reflecting 
in part an especially large increase in agricultural 
exports.  

In April growth in the narrowly defined money stock 
picked up from its low first-quarter rate, and growth 
in the broadly defined money stock also increased.  
Growth in business loans at banks slowed, and banks 
reduced the pace at which they issued large-denomination 
CD's; consequently, the bank credit proxy expanded 
somewhat less than in other recent months. In recent 
weeks Federal Reserve Bank discount rates have been 
increased in two steps of one-quarter point to 6 per 
cent by May 11. Most short-term market interest rates, 
which had risen sharply earlier, have advanced slightly 
further. Interest rates on long-term market securities 
have been relatively stable.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to abatement of infla
tionary pressures, a more sustainable rate of advance 
in economic activity, and progress toward equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international and domestic financial market developments, 
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money 
market conditions consistent with somewhat slower growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months immediately ahead 
than occurred on average in the past 6 months.  

By unanimous vote, paragraphs (a) and (d) of Section 4 of 

the Committee's Rules of Organization were amended, effective 

June 1, 1973, to read as follows: 

SEC. 4. Staff. (a) Selection of staff officers.  
At its first meeting on or after March 1 of each year, 
the Committee selects, from among the officers and 
employees of the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks, the 
following staff officers to serve until the first meeting 
on or after March 1 of the next following year: Secretary,



5/15/73

Deputy Secretary, and one or more Assistant Secretaries; 
General Counsel, Deputy General Counsel, and one or more 
Assistant General Counsel; and Economists, one or more 
of whom may be designated as Senior or Associate Economists 
or given titles reflecting their areas of particular 
specialization.  

* * * * * 

(d) General Counsel and Deputy 
and Assistant General Counsel. The General Counsel 
furnishes such legal advice as the Committee may require.  
In the absence of the General Counsel, the Deputy General 
Counsel or an Assistant General Counsel acts as General 
Counsel pro ten.  

By unanimous vote, Thomas J. O'Connell, Edward G. Guy, 

and John Nicoll were elected General Counsel, Deputy General Counsel, 

and Assistant General Counsel, respectively, of the Federal Open 

Market Committee, effective June 1, 1973, to serve until the 

election of their successors at the first meeting of the Committee 

after February 28, 1974, with the understanding that in the event 

of the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board 

of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Monday and Tuesday, June 18-19, 

1973, beginning on the afternoon of June 18.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary 
Deputy Secretary


