











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 19-20, 1973 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, March 19-20, 

1973, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Minneapolis and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Bryant, Eisenmenger, Garvy, Gramley, 

Hersey, Reynolds,./ Scheld, and Sims, 
Associate Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/19/73

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff,1/ Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Zeisel,1/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Kichline,1/ Chief, Capital Markets 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Enzler,1 / Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman,2/ Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Black and Fossum, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, Parthemos, and Doll, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Richmond, and Kansas 
City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Jordan, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, St. Louis, and Dallas.  
respectively 

1/ Attended Monday session only.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/19-20/73

Mr. Meek, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one 

year beginning March 1, 1973; that it appeared that such persons 

were legally qualified to serve; and that they had executed their 

oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston, with David P. Eastburn, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate; 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

Darryl R. Francis, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis, with Monroe Kimbrel, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate; 

John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, with George H. Clay, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate.  

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed 
below were taken on Tuesday, March 20, 1973.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of



3/20/73

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1974, with the understanding that in the event of 

the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board 

of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might 

be, they would cease to have any official connection with the 

Federal Open Market Committee: 

Arthur F. Burns Chairman 
Alfred Hayes Vice Chairman 
Robert C. Holland Secretary 
Arthur L. Broida Deputy Secretary 
Murray Altmann and 

Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretaries 
Howard H. Hackley General Counsel 
Thomas J. O'Connell Assistant General Counsel 
J. Charles Partee Senior Economist 
Stephen H. Axilrod Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Robert Solomon 1/ Economist (International 

Finance) 
Leonall C. Andersen, Ralph C.  
Bryant, Robert W. Eisenmenger, 
George Garvy, Lyle E. Gramley, 
A. B. Hersey, John E. Reynolds, 
Karl A. Scheld, and Kent 0.  
Sims Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market 

Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee after February 28, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, Section 5 of the Committee's Rules of 

Organization was amended to read as follows: 

1/ On leave of absence.



3/20/73 -5

Manager, Special Manager, and Deputies 

The Committee selects a Manager of the System Open 
Market Account and a Special Manager for Foreign Currency 
Operations for such Account, and it may also select a 
Deputy Manager and a Deputy Special Manager for foreign 
currency operations. All of the foregoing shall be 
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank selected by 
the Committee to execute open market transactions for 
such Account, and all shall serve at the pleasure of 
the Committee. The Manager and Special Manager, or 
their Deputies, keep the Committee informed on market 
conditions and on transactions they have made and 
render such reports as the Committee may specify.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D. Sternlight, 

Charles A. Coombs, and David E. Bodner were selected to serve at 

the pleasure of the Federal Open Market Committee as Manager, 

Deputy Manager, Special Manager for foreign currency operations, 

and Deputy Special Manager for foreign currency operations, 

respectively, of the System Open Market Account, it being under

stood that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory 

to the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently was received 
that Messrs. Holmes, Sternlight, Coombs, and Bodner 
were satisfactory to the Board of Directors of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York for service in the 

respective capacities indicated.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 16, 1973, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on January 16, 1973, was accepted.



3/20/73

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period February 13 through 

March 19, 1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 

months of the two System drawings on the National Bank of 

Belgium maturing on April 19 and 26, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the Special 

Manager to undertake negotiations looking toward increases in 

System swap lines not exceeding $6 billion in the aggregate, on 

the understanding that increases in individual swap lines, and 

the corresponding amendments to paragraph 2 of the authorization 

for System foreign currency operations, would become effective 

upon approval by Chairman Burns, after consultation with 

responsible officials of the U.S. Treasury; and on the further 

understanding that any increases made effective would not be 

drawn on until after further consultation with the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period February 13 through March 19, 1973, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members on 

March 15, 1973, increasing the limit specified in paragraph 1(a) 

of the continuing authority directive on changes between meetings



3/20/73

of the Committee in System holdings of U.S. Government securities 

and agency issues from $2 billion to $3 billion for the period 

through the close of business March 20, 1973, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive 

(later in this meeting retitled "domestic policy directive"): 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
continued substantial growth in real output of goods 
and services in the current quarter, although at a 
rate less rapid than in the fourth quarter of 1972.  
Over the first 2 months of this year, employment rose 
strongly but the unemployment rate remained about 
5 per cent. The advance in wage rates moderated from 
the earlier rapid pace, while the rate of increase in 
prices accelerated. Prices of foods continued to 
rise sharply both at wholesale and retail; in February, 
moreover, increases in wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities were large and widespread. Another wave 
of speculative movements out of dollars into German 
marks and some other currencies developed at the 
beginning of March and led to a decision by a number 
of European countries to float their currencies 
jointly. On March 16, after a series of meetings, 
officials of leading industrial countries announced 
a program aimed at maintaining orderly international 
monetary arrangements.  

The narrowly defined money stock expanded moderately 
in February, after having changed little in January, and 
growth over recent months remained at an average annual 
rate of about 6.5 per cent. The more broadly defined 
money stock continued to grow at a moderate rate in 
February as inflows of consumer-type time and savings 
deposits to banks slowed sharply. However, in the face 
of strong loan demand from businesses, and also from



3/20/73

foreign banks, U.S. banks sharply increased their 
issuance of large-denomination CD's and the bank 
credit proxy expanded very rapidly. In recent weeks 
short-term market interest rates have risen substan
tially further while the rise in long-term rates has 
remained more moderate.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions consonant with the aims 
of the economic stabilization program, including 

abatement of inflationary pressures, sustainable 
growth in real output and employment, and progress 
toward equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of possible domestic credit market and international 
developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank 

reserve and money market conditions that will support 
somewhat slower growth in monetary aggregates over 
the months ahead than occurred on average in the past 
6 months.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authori

zations of the Committee, in accordance with the customary 

practice of reviewing such matters at the first meeting in March 

of every year.  

Secretary's Note: It had been agreed at 

the meeting on March 10, 1970, that 

certain authorizations among those that 

the Committee had reviewed annually in 
the past would remain effective until 
otherwise directed by the Committee, and 
would no longer be submitted routinely 
for review each year. Instead, it was 
understood that these authorizations 

would be called to the Committee's 
attention before the first meeting in 

March of each year and that members 
would be given an opportunity to raise 

any questions they had concerning them.



3/20/73

Accordingly, copies of the authorizations 
in question (listed below) had been dis
tributed to the Committee on February 21, 
1973, with a request that members advise 
the Secretariat if they wished to have 
any placed on the agenda for consideration 
at today's meeting. No such requests were 
received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedure for allocations of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. Distribution list for periodic reports prepared 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System 
Account in case the New York Bank was unable 
to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued operation 
of the Committee, and for certain actions by 
the Reserve Banks, during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the 
System Open Market Account.  

It was agreed to retain the existing procedure for making 

minutes and other records of the Committee available to employees 

of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, including 

authorization to the Secretary to act on the Chairman's behalf in 

considering proposals for the addition of members of the Board's 

staff to the list of those having access to Committee minutes 

and other records.  

By unanimous vote, the Continuing Authority Directive 

with respect to Domestic Open Market Operations was retitled 

"Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations," and was

amended to read as follows:



3/20/73

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domes
tic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government 
securities and securities that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to 
principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from 
or to securities dealers and foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
System Open Market Account at market prices 
and, for such Account, to exchange maturing 
U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 
with the Treasury or the individual agencies 
or to allow them to mature without replace
ment; provided that the aggregate amount of 
U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 
held in such Account at the close of business 
on the day of a meeting of the Committee at 
which action is taken with respect to a 
domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $2.0 
billion during the period commencing with the 
opening of business on the day following such 
meeting and ending with the close of business 
on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell prime bankers' accep
tances of the kinds designated in the Regula
tion of the Federal Open Market Committee in 
the open market, from or to acceptance dealers 
and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, 
or deferred delivery basis, for the account of 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market 
discount rates; provided that the aggregate 
amount of bankers' acceptances held at any one 
time shall not exceed (1) $125 million or (2) 
10 per cent of the total of bankers' acceptances

-10-



3/20/73

outstanding as shown in the most recent accep
tance survey conducted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, whichever is the lower; 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, 
obligations that are direct obligations of, 
or fully guaranteed as to principal and inter
est by any agency of the United States, and 
prime bankers' acceptances with maturities of 
6 months or less at the time of purchase, from 
nonbank dealers for the account of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for 
repurchase of such securities, obligations, or 
acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at 
rates that, unless otherwise expressly autho
rized by the Committee, shall be determined by 
competitive bidding, after applying reasonable 
limitations on the volume of agreements with 
individual dealers; provided that in the event 
Government securities or agency issues covered 
by any such agreement are not repurchased by 
the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a 
renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the mar
ket or transferred to the System Open Market 
Account; and provided further that in the 
event bankers' acceptances covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal 
Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open 
market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, if 
the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal 
Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury for 
its own account (with discretion, in cases where it seems 
desirable, to issue participations to one or more Federal 
Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to 
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; 
provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such 
purchases, and provided further that the total amount of 
such certificates held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall not exceed $1 billion.

-11-



3/20/73

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee autho
rizes and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S.  
Government securities held in the System Open Market 
Account to Government securities dealers and to banks par
ticipating in Government securities clearing arrangements 
conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such 
instructions as the Committee may specify from time to time.  

By unanimous vote the "current economic policy directive" 

was retitled "domestic policy directive." 

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for System Foreign 

Currency Operations was retitled "Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations" and was amended to read as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System 
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out 
the Committee's foreign currency directive and express 
authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home and abroad, 
including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization Fund 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, 
with foreign monetary authorities, and with the Bank for 
International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen

-12-



3/20/73

Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in para
graph A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, 
including currencies purchased from the 
Stabilization Fund, and sold forward to the 
Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion equiva
lent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or 
forward, up to the amounts necessary to ful
fill other forward commitments; 

(3) Additional currencies purchased 
spot or forward, up to the amount necessary for 
System operations to exert a market influence 
but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered 
or guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, 
under agreement with the Bank of England, up 
to $200 million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments 
undertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign 
currencies, up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign 
currencies to the Stabilization Fund, up to the 
limit specified in paragraph 1B(1) above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to 
deliver foreign currencies up to $550 million 
equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal 
currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such 
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months

-13-



3/20/73

after any amount outstanding at that time was first 
drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the 
System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum 
of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which 
are among those designated by the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, 
and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 
Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 200 
National Bank of Belgium 600 
Bank of Canada 1,000 
National Bank of Denmark 200 
Bank of England 2,000 
Bank of France 1,000 
German Federal Bank 1,000 
Bank of Italy 1,250 
Bank of Japan 1,000 
Bank of Mexico 130 
Netherlands Bank 300 
Bank of Norway 200 
Bank of Sweden 250 
Swiss National Bank 1,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,000 

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System 
swap commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 
purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions in 
foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) above

-14-



3/20/73

shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, be at prevailing market rates and no 
attempt shall be made to establish rates that appear 
to be out of line with underlying market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 
transactions. In making operating arrangements with 
foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign cur
rencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not 
commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless 
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any 
agreements or understandings concerning the adminis
tration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York with the foreign banks designated by the 
Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N 
shall be referred for review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested 
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum 
working balances. Such investments shall be in accordance 
with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. The Subcommittee named in Section 272.4(c) of 
the Committee's rules of procedure is authorized to act 
on behalf of the Committee when it is necessary to enable 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage in foreign 
currency operations before the Committee can be consulted.  
All actions taken by the Subcommittee under this paragraph 
shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice Chair
man of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the Vice 
Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to 
enter into any needed agreement or understanding with 
the Secretary of the Treasury about the division of 
responsibility for foreign currency operations between 
the System and the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury 
fully advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary on such 
policy matters as may relate to the Secretary's 
responsibilities; and

-15-



3/20/73

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory Council 
on International Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency 
operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury 
Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in 
the foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of Governors' 
Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relation
ships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the foreign currency directive was 

amended to read as follows: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in 
foreign currencies are; 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar 
in international exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of international 
payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with central 
banks of other countries having convertible currencies, 
with the International Monetary Fund, and with other 
international payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements in 
exchange rates, within the limits stated in the 
International Monetary Fund Agreement or established 
by central bank practices, reflect the interaction of 
underlying economic forces and thus serve as efficient 
guides to current financial decisions, private and 
public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international 
liquidity in accordance with the needs of an expanding 
world economy.

-16-



3/20/73

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee, System operations in 
foreign currencies shall be undertaken only when 
necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the 
flows of international payments, if such fluctuations 
(1) are deemed to reflect transitional market unsettle
ment or other temporary forces and therefore are expected 
to be reversed in the foreseeable future; and (2) are 
deemed to be disequilibrating or otherwise to have 
potentially destabilizing effects on U.S. or foreign 
official reserves or on exchange markets, for example, 
by occasioning market anxieties, undesirable speculative 
activity, or excessive leads and lags in international 
payments; 

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes 
in spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums 
and discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever 
supply or demand persists in influencing exchange rates 
in one direction, System transactions should be modified 
or curtailed unless upon review and reassessment of the 
situation the Committee directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions 
in exchange markets. Special factors that might make 
for exchange market instabilities include (1) responses 
to short-run increases in international political tension, 
(2) differences in phasing of international economic 
activity that give rise to unusually large interest 
rate differentials between major markets, and (3) market 
rumors of a character likely to stimulate speculative 
transactions. Whenever exchange market instability 
threatens to produce disorderly conditions, System 
transactions may be undertaken if the Special Manager 
reaches a judgment that they may help to reestablish 
supply and demand balance at a level more consistent 
with the prevailing flow of underlying payments. In 
such cases, the Special Manager shall consult as soon 
as practicable with the Committee or, in an emergency, 
with the members of the Subcommittee designated for 
that purpose in paragraph 6 of the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations; and

-17-



3/20/73

D. To adjust System balances within the limits 
established in the Authorization for Foreign Currency 
Operations in light of probable future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements 
are appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign currencies 
for the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either 
outright or in conjunction with spot transactions, may 
be undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums or 
discounts from giving rise to disequilibrating movements 
of short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculative 
disturbances; (iii) to supplement existing market 
supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly, as 
a means of encouraging the retention or accumulation of 
dollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to 
allow greater flexibility in covering System or Treasury 
commitments, including commitments under swap arrange
ments, and to facilitate operations of the Stabilization 
Fund; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for the 
settlement of System or Treasury commitments denominated 
in other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for 
System holdings of foreign currencies.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 17, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-18-


