











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 13, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn

Messrs. Francis, Mayo, and Balles, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Gramley, Green, 

Hersey, Hocter, Kareken, and Link, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



2/13/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. McIntosh, Director, Division of Federal 1/ 
Reserve Bank Operations, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Black, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Taylor, Scheld, 
and Andersen, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Doll, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City 

Mr. Cooper, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Bisignano, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 19, 1972, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on December 19, 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 16 through February 12, 

1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

1/ Attended first part of meeting only.



2/13/73

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances during the period January 16 through February 12, 1973, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
continued substantial growth in real output of goods 
and services in the current quarter, although at a rate 
less rapid than in the fourth quarter of 1972. The 
unemployment rate has declined slightly further. In 
recent months wage rates have increased at a relatively 
rapid pace, and unit labor costs turned up in the fourth 
quarter of 1972. The rise in consumer prices slowed in 
December when retail prices of foods changed little, 
but prices of foods and foodstuffs at earlier stages of 
distribution rose sharply in both December and January.  
The excess of U.S. merchandise imports over exports 
remained large in December. Heavy speculative movements 
out of dollars into German marks and some other curren
cies developed in late January and early February. On 
February 12 the Government announced that the United 
States would devalue the dollar by 10 per cent.  

The narrowly defined money stock changed little in 
January after having increased sharply in December, and 
growth over the 2 months combined was at an average 
annual rate of about 6-1/2 per cent. Growth in the more 
broadly defined money stock slowed less abruptly from 
December to January as inflows of consumer-type time 
and savings deposits to banks accelerated. A sharp and 
pervasive increase has taken place in bank loans to 
businesses. In recent weeks market interest rates 
generally have risen further, with increases substantial



2/13/73

for short-term rates and relatively moderate for long
term rates. Most recently, however, Treasury bill rates 
have moved back down under the influence of foreign 
official buying.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions consonant with the aims of the 
economic stabilization program, including further 
abatement of inflationary pressures, sustainable 
growth in real output and employment, and progress 
toward equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of possible domestic credit market and international 
developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank 
reserve and money market conditions that will support 
somewhat slower growth in monetary aggregates over 
the months ahead than occurred on average in the past 
6 months.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, March 20, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


