











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 16, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Daane 
Eastburn 
MacLaury 
Mitchell 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn 
Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Heflin, Mayo, and Balles, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris, Kimbrel, and Clay, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr. O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Bryant, Gramley, Green, Hersey, and 

Hocter, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account



1/16/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Chase, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Debs, Parthemos, Taylor, 
Scheld, and Andersen, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, New York, Richmond, Atlanta, 
Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Bodner and Doll, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Davis, Adviser, Research and Statistics, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Feldberg, Secretary and Assistant Counsel, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kaminow, Research Officer and Economist, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Sandberg, Manager, Acceptance and Securities 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Bisignano, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Miller, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis



1/16/73

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 20-21, 

1972, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on November 20-21, 1972, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 19, 1972, through 

January 15, 1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the eight System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the 

two drawings on the Swiss National Bank, and the drawing on the 

Bank for International Settlements maturing at various dates in 

the period February 2-23, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period December 19, 1972, through January 15, 1973, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following current economic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services expanded much 
more rapidly in the fourth quarter than in the third 
quarter, and the unemployment rate declined. Wage



1/16/73

rates have increased more rapidly in recent months than 
earlier in the year. Consumer prices rose considerably 
again in November. Wholesale prices of farm and food 
products advanced sharply in December but those of 
industrial commodities increased little. On January 11 
the President announced Phase III of the economic stabi
lization program, which has among its major objectives 
a further reduction in the rate of inflation. The over
all deficit in the U.S. balance of payments has remained 
substantial in recent months, and U.S. merchandise imports 
rose more than exports in November.  

Growth in the narrowly and broadly defined money 
stock was exceptionally rapid in December, after having 
been moderate on average during the preceding 4 months.  
In recent weeks interest rates on both short- and long
term securities have risen moderately. Effective 
January 15, Federal Reserve discount rates were raised 
one-half of a percentage point to 5 per cent.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions consonant with the aims of the 
economic stabilization program, including further abate
ment of inflationary pressures, sustainable growth in 
real output and employment, and progress toward equilib
rium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury financing and possible credit 
market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions that will 
support slower growth in monetary aggregates over the 
months ahead than occurred in the second half of last 
year.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee's By-Laws were rescinded.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee's Regulation Relating to 

Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve Banks was revised,

effective February 1, 1973, to read as follows:



1/16/73

REGULATION RELATING TO OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
OF FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS 

SECTION 270.1 - AUTHORITY 

This Part is issued by the Federal Open Market 
Committee (the "Committee") pursuant to authority 
conferred upon it by sections 12A and 14 of the 
Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. §§ 263, 355).  

SECTION 270.2 - DEFINITIONS 

(a) The term "obligations" means Government 
securities, U. S. agency securities, bankers' accep
tances, bills of exchange, cable transfers, bonds, 
notes, warrants, debentures, and other obligations 
that Federal Reserve Banks are authorized by law to 
purchase and sell.  

(b) The term "Government securities" means direct 
obligations of the United States (i.e., U. S. bonds, 
notes, certificates of indebtedness, and Treasury bills) 
and obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and 
interest by the United States.  

(c) The term "U. S. agency securities" means obli
gations that are direct obligations of, or are fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency 
of the United States.  

(d) The term "System Open Market Account" means 
the obligations acquired pursuant to authorizations and 
directives issued by the Committee and held on behalf 
of all Federal Reserve Banks.  

SECTION 270.3 - GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 

As required by section 12A of the Federal Reserve 
Act, the time, character, and volume of all purchases 
and sales of obligations in the open market by Federal 
Reserve Banks are governed with a view to accommodating 
commerce and business and with regard to their bearing 
upon the general credit situation of the country.



1/16/73

SECTION 270.4 - TRANSACTIONS IN OBLIGATIONS 

(a) Each Federal Reserve Bank shall engage in open 
market operations under section 14 of the Federal Reserve 
Act only in accordance with this Part and with the autho
rizations and directives issued by the Committee from 
time to time, and no Reserve Bank shall decline to engage 
in open market operations as directed by the Committee.  

(b) Transactions for the System Open Market Account 
shall be executed by a Federal Reserve Bank selected by 
the Committee. The participations of the several Federal 
Reserve Banks in such Account and in the profits and 
losses on transactions for the Account shall be allocated 
in accordance with principles determined by the Committee 
from time to time.  

(c) In accordance with such limitations, terms, and 
conditions as are prescribed by law and in authorizations 
and directives issued by the Committee, the Reserve Bank 
selected by the Committee is authorized and directed 

(1) To buy and sell Government securities and 
U. S. agency securities in the open market for the System 
Open Market Account, and to exchange maturing securities 
with the issuer; 

(2) To buy and sell bankers' acceptances of the 
kinds made eligible for purchase under Part 202 of this 
chapter [Regulation B] in the open market for its own 
account; 

(3) To buy Government securities, U. S. agency 
securities, and bankers' acceptances of the kinds described 
above, under agreements for repurchase of such obligations, 
in the open market for its own account; and 

(4) To buy and sell foreign currencies in the 
form of cable transfers in the open market for the System 
Open Market Account and to maintain for such Account 
reciprocal currency arrangements with foreign banks among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under § 214.5 of this chapter [Regulation N].  

(d) In accordance with such limitations, terms, and 
conditions as are prescribed by law and in authorizations 
and directives issued by the Committee, the Reserve Bank



1/16/73

selected by the Committee (or, if that Bank is closed, 
any other Federal Reserve Bank) is authorized and directed, 
for its own account or the System Open Market Account, to 
purchase directly from the United States such amounts of 
Government securities as may be necessary from time to 
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury Depart
ment.  

(e) The Federal Reserve Banks are authorized and 
directed to engage in such other operations as the Commit
tee may from time to time determine to be reasonably nec
essary to the effective conduct of open market operations 
and the effectuation of open market policies.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee's Rules of Organization 

were revised, effective February 1, 1973, to read as follows: 

RULES OF ORGANIZATION 

SECTION 1 - AUTHORITY 

These rules are issued by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee (the "Committee") pursuant to the requirement of 
section 552 of Title 5 of the United States Code that every 
agency shall publish in the Federal Register a description 
of its central and field organization, 

SECTION 2 - COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE 

(a) Members. - The Committee consists of the seven 
members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System (the "Board") and five representatives of the 
Federal Reserve Banks, each of whom is a President or a 
First Vice President of a Reserve Bank.  

(b) Reserve Bank representatives. - The representatives 
of the Federal Reserve Banks, and an alternate for each 
representative, are elected by the boards of directors of 
the Reserve Banks in accordance with section 12A of the 
Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 263) for terms of one year 
commencing on March 1 of each year. Prior to the first 
meeting of the Committee on or after March 1 of each year, 
each member of the Committee representing the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall cause a record of his election and of 
the election of his alternate to be forwarded to the 
Secretary of the Committee. If any question is raised as 
to the election or eligibility of a member or alternate,



1/16/73

the Committee determines such question before such member 
or alternate participates in a meeting of the Committee.  
In the event a member is absent from a meeting of the 
Committee, his alternate, in attending the meeting, shall 
have the same status as the member for whom he is serving.  
If a member or alternate ceases to be a President or First 
Vice President of a Reserve Bank, a successor may be 
chosen in a special election by the boards of directors 
of the appropriate Reserve Bank or Banks and such successor 
serves until the next annual election.  

(c) Oath of office. - Each member of the Committee 
and each alternate take the same oath of office as that 
prescribed by statute to be taken by officers of the United 
States.  

SECTION 3 - CHAIRMAN AND VICE CHAIRMAN 

At its first meeting on or after March 1 of each year, 
the Committee elects a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from 
among its membership. The Chairman presides at all meetings 
of the Committee and performs such other duties as the Com
mittee may require. The Vice Chairman performs the duties 
of the Chairman in the absence of the Chairman. In the 
absence of both the Chairman and the Vice Chairman of the 
Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board acts as Chairman 
of the Committee; and, in the absence of the Chairman and 
the Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman of 
the Board, the member of the Board present with the longest 
service as a member of the Board acts as Chairman of the 
Committee.  

SECTION 4 - STAFF 

(a) Selection of staff officers. - At its first meeting 
on or after March 1 of each year, the Committee selects, 
from among the officers and employees of the Board and the 
Federal Reserve Banks, the following staff officers to serve 
until the first meeting on or after March 1 of the next 
following year: Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and one or 
more Assistant Secretaries; General Counsel and one or more 
Assistant General Counsel; and Economists, one or more of 
whom may be designated as Senior or Associate Economists or 
given titles reflecting their areas of particular special
ization.



1/16/73

(b) Secretary and Deputy and Assistant Secretaries. 
The Secretary keeps minutes of actions and records of dis
cussions at all meetings of the Committee; he maintains a 
complete record of the actions taken by the Committee upon 
all questions of policy relating to open market operations; 
and he records the votes taken in connection with the deter
mination of open market policies and the reasons underlying 
each such action. He has custody of such minutes and 
records, and he performs such other duties as the Committee 
may require. In the absence of the Secretary of the Com
mittee, the Deputy Secretary or an Assistant Secretary acts 
as Secretary pro tem.  

(c) Economists. - The Economists prepare for the use 
of the Committee and present to it such information regard
ing business and credit conditions and domestic and inter
national economic and financial developments as will assist 
the Committee in the determination of open market policies, 
and they perform such other duties as the Committee may 
require.  

(d) General Counsel and Assistant General Counsel.  
The General Counsel furnishes such legal advice as the 
Committee may require. In the absence of the General 
Counsel, an Assistant General Counsel acts as General 
Counsel pro tem.  

(e) Filling of vacancies. - At any meeting the Commit
tee may fill any vacancy in the offices described in this 
section.  

(f) Other staff assistance. - The services of any 
officers and employees of the Board and the Federal 
Reserve Banks are made available and are utilized by the 
Committee as required.  

SECTION 5 - MANAGER AND SPECIAL MANAGER 

The Committee selects a Manager of the System Open 
Market Account and a Special Manager for Foreign Currency 
Operations for such Account, both of whom shall be satis
factory to the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Com
mittee to execute open market transactions for such 
Account, and both of whom serve at the pleasure of the 
Committee. The Manager and Special Manager keep the 
Committee informed on market conditions and on trans
actions they have made and render such reports as the Com
mittee may specify.



1/16/73

By unanimous vote, the Committee's Rules regarding the 

Availability of Information were amended, effective February 1, 

1973, to read as follows: 

RULES REGARDING AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION 

SECTION 271.1 - AUTHORITY 

This Part is issued by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee (the "Committee") pursuant to the requirement of 
section 552 of Title 5 of the United States Code that 
every agency shall publish in the Federal Register for 
the guidance of the public descriptions of the estab
lished places at which, the officers from whom, and the 
methods whereby, the public may obtain information, make 
submittals or requests, or obtain decisions.  

SECTION 271.2 - DEFINITIONS 

(a) "Information of the Committee". - For purposes 
of this Part, the term "information of the Committee" 
means all information coming into the possession of the 
Committee or of any member thereof or of any officer, 
employee, or agent of the Committee, the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the "Board"), 
or any Federal Reserve Bank, in the performance of 
duties for, or pursuant to the direction of, the Committee.  

(b) "Records of the Committee". - For purposes of 
this Part, the term "records of the Committee" means rules, 
statements, opinions, orders, memoranda, letters, reports, 
accounts, and other papers containing information of the 
Committee that constitute a part of the Committee's 
official files.  

SECTION 271.3 - PUBLISHED INFORMATION 

(a) Federal Register. - To the extent required by 
sections 552 and 553 of Title 5 of the United States Code, 
and subject to the provisions of §§ 271.5 and 271.6, the 
Committee publishes in the Federal Register, in addition 
to this Part,

-10-



1/16/73

(1) a description of its organization; 

(2) statements of the general course and 
method by which its functions are channeled and determined; 

(3) rules of procedure; 

(4) substantive rules of general applicability, 
and statements of general policy and interpretation of gen
eral applicability formulated and adopted by the Committee; 

(5) every amendment, revision, or repeal of the 
foregoing; and 

(6) general notices of proposed rule making.  

(b) Policy record. - In accordance with section 10 
of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 247a), each 
annual report made to Congress by the Board includes a 
complete record of the actions taken by the Committee 
during the preceding year upon all matters of policy 
relating to open market operations, showing the votes 
taken and the reasons underlying such actions.  

(c) Other published information. - From time to 
time, other information relating to open market opera
tions of the Federal Reserve Banks is published in the 
Federal Reserve Bulletin, issued monthly by the Board, 
in such Board's annual report to Congress, and in 
announcements and statements released to the press.  
Copies of issues of the Bulletin and of annual reports 
of the Board may be obtained upon request.  

SECTION 271.4 - RECORDS AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC 
ON REQUEST 

(a) Records available. - Records of the Committee 
are made available to any person, upon request, for 
inspection or copying in accordance with the provisions 
of this section and subject to the limitations stated 
in §§ 271.5 and 271.6. Records falling within the 
exemptions from disclosure set forth in section 552(b) 
of Title 5 of the United States Code and in § 271.6 may 
nevertheless be made available in accordance with this 
section to the fullest extent consistent, in the

-11-



1/16/73

Committee's judgment, with the effective performance of 
the Committee's statutory responsibilities and with the 
avoidance of injury to a public or private interest 
intended to be protected by such exemptions.  

(b) Place and time. - In general, the records of 
the Committee are held in the custody of the Board, but 
certain of such records, or copies thereof, are held in 
the custody of one or more of the Federal Reserve Banks.  
Any such records subject to this section will be made 
available for inspection or copying during regular busi
ness hours at the offices of the Board in the Federal 
Reserve Building, 20th and Constitution Avenue, Washington, 
D. C., 20551, or, in certain instances as provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, at the offices of one or 
more designated Federal Reserve Banks.  

(c) Obtaining access to records. - Any person request
ing access to records of the Committee shall submit such 
request in writing to the Secretary of the Board. In any 
case in which the records requested, or copies thereof, 
are available at a Federal Reserve Bank, the Secretary of 
the Board may so advise the person requesting access to 
the records. Every request for access to records of the 
Committee shall state the full name and address of the 
person requesting them and shall describe such records 
in a manner reasonably sufficient to permit their identi
fication without undue difficulty; and such person shall 
pay a fee in an amount based upon $5 per hour for the 
time required to locate such records and prepare them for 
inspection plus 10 cents per standard page for any copy
ing thereof.  

SECTION 271.5 - DEFERMENT OF AVAILABILITY OF 
CERTAIN INFORMATION 

(a) Deferred availability of information. - In some 
instances, certain types of information of the Committee 
are not published in the Federal Register or made avail
able for public inspection or copying until after such 
period of time as the Committee may determine to be 
reasonably necessary to avoid the effects described in 
paragraph (b) of this section or as may otherwise be 
necessary to prevent impairment of the effective dis
charge of the Committee's statutory responsibilities.  
For example, the Committee's current economic policy 
directive adopted at each meeting of the Committee is

-12-



1/16/73

published in the Federal Register approximately 90 days 
after the date of its adoption; and no information in 
the records of the Committee relating to the adoption 
of any such directive is made available for public 
inspection or copying before it is published in the 
Federal Register or is otherwise released to the public 
by the Committee.  

(b) Reasons for deferment of availability.  
Publication of, or access to, certain information of the 
Committee may be deferred because earlier disclosure of 
such information would 

(1) interfere with the orderly execution of 
policies adopted by the Committee in the performance of 
its statutory functions; 

(2) permit speculators and others to gain unfair 
profits or to obtain unfair advantages by speculative trad
ing in securities, foreign exchange, or otherwise; 

(3) result in unnecessary or unwarranted distur
bances in the securities market; 

(4) make open market operations more costly; 

(5) interfere with the orderly execution of the 
objectives or policies of other Government agencies concerned 
with domestic or foreign economic or fiscal matters; or 

(6) interfere with, or impair the effectiveness of, 
financial transactions with foreign banks, bankers, or coun
tries that may influence the flow of gold and of dollar 
balances to or from foreign countries.  

SECTION 271.6 - INFORMATION NOT DISCLOSED 

Except as may be authorized by the Committee, infor
mation of the Committee that is not available to the 
public through other sources will not be published or 
made available for inspection, examination, or copying by 
any person if such information



1/16/73

(a) is exempted from disclosure by statute or 
executive order; 

(b) relates solely to internal personnel rules 
or practices or other internal practices of the Commit
tee; 

(c) relates to trade secrets or commercial or 
financial information obtained from any person and privi
leged or confidential; 

(d) is contained in inter-agency or intra-agency 
memoranda or letters, including records of deliberations 
and discussions at meetings of the Committee and reports 
and documents filed by members or staff of the Committee 
that would not be routinely available to a private party 
in litigation with the Committee; 

(e) is contained in personnel, medical, or similar 
files (including financial files) the disclosure of which 
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy; or 

(f) is contained in or related to examination, 
operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, 
or for the use of any agency responsible for the regulation 
or supervision of financial institutions.  

Except as provided by or pursuant to this Part, no person 
shall disclose, or permit the disclosure of, any informa
tion of the Committee to any person, whether by giving out 
or furnishing such information or copy thereof, by allowing 
any person to inspect, examine, or reproduce such informa
tion or copy thereof, or by any other means, whether the 
information is located at the offices of the Board, any 
Federal Reserve Bank, or elsewhere, unless such disclosure 
is required in the performance of duties for, or pursuant 
to the direction of, the Committee. Any person who may be 
denied access to records of the Committee may, within 
5 days thereafter, file with the Committee a written request 
for review of such action.

-14-



1/16/73

SECTION 271.7 - SUBPOENAS 

(a) Advice by person served. - If any person, whether 
or not an officer or employee of the Committee, of the 
Board, or of a Federal Reserve Bank, has information of 
the Committee that may not be disclosed by reason of 
§ 271.5 or § 271.6 and in connection therewith is served 
with a subpoena, order, or other process requiring his 
personal attendance as a witness or the production of 
documents or information upon any proceeding, he should 
promptly inform the Secretary of the Committee of such 
service and of all relevant facts, including the documents 
and information requested and any facts that may be of 
assistance in determining whether such documents or infor
mation should be made available; and he should take action 
at the appropriate time to inform the court or tribunal 
that issued the process, and the attorney for the party 
at whose instance the process was issued, if known, of 
the substance of this Part.  

(b) Appearance by person served. - Except as dis
closure of the relevant information is authorized pursuant 
to this Part, any person who has information of the Com
mittee and is required to respond to a subpoena or other 
legal process shall attend at the time and place therein 
mentioned and decline to disclose such information or give 
any testimony with respect thereto, basing his refusal 
upon this Part. If, notwithstanding, the court or other 
body orders the disclosure of such information, or the 
giving of such testimony, the person having such informa
tion of the Committee shall continue to decline to disclose 
such information and shall promptly report the facts to the 
Committee for such action as the Committee may deem appro
priate.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee's Rulesof Procedure were 

revised, effective February 1, 1973, to read as follows: 

RULES OF PROCEDURE 

SECTION 272.1 - AUTHORITY 

This Part is issued by the Federal Open Market 
Committee (the "Committee") pursuant to the requirement 
of section 552 of Title 5 of the United States Code 
that every agency shall publish in the Federal Register 
its rules of procedure.

-15-



1/16/73

SECTION 272.2 - FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 

The procedures followed by the Committee are 
designed to facilitate the effective performance of 
the Committee's statutory functions with respect to 
the regulation and direction of open market operations 
conducted by the Federal Reserve Banks and with respect 
to certain direct transactions between the Reserve 
Banks and the United States. In determining the poli
cies to be followed in such operations, the Committee 
considers information regarding business and credit 
conditions and domestic and international economic 
and financial developments, and other pertinent infor
mation gathered and submitted by its staff and the 
staffs of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System (the "Board") and the Federal Reserve Banks.  
Against the background of such information, the Commit
tee takes actions from time to time to regulate and 
direct the open market operations of the Reserve Banks.  
Such policy actions ordinarily are taken through the 
adoption and transmission to the Federal Reserve Banks 
of regulations, authorizations, and directives.  

SECTION 272.3 - MEETINGS 

(a) Place and frequency. - The Committee meets in 
Washington, D. C., at least four times each year and 
oftener if deemed necessary. Meetings are held upon 
the call of the Chairman of the Board or at the request 
of any three members of the Committee. Notices of 
calls by the Chairman of the Board to other members are 
given by the Secretary of the Committee in writing or 
by telegram. Requests of any three members for the 
calling of a meeting shall state the time therefor and 
shall be filed in writing or by telegram with the Secre
tary who shall forthwith notify all members of the Com
mittee in writing or by telegram. When the Secretary 
has sent notices to all members of the Committee that 
a meeting has been requested by three members and of 
the time therefor, a meeting is deemed to have been 
called. If, in the judgment of the Chairman, circum
stances require that a meeting be called at such short 
notice that one or more members cannot be present in 
Washington, such members may participate in the meeting 
by telephone conference arrangements.

-16-



1/16/73

(b) Alternates. - Whenever any member of the Com
mittee representing Federal Reserve Banks shall find 
that he will be unable to attend a meeting of the 
Committee, he shall promptly notify his alternate and 
the Secretary of the Committee in writing or by tele
gram, and upon receipt of such notice the alternate 
shall advise the Secretary whether he will attend such 
meeting.  

(c) Quorum. - Seven members (including alternates 
present and acting in the absence of members) constitute 
a quorum for the transaction of business; but less than 
a quorum may adjourn from time to time until a quorum is 
in attendance.  

(d) Attendance at meetings. - Attendance at Committee 
meetings is restricted to members and alternate members of 
the Committee, the Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks who 
are not at the time members or alternates, staff officers 
of the Committee, the Manager and Special Manager, and such 
other advisers as the Committee may invite from time to time.  

(e) Meeting agendas. - The Secretary, in consultation 
with the Chairman, prepares an agenda of matters to be 
discussed at each meeting and the Secretary transmits the 
agenda to the members of the Committee within a reasonable 
time in advance of such meeting. In general, the agendas 
include approval of minutes of actions and acceptance of 
memoranda of discussion for previous meetings; reports by 
the Manager and Special Manager on open market operations 
since the previous meeting, and ratification by the Com
mittee of such operations; reports by Economists on, and 
Committee discussion of, the economic and financial 
situation and outlook; Committee discussion of monetary 
policy and action with respect thereto; and such other 
matters as may be considered necessary.  

SECTION 272.4 - COMMITTEE ACTIONS 

(a) Actions at meetings. - Actions are taken at 
meetings of the Committee except as described below.  

(b) Actions between meetings. - Special circumstances 
may make it desirable in the public interest for Committee 
members to consider an action to modify an outstanding 
Committee authorization or directive at a time when it is 
not feasible to call a meeting. Whenever, in the judgment

-17-



1/16/73

of the Chairman, such circumstances have arisen, the 
relevant information and recommendations for action are 
transmitted to the members by the Secretary, and the 
members communicate their votes to the Secretary. If 
the action is approved by a majority of the members, 
advice to that effect is promptly given by the Secretary 
to the members of the Committee and to the Reserve Bank 
selected to execute transactions for the System Open 
Market Account. All communications of recommended 
actions and votes under this paragraph shall be in 
writing or by telegram; provided that, in exceptional 
cases when that is not feasible, such communications 
may be made orally, either in person or by telephone, 
and the Secretary shall cause a written record to be 
made without delay. An action taken between meetings 
has the force and effect of an action at a meeting; 
provided, however, that if a meeting is held before the 
execution of any operations pursuant to the action, the 
action is null and void unless it is ratified and con
firmed by the Committee at such meeting.  

(c) Delegations of authority. - In special circum
stances, the Committee may delegate authority to take 
an action, subject to such instructions or guidelines 
as the Committee deems proper. Such delegations of 
authority may be made to the Chairman; to a subcommit
tee consisting of the Chairman and the Vice Chairman of 
the Committee and the Vice Chairman of the Board (or in 
the absence of the Chairman or of the Vice Chairman of 
the Board the members of the Board designated by the 
Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee his alternate); or to any 
other member or members of the Committee. An action 
taken pursuant to such a delegation of authority has 
the force and effect of an action taken by the Committee.  

(d) Effective date. - Committee action ordinarily 
is made effective as of the time it is taken because the 
nature of the subject matter and the action taken is such 
that the public interest and the proper discharge of the 
Committee's responsibilities so require. Occasionally, 
however, the Committee may specify that an action is to 
be effective at some different time.

-18-



1/16/73 -19

SECTION 272.5 - NOTICE AND PUBLIC PROCEDURE 

There ordinarily is no published notice of proposed 
action by the Committee or public procedure thereon, as 
described in section 553 of Title 5 of the United States 
Code, because such notice and procedure are impracticable, 
unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 13, 1973, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


