











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 18, 1973 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 18, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Balles 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Holland 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Sheehan 
Debs, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, MacLaury, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis,and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Andersen, Bryant, Eisenmenger, Gramley, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



9/18/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Feldberg, Secretary to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Keir, Pierce, and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Peters, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Fossum, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Boehne and Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, Nelson, and Green, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Fousek, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Broaddus, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Sandberg, Manager, Acceptance and Securities 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York



9/18/73

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 17 and 

August 21, 1973, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on July 17 and August 21, 

1973, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period August 21 through September 

17, 1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of the two System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium 

maturing on October 19 and 26, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period August 21 through September 17, 1973, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



9/18/73

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services, which 
slowed in the second quarter from the exceptionally rapid 
pace of the two preceding quarters, will be moderate in 
the third quarter. Although nonfarm employment rose sharply 
in August, the average gain in recent months has been smaller 
than earlier and the unemployment rate has changed little 
at a level somewhat below 5 per cent. The exceptionally rapid 
advance in prices was interrupted in July by the temporary 
freeze imposed in mid-June. However, farm and food prices 
surged after mid-July--when the freeze was lifted on most 
such products--and despite later appreciable declines, they 
remained far above pre-freeze levels. The U.S. merchandise 
trade balance improved further in July, and net foreign 
purchases of U.S. stocks increased. In recent weeks exchange 
rates for the dollar against most foreign currencies have 
changed little on balance after strengthening in the first 
half of August, and the balance of payments has been in 
surplus on an official settlements basis.  

The narrowly defined money stock, which had increased 
moderately in July, declined somewhat in August. The more 
broadly defined money stock continued to expand as a result 
of net inflows at banks of consumer-type time deposits. Non
bank thrift institutions experienced net deposit outflows 
in the July-August period. Expansion in bank credit has 
continued at a substantial pace. On September 7 the Federal 
Reserve announced an increase from 8 to 11 per cent in marginal 
reserve requirements on large-denomination CD's. Interest 
rates on long-term market securities declined from early 
August to early September, partly because of growing expecta
tions that the maximum degree of monetary restraint had been 
reached. Later, however, such expectations weakened and some 
long-term rates turned up. Short-term rates generally remained 
under upward pressure in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con
ditions conducive to abatement of inflationary pressures, a 
sustainable rate of advance in economic activity, and continued 
progress toward equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.



9/18/73

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international and domestic financial market developments, 
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market 
conditions consistent with moderate growth in monetary 
aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 16, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


