











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 16, 1973 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 16, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Holland 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

Black and Coldwell, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond 
Dallas, respectively

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Guy, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Nicoll, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Andersen, Bryant, Eisenmenger, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate 
Economists



10/16/73

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Feldberg, Secretary to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Peters, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Strothman, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Boehne, Doll, and Taylor, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Kansas City, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Green, and Sims, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Garvy and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. McTeer, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond



10/16/73

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 18, 

1973, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on September 18, 1973, was 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period September 18 through 

October 15, 1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements 

maturing in the period November 2-16, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period September 18 through October 15, 

1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending 

of Government securities from the System Open Market Account 

should be retained at this time.



10/16/73

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that growth in real output of goods and services in the 
fourth quarter is likely to remain at about the moderate 

rate indicated for the third quarter. In recent months 
manufacturing employment has leveled off and total non

farm employment has expanded less rapidly than earlier; 

the unemployment rate has remained at 4.8 per cent. The 
advance in wage rates has been somewhat faster than earlier.  
In September wholesale prices of industrial commodities 

rose appreciably; farm and food prices declined, but by 

far less than they had risen in August. The U.S. merchan

dise trade balance weakened slightly in August. Net foreign 

purchases of U.S. stocks continued large, however, and the 

balance of payments on an official settlements basis was 

in surplus in both August and September. Exchange rates 

for the dollar against most foreign currencies have changed 

little since mid-August.  

The narrowly defined money stock, which had risen 

sharply during the second quarter, declined in September 

for the second successive month. The more broadly defined 

money stock expanded slightly in September as a result of 

net inflows at banks of consumer-type time deposits. The 

deposit experience at nonbank thrift institutions improved 

somewhat in September following a period of sizable out

flows. Bank credit--which had been expanding rapidly-

increased little as business loan growth slowed markedly, 
and after mid-September the outstanding volume of large

denomination CD's declined substantially. Short-term market 

interest rates fell sharply from mid-September to early 

October, partly as a result of a shift in market expectations 

regarding monetary policy, and rates on long-term market 

securities declined moderately further.



10/16/73

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to abatement of infla
tionary pressures, a sustainable rate of advance in 
economic activity, and continued progress toward 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury financing and of international 
and domestic financial market developments, the Committee 
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates 
over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on November 19-20, 1973, beginning at 4 p.m.  

on November 19.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


