











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 17-18, 1973

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, December 17-18, 

1973, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 

Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 

Daane 
Francis .  
Holland 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, 2/ and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, MacLaury, and Coldwell, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 

Mr. Guy, 3/ Deputy General Counsel 

Mr. Nicoll, 3/ Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 

1/ Attended Monday session only.  

2/ Served as alternate for Mr. Francis at Tuesday session.  

3/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/17-18/73

Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Andersen, 1/ Bryan 1/ Eisenmenger, 1/ 

Gramley, 1/ Reynolds, 1/ Scheld, 1/ and 
Sims, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes,1/ Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, 1/ Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff, 1/ Managing Director for Operations 
and Supervision, Board of Governors 

Mr. Feldberg, 1/ Secretary to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Pierce, 1/ Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Wernick, 1/ and Williams, 1/ 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill 2/ and Pizer, 1/ Advisers, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, 1/ Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, 1/ Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, Parthemos, Taylor,1/ and Doll,1/ 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, and 
Kansas City,.respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Garvy 1/ and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended Monday session only.



12/17-18/73

Mr. Sandberg, 1/ Manager, Acceptance and 
Securities Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed 
below were taken on Tuesday, December 18, 1973.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 19-20, 

1973, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 19-20, 1973, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 20 through December 

17, 1973, were approved, ratified,and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, maturing in the 

period January 18 through February 1, 1974, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the swap arrangements 

with the National Bank of Belgium, the Bank of France, and the 

Netherlands Bank for periods of less than one year, if desired 

by those Banks, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 20 through December 17, 1973,were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/17-18/73

With Mr. Hayes dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting--including 
recent developments in industrial production, residential 
construction, and retail sales--suggests that growth in 
economic activity is slowing in the fourth quarter. A 
further weakening in activity and an appreciable rise in 
prices are in prospect because of the curtailment in oil 
supplies. In November nonfarm payroll employment expanded 
further, but the unemployment rate, which had dropped in 
October, rose again to about the level that had prevailed 
since midyear. Wholesale prices of industrial commodities 
continued to rise sharply in November, reflecting large 
additional increases for petroleum products and widespread 
advances among other commodities; farm and food prices 
declined further.  

In nearly all industrial countries abroad, concern 
has grown that a sustained cut in oil supplies will dis
rupt economic activity. Major foreign currencies have 
depreciated further against the dollar, and intervention 
sales of dollars by foreign monetary authorities have 
continued. The U.S. merchandise trade balance registered 
a strong surplus in the September-October period.  

The narrowly defined money stock, following little 
net change over the third quarter, has grown at a relatively 
rapid pace over the past 2 months. Growth in the more 
broadly defined money stock has also been substantial, 
as net inflows at banks of consumer-type time deposits 
have been large. Net deposit inflows at nonbank thrift 
institutions improved somewhat further. Bank credit 
expansion remained moderate in November, although business 
loans increased after 2 months of little or no growth.  
On December 7 the Federal Reserve announced a reduction 
from 11 to 8 per cent in marginal reserve requirements



12/17-18/73

on large-denomination CD's. Most short-term market 
interest rates have declined somewhat on balance in 
recent weeks, while movements in long-term market 
rates have been mixed.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to resisting 
inflationary pressures, cushioning the effects on 
production and employment growing out of the oil short
age, and maintaining equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of international and domestic financial market developments, 
the Committee seeks to achieve some easing in bank 
reserve and money market conditions, provided that 
the monetary aggregates do not appear to be growing 
excessively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, January 22, 1974, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


