











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 17, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 

Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Robertson 
Sheehan 
Winn, Alternate for Mr. Mayo

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, and Kimbrel, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

MacLaury and Coldwell, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis 
Dallas, respectively

Mr. Holland, Secretary 
Mr. Broida, Deputy Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel 
Mr, O'Connell, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Andersen, Bryant, Garvy, Hersey, 

Reynolds, Scheld, and Sims, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account



4/17/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 

Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Pierce, Wernick, and Williams, 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill and Pizer, Advisers, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Rehanek, Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Sherman, Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Black and Baughman, First Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Richmond and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, Parthenos, Taylor, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, 

Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 

Dallas, respectively 
Messrs. Anderson and Cooper, Assistant 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 

of Boston and New York, respectively 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on February 13, 1973, 

were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on February 13 and March 7, 1973, were

accepted.



4/17/73

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period March 20 through April 16, 1973, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account should 

be retained at this time.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of 

the FOMC minutes of actions and memoranda of discussion for the 

year 1967, on the basis described in a memorandum from the 

Secretariat dated March 13, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, numbers 3 and 4 of the guidelines for 

the conduct of System operations in Federal agency issues were 

amended to read as follows: 

3. System holdings of agency issues shall be 

modest relative to holdings of U.S. Government securi
ties, and the amount and timing of System transactions 

in agency issues shall be determined with due regard 
for the desirability of avoiding undue market effects.  

4. System holdings of maturing agency issues 

will be allowed to run off at maturity.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 20 through April 16, 

1973, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



4/17/73

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of the eight System swap drawings on the National Bank of 

Belgium maturing in the period May 2-23, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of three 

months of the two System swap drawings on the Swiss National Bank 

and the one drawing on the Bank for International Settlements 

maturing in the period May 9-16, 1973, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
continued rapid growth in real output of goods and ser
vices in the first quarter, spurred by an extraordinary 
increase in consumption expenditures. Over the first 
3 months of this year, employment rose strongly but the 
unemployment rate remained about 5 per cent. The recent 
advance in wage rates has been more moderate than in the 
latter part of 1972, but the increase in social security 
taxes in January added significantly to payroll costs.  
The rate of increase in prices stepped up very sharply 
in the first quarter. Prices of foods have continued 
to rise at wholesale and retail, and in both February 
and March increases in wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities were large and widespread. Foreign exchange 
markets have been relatively quiet since mid-March, and 
there has been a moderate reflow into dollars. The U.S.  
merchandise trade balance improved a little in January
February, when both exports and imports were sharply 
higher than in the fourth quarter of 1972.  

Growth in both the narrowly and more broadly defined 
money stock slowed markedly in the first quarter follow
ing a bulge toward the close of last year. However, in the 
face of strong loan demand--especially from businesses--



4/17/73

banks sharply increased their issuance of large
denomination CD's, and the bank credit proxy expanded 
very rapidly. Short-term market interest rates con
tinued to rise until the beginning of April, but since 
then some rates--particularly those on Treasury bills-
have declined. Rates on long-term market securities have 
moved down on balance in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to abatement of 
inflationary pressures, a more sustainable rate of 
advance in economic activity, and progress toward equili
brium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
forthcoming Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con
sistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates 
over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 15, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


