











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 17, 1973 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 17, 1973, at 9:30 a.m. As 

indicated below, only a limited number of staff members were in 

attendance during the first part of the meeting.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Holland 
Mayo 
Morris 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Minneapolis and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Bryant and Reynolds, Associate 

Economists 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager, System 

Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System 

Open Market Account



7/17/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Advisor, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Willes and Black, First Vice Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia 
and Richmond, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 19 through July 16, 1973, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months of 

System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss National 

Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing in the 

period August 2-23, 1973, was authorized.  

The following then entered the meeting: 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Messrs. Andersen, Eisenmenger, Gramley, 

Scheld, and Sims, Associate Economists 
Mr. Feldberg, Secretary to the Board of 

Governors 
Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 

Board of Governors 
Messrs. Keir, Wernick, and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Struble, Senior Economist, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Peters, Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors



Messrs. Boehne, Taylor, and Doll, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Kansas 
City, respectively 

Messrs. Davis, Hocter, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Cleveland, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Broaddus, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Rolnick, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee on July 6, 1973, increasing from $2 billion to $3 

billion the limit specified in paragraph 1(a) of the authorization for 

domestic open market operations on net changes between Committee 

meetings in System Account holdings of U. S. Government securities and 

agency issues, for the period through the close of business on 

July 17, 1973, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 15, 1973, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on May 15, 1973, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period June 19 through July 16, 1973, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.



7/17/73

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting, including 
recent developments in industrial production, employment, 
and retail sales, suggests that growth in economic activity 
moderated in the second quarter from the exceptionally 
rapid pace of the two preceding quarters. Increases in 
employment were relatively substantial, however, and in 
June the unemployment rate dropped below 5 per cent.  
Wage rates advanced at a faster pace during the second quar
ter than earlier in the year. In the months immediately 
preceding the price freeze imposed in mid-June, the rise 
in prices of both industrial commodities and farm and food 
products remained extraordinarily rapid.  

The U.S. merchandise trade balance worsened in May 
as import prices rose sharply further, but the trade deficit 
remained well below the first-quarter average. In foreign 
exchange markets, the jointly floating continental European 
currencies rose sharply further against the dollar in 
early July. After the first week in July, the dollar 
recovered somewhat on the basis of market expectations of 
official intervention. On July 10 the Federal Reserve 
announced substantial increases in its swap arrangements 
with other central banks.  

Both the narrowly and more broadly defined money stock 
rose sharply in May and June, although inflows of consumer
type time and savings deposits slackened somewhat in the 
latter month. Expansion in bank credit continued at a 
substantial pace. Since mid-June both short- and long-term 
market interest rates have advanced considerably further, 
with the sharpest increases in the short-term sector. On 
June 29 increases were announced in Federal Reserve discount 
rates, from 6-1/2 to 7 per cent, and in member bank reserve 
requirements; on July 5 ceiling interest rates were increased 
on time and savings deposits at commercial banks and other 
thrift institutions.



7/17/73 -5

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to abatement of inflationary pressures, 
a more sustainable rate of advance in economic activity, 
and progress toward equilibrium in the country's balance 
of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international and domestic financial market developments 
and the forthcoming Treasury financing, the Committee seeks 
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con
sistent with slower growth in monetary aggregates over the 
months immediately ahead than occurred on average in the 
first half of the year.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 21, 1973, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


