











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 21, 1973 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 21, 1973, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Holland 
Mayo 
Morris 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, MacLaury, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Bryant, Gramley, Reynolds, Scheld, 

and Sims, Associate Economists 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



8/21/73

Mr. Melnicoff, Deputy Executive Director, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 

of Governors 
Messrs. Wernick and Williams, Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill and Pizer, Advisers, Division 
of International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Crow, Staff Assistant, Board Members' Offices, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Peters, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Stanier, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos and Doll, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Atlanta, and Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Kaminow and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Miss Greenwald and Messrs. Cooper, Thunberg, and 
Balbach, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, New York, 
and St. Louis, respectively



8/21/73

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 18-19 and 

July 9, 1973, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 18-19 and July 9, 1973, were 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 17 through August 20, 1973, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period July 17 through August 20, 1973, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

With Mr. Francis dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
growth in real output of goods and services, which slowed 
in the second quarter from the exceptionally rapid pace of 
the two preceding quarters, will be moderate in the third 
quarter. Increases in nonfarm employment also have slowed 
in recent months, but the unemployment rate has declined.  
The rate of rise in wage rates has remained relatively 
moderate. The exceptionally rapid advance in prices was



8/21/73

interrupted in July by the temporary freeze imposed in 
mid-June. However, farm and food prices adjusted sharply 
upward after mid-July, when the freeze was lifted on most 
such products. The U.S. merchandise trade balance improved 
in June, and the balance on goods and services was in sur
plus in the second quarter for the first time in nearly two 
years. Since the end of July the dollar has strengthened 
markedly in foreign exchange markets, and the price of gold 
has dropped sharply.  

Both the narrowly and more broadly defined money stock, 
which had increased rapidly in May and June, grew more 
slowly in July. Inflows of consumer-type time and savings 
deposits strengthened again at banks in late July and early 
August, while net outflows were experienced at nonbank 
thrift institutions. Expansion in bank credit has continued 
at a substantial pace. Since mid-July short-term market 
interest rates have advanced considerably further on bal
ance. Long-term rates also rose substantially for much 
of that period, but most recently they have declined in the 
course of a sharp market rally. On August 13 increases 
were announced in Federal Reserve discount rates from 7 
to 7-1/2 per cent.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to abatement of inflationary 
pressures, a sustainable rate of advance in economic acti
vity, and progress toward equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international and domestic financial market developments 
and the forthcoming Treasury financing, the Committee 
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
consistent with slower growth in monetary aggregates over 
the months immediately ahead than has occurred on average 
thus far this year.



8/21/73

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on September 18, 1973, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


