











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 18-19, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, March 18-19, 

1974, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Coldwell, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Francis, and Balles, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively

Broida, Secretary 
Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
O'Connell, General Counsel 

Partee, Senior Economist 
Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance)



3/18-19/74

Messrs. Bryant, Davis, Doll, Gramley, 1 / 
Hocter, Parthemos, Pierce,1/ and 
Reynolds,1/Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff,./Managing Director for 
Operations and Supervision, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Assistant Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger,1/ Boehne, Taylor,1/ 
Scheld, and Andersen,/ Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Philadelphia, Atlanta, 
Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Green and Sims, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kareken,1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/18-19/74

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one 

year beginning March 1, 1974; that it appeared that such persons 

were legally qualified to serve; and that they had executed their 

oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternates were as follows: 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond, with Frank E. Morris, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate; 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with Richard A. Debs, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland, with Robert P. Mayo, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

Monroe Kimbrel, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta, with Philip E. Coldwell, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate; 

George H. Clay, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, with Bruce K. MacLaury, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate.  

Secretary's Note: The actions listed immediately 
below were taken on Monday, March 18, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1975, with the understanding that in the event of 

the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board



3/18-19/74

of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might 

be, they would cease to have any official connection with the 

Federal Open Market Committee: 

Arthur F. Burns Chairman 
Alfred Hayes Vice Chairman 
Arthur L. Broida Secretary 
Murray Altmann Deputy Secretary 
Normand R.V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Thomas J. O'Connell General Counsel 
Edward G. Guy Deputy General Counsel 
John Nicoll Assistant General Counsel 
J. Charles Partee Senior Economist 
Stephen H. Axilrod Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Robert Solomon 1/ Economist (International Finance) 

Harry Brandt, Ralph C. Bryant, 
Richard G. Davis, Raymond J.  
Doll, Lyle E. Gramley, 
William J. Hocter, James 
Parthemos, James L. Pierce, 
and John E. Reynolds Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market 

Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee after February 28, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D. Sternlight, 

and Charles A. Coombs were selected to serve at the pleasure of 

the Federal Open Market Committee as Manager, Deputy Manager, and 

Special Manager for foreign currency operations, respectively, of 

the System Open Market Account, it being understood that their

1/ On leave of absence.



3/18-19/74

selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the Board 

of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently was received 

that Messrs. Holmes, Sternlight, and Coombs were 

satisfactory to the Board of Directors of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York for service in the respective 

capacities indicated.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of review

ing such matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's Note: On February 26, 1974, certain 
continuing authorizations of the Committee, listed 
below, had been distributed by the Secretary with 

the advice that, in accordance with past practice, 
they would remain effective until otherwise directed 
by the Committee. Members were asked to so indicate 

if they wished to have any of the authorizations in 

question placed on the agenda for consideration at 

this meeting, and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. Distribution list for periodic reports prepared 
by Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 

Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 

in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  
4. Resolutions providing for continued operation of 

the Committee and for certain actions by the 
Reserve Banks during an emergency.1/ 

1/ With respect to the second of these resolutions, a final 
(unnumbered) paragraph had been inadvertently omitted from the text 
shown in the minutes of actions for the meeting of the Committee 
on September 21, 1971 (the date of the latest revision) and in copies 
distributed subsequently. The full text of the resolution was shown 
in an attachment to the memorandum of February 26, 1974, and is 
reproduced in Attachment A to these minutes.



3/18-19/74

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System 
Open Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations 
in Federal Agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations 
of Federal Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability 
of Information,and Rules of Procedure.  

It was agreed to retain the existing procedure for making 

minutes and other records of the Committee available to employees 

of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, including 

authorization to the Secretary to act on the Chairman's behalf in 

considering proposals for the addition of members of the Board's 

staff to the list of those having access to Committee minutes and 

other records.  

By unanimous vote, Section 270.4(c)( 2) of the Regulation 

Relating to Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve Banks was 

amended, effective April 1, 1974, to read as follows: 

ยง 270.4 Transactions in Obligations.  

* * * 

(c) In accordance with such limitations, terms, and 

conditions as are prescribed by law and in authorizations and 

directives issued by the Committee, the Reserve Bank selected 

by the Committee is authorized and directed -

* * *



3/18-19/74

(2) To buy and sell bankers' acceptances in the open 

market for its own account; .  

By unanimous vote, paragraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of the 

Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations were amended, 

effective April 1, 1974, to read as follows: 

(b) To buy or sell in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, 
or deferred delivery basis, for the account of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York at market discount rates, prime 
bankers' acceptances with maturities of up to nine months 
at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the cur
rent shipment of goods between countries or within the 
United States, or (2) arise out of the storage within 
the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a 
reasonable time and that are secured throughout their 
life by a warehouse receipt or similar document conveying 
title to the underlying goods; provided that the aggregate 
amount of bankers' acceptances held at any one time shall 
not exceed $125 million.  

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers' acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from nonbank 
dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at 
rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, 
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of 
agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the 
event Government securities or agency issues covered by



3/18-19/74

any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they 
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that 
in the event bankers' acceptances covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they shall 
continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or 
shall be sold in the open market.  

By unanimous vote, the staff committee on bankers' 

acceptances was directed to conduct further studies of the 

desirability of expanding Federal Reserve open market operations 

in bankers' acceptances to encompass all types of prime accept

ances, including finance bills.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization 

for Domestic Open Market Operations was amended, effective 

immediately, to read as follows: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, 
including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, 
and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency 
of the United States in the open market, from or to 
securities dealers and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, 
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open 
Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, 
to exchange maturing U.S. Government and Federal agency 
securities with the Treasury or the individual agencies 
or to allow them to mature without replacement; provided 
that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal 
agency securities held in such Account (including forward



3/18-19/74

commitments) at the close of business on the day of 
a meeting of the Committee at which action is taken 
with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not 
be increased or decreased by more than $3.0 billion 
during the period commencing with the opening of busi
ness on the day following such meeting and ending with 
the close of business on the day of the next such 
meeting.  

The Committee took note of the present state of de facto 

suspension of paragraph 2 of the Authorization for Domestic Open 

Market Operations as a consequence of the expiration, on November 

1, 1973, of the underlying statutory authority contained in a 

provision of Section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account, con

tained in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic Open 

Market Operations, should be retained at this time, subject to 

annual review.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System 
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out 
the Committee's foreign currency directive and express 
authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto:



3/18-19/74

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot 
or forward transactions on the open market at home and 
abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Stabili
zation Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve 
Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, and with 
the Bank for International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 

Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 

Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 

Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in paragraph 
A above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, including 

currencies purchased from the Stabilization Fund, and 
sold forward to the Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion 
equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or forward, up 

to the amounts necessary to fulfill other forward commitments; 

(3) Additional currencies purchased spot or 

forward, up to the amount necessary for System operations 

to exert a market influence but not exceeding $250 

million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered or gua

ranteed basis in terms of the dollar, under agreement 

with the Bank of England, up to $200 million equivalent.

-10-



3/18-19/74

C. To have outstanding forward commitments 
undertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreign 
currencies, up to the following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign currencies 
to the Stabilization Fund, up to the limit specified in 
paragraph 1B(1) above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to deliver 
foreign currencies, up to $550 million equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal 
currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such 
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 
months after any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the 
System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum 
of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which 
are among those designated by the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, 
and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 2,000

-11-



3/18-19/74

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 2,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 2,000 
Bank of Mexico 180 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 1,400 
Bank for International Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 
currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System 
swap commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 

bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 

in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 

purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions 
in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) 
above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, be at prevailing market rates and no 
attempt shall be made to establish rates that appear 

to be out of line with underlying market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign 

central banks for the coordination of foreign currency 

transactions. In making operating arrangements with 
foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 

currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall 

not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, 
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  

Any agreements or understandings concerning the adminis
tration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York with the foreign banks designated by 

the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N 

shall be referred for review and approval to the Committee.

-12-



3/18-19/74

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested 
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum 
working balances. Such investments shall be in accord
ance with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. The Subcommittee named in Section 272.4(c) of 
the Committee's rules of procedure is authorized to 
act on behalf of the Committee when it is necessary to 
enable the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage 
in foreign currency operations before the Committee 
can be consulted. All actions taken by the Subcommittee 
under this paragraph shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the Vice 
Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with the 
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of responsi
bility for foreign currency operations between the System 
and the Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency operations, 
and to consult with the Secretary on such policy matters 
as may relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; and 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory Council 
on International Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized 
to transmit pertinent information on System foreign 
currency operations to appropriate officials of the 
Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in 
the foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors' 
Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relation
ships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

-13-



3/18-19/74 -14-

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown 

below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in foreign 
currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar in 
international exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of international 
payments more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with central 
banks of other countries having convertible currencies, with 

the International Monetary Fund, and with other international 

payments irstitutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements in exchange 

rates, within the limits stated in the International Monetary 

Fund Agreement or established by central bank practices, re
flect the interaction of underlying economic forces and thus 
serve as efficient guides to current financial decisions, 
private and public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international liquidity 
in accordance with the needs of an expanding world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Federal 

Open Market Committee, System operations in foreign currencies 

shall be undertaken only when necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the flows 

of international payments, if such fluctuations (1) are deemed 

to reflect transitional market unsettlement or other temporary 

forces and therefore are expected to be reversed in the fore
seeable future; and (2) are deemed to be disequilibrating or 
otherwise to have potentially destabilizing effects on U.S.  
or foreign official reserves or on exchange markets, for 

example, by occasioning marke anxieties, undesirable specula
tive activity, or excessive leads and lags in international 

payments;



3/18-19/74

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in 
spot exchange rates,and to moderate forward premiums 
and discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever 
supply or demand persists in influencing exchange rates in 
one direction, System transactions should be modified or 
curtailed unless upon review and reassessment of the situ
ation the Committee directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions in 
exchange markets. Special factors that might make for 
exchange market instabilities include (1) responses to 
short-run increases in international political tension, (2) 
differences in phasing of international economic activity 
that give rise to unusually large interest rate differentials 
between major markets, and (3) market rumors of a character 
likely to stimulate speculative transactions. Whenever ex
change market instability threatens to produce disorderly 
conditions, System transactions may be undertaken if the 
Special Manager reaches a judgment that they may help to 
reestablish supply and demand balance at a level more 
consistent with the prevailing flow of underlying payments.  
In such cases, the Special Manager shall consult as soon 
as practicable with the Committee or, in an emergency, with 
the members of the Subcommittee designated for that purpose 
in paragraph 6 of the Authorization for foreign currency 
operations, and 

D. To adjust System balances within the limits 
established in the Authorization for foreign currency 
operations in light of probable future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements are appro
priate when necessary to obtain foreign currencies for the 
purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, transactions in forward exchange, either outright 
or in conjunction with spot transactions, may be undertaken 
only (i) to prevent forward premiums or discounts from giving 
rise to disequilibrating movements of short-term funds; (ii) 
to minimize speculative disturbances; (iii) to supplement 
existing market supplies of forward cover, directly or 
indirectly, as a means of encouraging the retention or

-15-



3/18-19/74

accumulation of dollar holdings by private foreign holders; 

(iv) to allow greater flexibility in covering System or 
Treasury commitments, including commitments under swap 
arrangements, and to facilitate operations of the Stabilization 
Fund; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for the set
tlement of System or Treasury commitments denominated in other 
currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for System holdings of 
foreign currencies.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 

20, 1974, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on January 21-22 and February 

20, 1974, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 20 through March 18, 

1974, were approved, ratified,and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing on 

April 18 and 25, 1974, was authorized.  

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed below 
were taken on Tuesday, March 19, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized an increase 

from $2 billion to $3 billion in the System's swap line with the 

Bank of England, and the corresponding amendment to paragraph 2 of 

the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, effective 

March 26, 1974.

-16-



3/18-19/74

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period February 20 through March 18, 1974, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services is declining in 
the current quarter, in large part because of the oil 
situation, and that prices are continuing to rise rapidly.  
In February industrial production and manufacturing em
ployment declined again, while total nonfarm payroll 
employment recovered, and the unemployment rate was 
unchanged at 5.2 per cent. Prices of farm and food 
products and industrial commodities increased sharply, 
although less so than in the preceding 2 months. Increases 
in wage rates appear to have moderated in recent months.  

After depreciating during the first 3 weeks of 
February, the dollar has since shown little net change 
against leading foreign currencies. The U.S. trade surplus 
remained large in January, despite a further sharp rise 
in the cost of petroleum imports.  

The narrowly defined money stock, after having declined 
in January, increased sharply in February and early March.  
Broader measures of the money stock rose substantially in 
February, as net inflows of consumer-type time deposits remained 
relatively strong. Business short-term borrowing at banks and 
in the open market has continued at a rapid pace. Following 
earlier declines, both short- and long-term market interest 
rates have risen appreciably in recent weeks.

-17-



3/18-19/74

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to resisting inflation

ary pressures, supporting a resumption of real economic 
growth, and maintaining equilibrium in the country's balance 
of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
international and domestic financial market developments, 
including the prospective Treasury financing, the Committee 
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that would moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the 
months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Monday and Tuesday, April 15 and 16, 1974, 

beginning on Monday afternoon.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-18-



ATTACHMENT A

RESOLUTION OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE AUTHORIZING 
CERTAIN ACTIONS BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS DURING AN EMERGENCY 

(As last revised September 21, 1971) 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes each 
Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions set forth 
below during war or defense emergency when such Federal Reserve 
Bank finds itself unable after reasonable efforts to be in com
munication with the Federal Open Market Committee (or with the 
Interim Committee acting in lieu of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee) or when the Federal Open Market Committee (or such 
Interim Committee) is unable to function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of 
economic conditions and the general credit situation then prevail
ing (after taking into account the possibility of providing 
necessary credit through advances secured by direct obligations 

of the United States under the last paragraph of section 13 of 
the Federal Reserve Act), such Federal Reserve Bank may purchase 
and sell obligations of the United States for its own account, 
either outright or under repurchase agreement, from and to banks, 
dealers or other holders of such obligations.  

(2) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretion 
purchase special certificates of indebtedness directly from the 

United States in such amounts as may be needed to cover over

drafts in the general account of the Treasurer of the United 
States on the books of such Bank or for the temporary accommoda

tion of the Treasury, but such Bank shall take all steps practi
cable at the time to insure as far as possible that the amount 

of obligations acquired directly from the United States and held 

by it, together with the amount of such obligations so acquired 

and held by all other Federal Reserve Banks, does not exceed 

$5 billion at any one time.  

(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may engage in operations 

of the types specified in the Committee's authorization for 

System foreign currency operations when requested to do so by 

an authorized official of the U.S. Treasury Department; provided, 
however, that such Bank shall take all steps practicable at the 

time to insure as far as possible that, in light of the informa
tion available on other System foreign currency operations, its 

own operations do not result in the aggregate in breaching any 
of the several dollar limits specified in the authorization.



- 2

Authority to take the actions set forth shall be 
effective only until such time as the Federal Reserve Bank 
is able again to establish communications with the Federal 
Open Market Committee (or the Interim Committee), and such 
Committee is then functioning.


