











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 21, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C. on Tuesday, May 21, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 

Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Coldwell, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

Balles and Francis, Presidents of 

Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco 

St. Louis, respectively

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Nicoll, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, Bryant, Davis, Doll, Gramley, 

Hocter, Parthemos, Pierce, and Reynolds, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account



5/21/74

Mr. Melnicoff, Managing Director for 
Operations and Supervision, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Chase, Adviser to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wonnacott, Associate Director, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Williams, Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Struble, Senior Economist, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Willes, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Boehne, Scheld, and 
Sims, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Chicago, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Jordan and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St Louis and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Cooper, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York



5/21/74

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 15-16, 

1974, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on April 15-16, 1974, was 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period April 6 through May 20, 

1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period April 16 through May 20, 1974, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



5/21/74

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services--which had declined 
appreciably in the first quarter--is likely to change little 

in the current quarter and that price increases are con
tinuing exceptionally large. In April industrial production 
and manufacturing employment expanded somewhat, after having 
declined for 4 months. The unemployment rate edged down to 
5 per cent, as the civilian labor force declined. Wholesale 
prices of farm and food products declined substantially further, 
but increases among industrial commodities again were wide
spread and extraordinarily large. The advance in wage rates 
has accelerated somewhat in recent months, and unit labor costs 
have been rising at a fast pace.  

In April and early May the dollar depreciated further 
against leading foreign currencies, and the balance of pay
ments remained in deficit on the official settlements basis.  

Rising import costs for petroleum and other products con
tributed to a sizable deficit in U.S. foreign trade in March.  

Growth in the narrowly defined money stock slackened 
somewhat in April from the rapid pace in the preceding 2 
months, and the more broadly defined money stock continued 
to expand moderately. Deposit experience at nonbank thrift 
institutions deteriorated sharply. Business short-term credit 
demands remained exceptionally strong. These demands were con
centrated in banks, and to help finance loan growth, banks 
issued a record amount of large-denomination CD's and 
continued to borrow in the commercial paper and Euro-dollar 
markets. Private short-term market interest rates have risen 
sharply further in recent weeks and conditions in financial 
markets have been uneasy. Treasury bill rates also rose in 
late April and early May, but have declined markedly in recent 
days. Long-term rates have continued upward. Effective April 
25, Federal Reserve discount rates were raised one-half point 
to 8 per cent.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial conditions 
conducive to resisting inflationary pressures, supporting a 
resumption of real economic growth, and achieving equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments.



5/21/74

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial markets, 
the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing restrict
ive money market conditions, provided that the monetary aggre
gates appear to be growing at rates within the specified 
ranges of tolerance.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open 

Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, June 18, 1974, at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


