











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

February 20, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D.C. on Wednesday, February 20, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 
Holland 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, MacLaury, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Messrs. Altmann and Bernard, Assistant 

Secretaries 

Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance)



2/20/74 

Messrs. Andersen, Bryant, Eisenmenger, 
Gramley, Reynolds, Scheld, and Sims, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 

Market Account 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager, System 

Open Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff, Managing Director for 
Operations and Supervision, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Feldberg, Secretary to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Pierce, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Advisers, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 

Governors 
Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wendel, Assistant Adviser, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, Parthemos, Taylor, and Doll, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, 
and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Vice President and Senior Adviser, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Messrs. Hocter 1/ and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 

Dallas, respectively 
Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis

1/ Attended morning session only.



2/20/74

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 21-22, 

1974, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 22, 1974, through 

February 19, 1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal of the swap arrangement with 

the National Bank of Belgium for a further period of up to one year 

was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period January 22 through February 19, 1974, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Bucher, Francis, Morris, and Sheehan 

dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services is declining in the current 
quarter, mainly because of the oil situation, and that prices 
are continuing to rise rapidly. In January industrial pro
duction declined again, nonfarm payroll employment dropped, 
and the unemployment rate rose above 5 per cent. Prices of



2/20/74

both farm products and industrial commodities increased very 
sharply. Wage rates have continued to rise substantially in 
recent months, although not so sharply as prices.  

After having appreciated for several months, the dollar 
has declined somewhat on the average against foreign currencies 
in recent weeks. U.S. controls on capital outflows were removed 
at the end of January, and several foreign countries have 
relaxed controls on capital inflows. The U.S. trade surplus 
rose sharply in December and in the fourth quarter as a whole.  

The narrowly defined money stock, after increasing 
substantially in the last 2 months of 1973, declined in 
January; most recently, however, it has appeared to strengthen.  
Broader measures of the money stock continued to rise in January, 
as net inflows of consumer-type time deposits remained relatively 
strong. Expansion in business loans and in total bank credit 
accelerated, and banks stepped up issuance of large-denomination 
CD's. Since mid-January, short-term market interest rates have 
fallen appreciably, and long-term rates have declined somewhat.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con
ditions conducive to resisting inflationary pressures, cushioning 
declines in production and employment that are being induced in 
large part by the oil situation, and maintaining equilibrium in 
the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of inter
national and domestic financial market developments, the 
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market con
ditions consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates 
over the months ahead.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of the 

FOMC minutes of actions and memoranda of discussion, on the basis 

described in a memorandum from the Secretariat dated January 14,

1974, was authorized.



2/20/74

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on March 19, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


