











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 16-17, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, December 16-17, 

1974, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Francis, and Balles, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, St. Louis, and San 

Francisco, respectively

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Guy,1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/16-17/74

Messrs. Brandt, Bryant Davis, Doll, Gramley,1/ 

Hocter, Parthemos,1/ Pierce, and Reynolds,1/ 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Wonnacott,1/ Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Kichline,1/ and Wernick,1/ 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer,1/ Adviser, Division of International 
Finance Board of Governors 

Mr. Zeisel,1/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Junz,1/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Taylor 1/ and Wendel,1/ Assistant Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Siegman 1/ and Truman,1/ Assistant 

Advisers, Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Peret,1/ Assistant to the Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Smith,1/ Chief, Financial Markets Section, 
Division of International Finance, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Beeman 1/ and Enzler,1/ Senior Economists, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Roxon,1/ Senior Economist, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors

1/ Attended Monday session only.



12/16-17/74

Mr. Annable,1/ Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Morisse,1/ Economist, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar,2/ Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt,1/ Economist, Open Market Secre
tariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Rankin, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Boehne, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and 
Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Jordan and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Ms. Tschinkel,2/ Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's note: All of the following actions were taken 
on Tuesday, December 17, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 19, 1974, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on November 19, 1974, was accepted.  

1/ Attended Monday session only.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/16-17/74

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period November 19 through 

December 16, 1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 

3 months of two System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, 

maturing on January 17 and 24, 1975, respectively, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 19 through December 16, 1974, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Mitchell and Wallich dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions for the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services is falling substantially 
further in the current quarter. Price and wage increases 
are continuing large, although not so large as earlier this 
year. In November declines in industrial production and 
employment were sharp and widespread, and the unemployment 
rate increased further, from 6.0 to 6.5 per cent. In recent 

weeks additional production cutbacks and layoffs have been 
announced. The November rise in wholesale prices of indus
trial commodities, although substantial, remained well below 
the extraordinarily rapid rate in the first 8 months of the 
year.



12/16-17/74

Since mid-November the dollar has declined somewhat 
further against leading foreign currencies. In October 
the U.S. foreign trade deficit was reduced sharply for 
the second consecutive month, while there were continued 
net inflows of bank-reported private capital and of invest
ments by oil-exporting countries.  

Growth of the narrowly defined money stock increased 
in November to an annual rate of about 7 per cent. Net 
inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits remained 

strong at banks and continued to improve at nonbank thrift 

institutions, and the more broadly defined money supply 
measures again expanded appreciably. Bank loans increased 
only moderately. Most market interest rates, after rising 
in the second half of November, subsequently turned down 
again. Yields on State and local government securities, 
however, continued under upward pressure. Effective 
December 9, Federal Reserve discount rates were reduced 
from 8 to 7-3/4 per cent.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to resisting inflationary 
pressures, cushioning recessionary tendencies and encour
aging resumption of real economic growth, and achieving 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with somewhat 
more rapid growth in monetary aggregates over the 
months ahead than has occurred in recent months.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on January 21, 1975, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


