











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

September 10, 1974 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 10, 1974, at 3:15 p.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Coldwell, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 

Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Francis, and Balles, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 

Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 1/ 

Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 

Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 

Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance)1/ 
Messrs. Bryant, Gramley, Parthemos, 1/ Pierce,1/ 

and Reynolds,1/ Associate Economists

1/ Attended first part of meeting only.



9/10/74

Mr. Coombs,1/ Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Coyne,1/ Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wonnacott,2/ Associate Director, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien,2/ Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Keir/ and Williams 2 / , Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Wendel,2/ Assistant Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Miss Pruitt,2/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell,2/ Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, 2/ Boehne,2/ and Scheld,2/ 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek,2/ Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Fousek,2/ Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Cox,. Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. Rolnick,2/ Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.  
2/ Attended first part of meeting only.



9/10/74

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period August 20 through September 9, 1974, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

The following actions were taken during the part of the 

meeting in which staff attendance was limited. Messrs. Coombs 

and Coyne joined the meeting prior to these actions.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period August 20 through 

September 9, 1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of two System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, maturing 

on October 15 and 18, 1974, respectively, was authorized.  

With Mr. Hayes dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services is changing little in the 
current quarter, following the first-half decline, and that 
price and wage increases are continuing large. In August 
industrial production, according to preliminary indications, 
remained near the level of recent months, while the unem
ployment rate edged up to 5.4 per cent. Wholesale prices 
of farm products rose further, on average, and announcements 
of increases for industrial commodities continued numerous.



9/10/74

In recent weeks the dollar has continued to appreciate 
against leading foreign currencies. U.S. bank lending to 
foreign borrowers diminished in July and apparently also in 
August, while inflows from abroad increased. The foreign 
trade deficit, which had narrowed in June, widened in July.  

In August growth of the narrowly defined money stock 
was above the low pace of July but well below the 6 per cent 
annual rate of the first half of the year. Net inflows of 
time deposits other than money market CD's continued at about 
the July rate, but the performance of passbook savings at 
banks--and of total deposits at nonbank thrift institutions-
remained weak. Although growth in business loans remained 
relatively strong in August, growth in total bank credit was 
moderate, and banks reduced their reliance on large-denomina
tion CD's and nondeposit funds. Interest rates on most short
term market instruments have changed little on balance since 
mid-August, while rates on most types of longer-term securities 
have risen further. On September 4 the Federal Reserve announced 
the removal of the 3 per cent marginal reserve requirement on 
longer-term, large-denomination CD's.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con
ditions conducive to resisting inflationary pressures, 
supporting a resumption of real economic growth, and achieving 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of develop
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the 
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market condi
tions consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates 
over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be on October 15, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


