











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 14-15, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, October 14-15, 

1974, beginning at 5:30 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Coldwell, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee 

Mr. Eastburn, President of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 

Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 

Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 

Mr. Partee,1/ Senior Economist 

Mr. Axilrod,1/ Economist (Domestic Finance) 

Mr. R. Solomon,1/ Economist (International 
Finance) 

Messrs. Brandt,1/ Bryant,1/ Doll,1/ Hocter,1 / 

Pierce,1/ and Reynolds,1/ Associate 

Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



10/14-15/74

Mr. Holmes,1/ Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs,1 / Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Coyne,1 / Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wonnacott,1/ Associate Director, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir,1/ Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt,1/ Economist, Open Market 

Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell,1/ Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Leonard and Williams, First Vice 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of St. Louis and San Francisco, 

respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger,1 / Boehne,1/ and Scheld,1/ 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 

Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and 

Chicago respectively 
Mr. Garvy,1/ Vice President and Senior 

Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Messrs. Snellings, Jordan, and Green, 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken,1 Economic Adviser, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Mr. Keran,1/ Director of Research, Federal 

Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Mr. Sandberg,1/ Assistant Vice President, 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the action of 

members on September 25, 1974, authorizing and directing the Federal

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



10/14-15/74

Reserve Bank of New York, under the provisions of 270.4(e) of the 

Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve 

Banks, to engage in such open market transactions in foreign curren

cies, including transactions for the System Open Market Account, as 

may be necessary to carry out the arrangements that have been made 

by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with the concurrence of 

the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, for the dispo

sition of assets and liabilities of the Franklin National Bank.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 20 

and September 10, 1974, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on August 20 and September 

10, 1974, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 10 through October 

14, 1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, matur

ing in the period November 4 through 15, 1974, was authorized.



10/14-15/74 -4

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period September 10 through October 14, 1974, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Clay dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions for the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services declined somewhat further in 
the third quarter and that price and wage increases continued 
large. In September industrial production increased somewhat, 
reflecting settlement of work stoppages that had reduced out
put in August. An upsurge in the labor force, following 
several months of relatively slow growth, raised the unemploy
ment rate from 5.4 to 5.8 per cent. The rise in wholesale 
prices of industrial commodities moderated, although it remained 
substantial, and prices of farm products and foods declined 
after having increased sharply in July and August.  

On October 8 the President recommended a program to 
combat inflation and to mitigate the impact of monetary and 
fiscal restraint on certain sectors of the economy. The tax 
and expenditure proposals included in the program would, on 
balance, have approximately a neutral effect on the size of 
the Federal deficit.  

In recent weeks the dollar has declined against leading 
foreign currencies. The U.S. foreign trade deficit increased 
substantially in August, as imports of petroleum and industrial 
materials rose while exports held steady.



10/14-15/74

The narrowly defined money stock rose slightly in 

September and grew at an annual rate of about 2 per cent 
over the third quarter, compared with a rate of 6 per cent 
in the first half of the year. The money supply measure 
more broadly defined to include bank time and savings deposits 
other than money market CD's--as well as the measure that 
includes deposits at other thrift institutions--also rose only 

slightly in September. Over-all business credit demands slack
ened last month, and outstanding business loans at banks leveled 

off. Since early September interest rates on short-term market 

instruments have fallen considerably, while yields on Treasury 

and State and local government bonds have declined modestly.  

Yields on corporate bonds have risen somewhat further, on 

balance, reflecting the large volume of offerings in prospect.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 

of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial con

ditions conducive to resisting inflationary pressures, supporting 

a resumption of real economic growth, and achieving equilibrium 
in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of the 

forthcoming Treasury financing and of developments in domestic 

and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to 

achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent 

with resumption of moderate growth in monetary aggregates over 

the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on November 19, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


