











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 21-22, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, January 21-22, 

1974, beginning at 8:15 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Daane 
Francis 

Holland 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Morris 
Sheehan

Messrs. Clay, Eastburn, Kimbrel, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, MacLaury, and Coldwell, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell,1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod,1/ Economist (Domestic Finance)

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



1/21-22/74

Messrs. Andersen, 1/ Bryant, Eisenmenger, 1/ 
Gramley, 1/ Reynolds, 1/ Scheld, 1/ and 
Sims, 1/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, 1/ Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Melnicoff, Managing Director for Operations 
and Supervision, Board of Governors 

Messrs Cardon 2/ and Coyne, Assistants to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Pierce, 1/ Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. McWhirter, 3/ Associate Director, Division 
of Federal Reserve Bank Operations, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs, Keir, 1/ Wernick, 1/ and Williams, 1/ 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, 1/ Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, 1/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, 1/ Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, 1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretaria, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, 1/ Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Doll, 1/ Senior Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City 

Messrs. Brandt, 1/ Davis, 1/ Hocter, 1/ and 
Nelson, 1/ Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, New York, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended Monday session only.  
3/ Participated in meeting at point indicated.



1/21-22/74

Mr. Kaminow, 1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Meek, 1/ Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Broaddus 1/ and Pardee, 1/ Assistant 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond and New York, respectively 

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed 
below were taken on Tuesday, January 22, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, the action of Committee members on January 

4, 1974, increasing from $2 billion to $3 billion the limit specified 

in paragraph 1(a) of the authorization for domestic open market 

operations on net changes between Committee meetings in System Account 

holdings of securities, effective January 4, 1974, through the close of 

business on January 22, 1974, was ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 17-18, 

1973, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on December 17-18, 1973, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 18, 1973, through 

January 21, 1974, were approved, ratified,and confirmed.

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



1/22/74

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized an increase from 

$2 billion to $3 billion in the System's swap line with the Bank of 

Italy, and the corresponding amendment to paragraph 2 of the authori

zation for foreign currency operations, to become effective upon 

approval by the Subcommittee named in Section 272.4(c) of the Com

mittee's rules of procedure after consultation with responsible 

officials of the U. S. Treasury.  

Secretary's Note: Pursuant to the foregoing action, on 
January 29, 1974, the Subcommittee approved the indicated 
increase in the System's swap line with the Bank of Italy 
and the corresponding amendment to the authorization for 
foreign currency operations, effective February 1, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss National 

Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing in the 

period February 1 to February 15, 1974, was authorized.  

The reports of audit of the System Open Market Account and 

of foreign currency transactions, made by the Board's Division of 

Federal Reserve Bank Operations as at the close of business July 

27, 1973, together with the supplementary letter from Mr. McWhirter 

dated January 14, 1974, were accepted.  

Mr. McWhirter joined the meeting for the discussion of the 

foregoing item.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period December 18, 1973, through January 21, 1974, were approved,



1/22/74

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Hayes and Francis dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions for 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that growth in real output of goods and services was 
slow in the fourth quarter of 1973, in part because of 
the fuel situation. Prices continued to rise sharply 
in December, reflecting additional increases for petroleum 
products and widespread advances among other goods and 
services. A further weakening in activity and sharp rise 
in prices appear to be in prospect for early 1974. In 
December nonfarm payroll employment changed little and 
the unemployment rate increased further. Wage rates have 
continued to rise substantially in recent months, although 
not so sharply as prices.  

Major foreign currencies have depreciated further 
against the dollar since mid-December, and some foreign 
monetary authorities have continued to sell dollars in 
exchange markets. Steep price increases imposed by 
oil-producing countries have heightened fears of economic 

disruption in many countries and of large and erratic 
international flows of funds.  

The narrowly defined money stock increased substantially 
in the last 2 months of 1973, partly reflecting increased 
foreign deposits, but it has changed little on balance over 
recent weeks. Net inflows of consumer-type time deposits 
remained sizable at both banks and nonbank thrift institu
tions. Bank credit expansion, which was moderate over the 
closing months of 1973, has accelerated in recent weeks 
as banks have stepped up issuance of large-denomination CD's.  

Since mid-December, interest rate movements have been mixed; 
yields on most long-term securities and on Treasury bills 
have risen on balance, while some private short-term rates 
have declined.



1/22/74

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to resisting inflationary 
pressures, cushioning the effects on production and 

employment growing out of the oil shortage, and maintaining 

equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury financing and of international 
and domestic financial market developments, the Committee 

seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over 
the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Wednesday, February 20, 1974.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


