











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 18, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 18, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Black 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn 
Debs, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Coldwell, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Balles, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, Bryant, Doll, Gramley, Hocter, 

Parthemos, Pierce, and Reynolds, Associate 
Economists



6/18/74

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Feldberg, Secretary to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wonnacott, Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick, Advisers, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Struble, Senior Economist, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Messrs, Eisenmenger, Boehne, and Sims, 

Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy, Vice President and Senior Adviser, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Messrs. Jordan and Green, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and 

Dallas, respectively 
Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 
Mr. Kalchbrenner, Senior Economist and Assistant 

Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York



6/18/74

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 

21, 1974, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on May 21, 1974, was 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period May 21 through June 17, 

1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing on 

July 18 and July 25, 1974, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the Subcommittee consisting of the 

Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman 

of the Board of Governors, or designated alternates, was authorized 

to act on behalf of the Committee with respect to questions relating 

to the terms of repayment of outstanding System swap debts in 

Belgian francs and Swiss francs.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period May 21 through June 17, 1974, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.



6/18/74

With Mr. Clay dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions for the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services will be about the same in 
the current quarter as a whole as in the first quarter, but 
that there has been some improvement as the spring has pro
gressed. The over-all rate of price rise, while very large, 
is not quite so rapid as in the first quarter. In May indus
trial production increased somewhat for the second consecutive 
month, and nonfarm employment expanded substantially further.  
The unemployment rate moved above 5 per cent, however, as the 
civilian labor force rose sharply. Wholesale prices of farm 
and food products declined substantially further, but increases 
among industrial commodities again were widespread and extra
ordinarily large. The advance in wage rates accelerated some
what further.  

In May the depreciation of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies was arrested. U.S. international trans
actions were in approximate balance on the official settlements 
basis, as bank-reported net outflows of capital apparently 
abated. The foreign trade deficit narrowed in April, despite 

a further large rise in the cost of petroleum imports.  

Growth in the narrowly defined money stock moderated 

in May, but apparently it accelerated in early June. Net 
inflows of consumer-type time deposits at banks slowed in 

May, and deposit experience at nonbank thrift institutions 

continued poor. Business credit demands remained large, 
although the expansion in short-term credit was below the 
extraordinary pace of April and was less concentrated at 
banks. In May banks increased their outstanding large
denomination CD's substantially further and continued to



6/18/74

borrow in the Euro-dollar market; most recently, however, 
they have reduced their reliance on these sources of funds.  
Market interest rates have fluctuated in a narrow range in 
recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to resisting inflationary 

pressures, supporting a resumption of real economic growth, 
and achieving equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 

developments in domestic and international financial markets, 
the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing 

restrictive money market conditions, provided that the 
monetary aggregates appear to be growing at rates within 

the specified ranges of tolerance.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on July 16, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


