











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 16, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 16, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Coldwell, Mayo, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Francis, and Balles, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadephia, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Doll, Gramley, 

Hocter, Pierce, and Reynolds, 
Associate Economists



7/16/74

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coombs, Special Manage:, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wonnacott, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Assistant Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Van Nice, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Boehne, Scheld, and 
Sims, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Chicago, and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Snellings, Jordan, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Tschinkel, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 18, 1974, were

approved.



7/16/74

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on June 18, 1974, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 18 through July 15, 1974, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing 

in the period August 2-15, 1974, was authorized.  

A proposed letter from Chairman Burns to the Secretary of 

the Treasury, concerning possible use by the Bank of Italy of its 

swap line with the Federal Reserve, was approved.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period June 18 through July 15, 1974, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Bucher dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



7/16/74

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services changed little in the 
second quarter and that no significant expansive forces 
appear to be emerging. The over-all rate of price rise, 
while very large, was not quite so rapid in the second 
as in the first quarter, but the advance in wage rates 
accelerated. In June industrial production was unchanged, 
following 2 months of moderate advance, while nonfarm 
payroll employment edged down. The unemployment rate 
remained at 5.2 per cent. Wholesale prices of farm and 
food products declined substantially further, but increases 
among industrial commodities continued widespread and 
extraordinarily large.  

Since mid-May the dollar has appreciated somewhat 
against leading foreign currencies. In June there was 
a large increase in foreign official assets in the United 
States, mainly reflecting investments by oil-exporting 
countries. The foreign trade deficit increased sharply 
in May, as exports declined and imports rose further.  

Growth in the narrowly defined money stock was 
somewhat more rapid in June than in May; growth during 
the second quarter was close to the 7 per cent first
quarter pace. Net inflows of consumer-type time deposits 
at banks and at nonbank thrift institutions increased in 
June, but deposit experience at the nonbank institutions 
deteriorated late in the month. Growth in business loans 
and in total bank credit slowed in June, and banks added 
much less to their outstanding volume of large-denomination 
CD's than in April and May. Private market interest rates 
have risen substantially in recent weeks, and in association 
with uneasy conditions in financial markets, yield spreads 
between prime and lower quality issues have widened. Yields 
on long-term Government securities have increased relatively 
little, and those on Treasury bills have declined somewhat.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to resisting inflationary 
pressures, supporting a resumption of real economic growth, 
and achieving equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.



7/16/74

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury refunding and of developments 
in domestic and international financial markets, the 
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money 
market conditions that would moderate growth in monetary 
aggregates over the months ahead.  

By unanimous vote, the guidelines for the conduct of System 

operations in Federal agency issues were amended, effective imme

diately, to delete guidelines numbered 4 and 7, and to renumber 

the remaining guidelines as 4, 5 and 6.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(b) of the Authorization 

for Domestic Open Market Operations was amended, effective 

immediately, to read as follows: 

(b) To buy or sell in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, 
or deferred delivery basis, for the account of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York at market discount rates, prime 
bankers' acceptances with maturities of up to nine months 
at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current 
shipment of goods between countries or within the United 
States, or (2) arise out of the storage within the United 
States of goods under contract of sale or expected to move 
into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse 
receipt or similar document conveying title to the under
lying goods; provided that the aggregate amount of bankers' 
acceptances held at any one time shall not exceed $500 million.



7/16/74 -6

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, August 20, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


