











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 15-16, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, April 15-16, 

1974, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Brimmer 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Coldwell, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Mr. Eastburn, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, Bryant, Davis, Doll, Gramley 1/ 

Hocter, Parthemos, Pierce, and Reynolds,1/ 
Associate Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



4/15-16/74

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coyne,1/ Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. McWhirter,2/ Associate Director, 
Division of Federal Reserve Bank 
Operations, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir and Wernick,3/ Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer,3/ Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struble,3/ Senior Economist, Division 
of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Pruitt, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Leonard and Williams, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, Scheld, and Sims, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Chicago, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Willey, Jordan, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, St. Louis, ana Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Poole, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Gillum,,1/ Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia 

Ms. Tschinkel,3/ Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

1/ Attended Monday session only.  
2/ Participated in meeting at point indicated.  
3/ Attended Tuesday session only.



4/15-16/74

Secretary's Note: The actions listed immediately 
below were taken on Monday, April 15, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 18-19, 

1974, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on March 18-19, 1974, was accepted.  

The reports of audit of the System Open Market Account and 

of foreign currency operations, made by the Board's Division of 

Federal Reserve Bank Operations as at the close of business March 

8, 1974, were accepted.  

Mr. McWhirter joined the meeting for the discussion of the 

foregoing item.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the recommendations 

contained in a memorandum from the System Account Manager dated March 

15, 1974, entitled "Proposal to bid for Treasury bills on a 

noncompetitive basis." 

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 19 through April 15, 

1974, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing 

in the period May 2-15, 1974, was authorized.



4/15-16/74 -4

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period March 19 through April 15, 1974, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

Secretary's Note: The following action was taken 
on Tuesday, April 16, 1974.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services declined appreciably 
in the first quarter and that price increases were 
exceptionally large. The decline in economic activity 
reflected mainly the impact of the oil shortage, which is 
being eased by the ending of the oil embargo. In March 
industrial production and manufacturing employment receded 
further, but retail sales strengthened. The unemployment 
rate changed little, remaining slightly above 5 per cent.  
Prices of farm and food products declined in March, but 
increases among industrial commodities were widespread and 
extraordinarily large. Advances in wage rates were moderate 
in the first quarter.  

In March the dollar depreciated further against leading 
foreign currencies, and the balance of payments was in deficit 
on the official settlements basis. The U.S. trade surplus 
diminished again in February as the cost of imported oil 
rose sharply.



4/15-16/74 -5

The narrowly defined money stock increased sharply 
again in March. Broader measures of the money stock rose 
more moderately, however, as net inflows of consumer-type 
time deposits at banks slowed substantially. Business 
short-term credit demands remained strong, with demands at 
banks exceptionally large. To help finance loan growth, 
banks in late March and early April stepped up the issuance 
of large-denomination CD's and also increased borrowings from 
abroad. Both short- and long-term market interest rates have 
risen considerably further in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions conducive to resisting inflationary pressures, 
supporting a resumption of real economic growth, and main
taining equilibrium in the country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of the 
forthcoming Treasury financing and of international and 
domestic financial market developments, the Committee seeks 
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that 
would moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months 
ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 21, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


