











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 20, 1974 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 20, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 1/ 

Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. MacLaury and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Balles, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 2/ 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, 2/ Bryant, Doll,2/ Gramley, 2/ 

Hocter,2/ Parthemos, 2/ Pierce,2/ and 
Reynolds,2/ Associate Economists 

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.  
2/ Attended first part of meeting only.



8/20/74

Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Wonnacott,1/ Associate Director, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Keir 1 / and Wernick,1/ Advisers, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel,1/ Assistant Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Miss Pruitt,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell,1/ Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Baughman, Leonard, and Plant, First 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Chicago, St. Louis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger,1/ Scheld,1/ and Sims, 1/ 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Chicago, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Garvy,1/ Vice President and Senior 
Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Messrs. Jordan 1/ and Green,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and 
Dallas, res ectively 

Messrs. Kaminow 1/ and Kareken,1/ Economic 
Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Ozog,1/ Manager, Acceptances and Securities, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/ Attended first part of meeting only.



8/20/74

The Secretary noted that Chairman Burns had been unavoidably 

detained, and that until his arrival Vice Chairman Hayes would serve 

as Acting Chairman.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 16, 1974, were 

approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the telephone conference 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 5, 1974, 

and for the meeting of the Committee held on July 16, 1974, were 

accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 16 through August 14, 1974, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Chairman Burns joined the meeting prior to the following 

action.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period July 16 through August 19, 1974, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

The following action was taken during the part of the 

meeting in which staff attendance was limited.



8/20/74

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services is changing little 
in the current quarter, following the first-half decline, 
and that price and wage increases are continuing large.  
In July industrial production was unchanged from the 
May-June level, and nonfarm payroll employment declined 
further. The unemployment rate edged up to 5.3 per cent.  
Wholesale prices of farm and food products rose sharply, 
after having declined for 4 months, and increases among 
industrial commodities continued widespread and extraordi
narily large.  

The new Administration has indicated that it will 
give high priority to combating inflation and that it 
will convene a summit meeting of the nation's economic 
leaders to that end.  

In recent weeks the dollar has appreciated some
what further against leading foreign currencies. U.S.  
bank lending to foreign borrowers, especially in Japan, 
has apparently continued large, but inflows of foreign 
capital, particularly from oil-exporting countries, 
have also been large. The foreign trade deficit, 
although smaller in June than in May, widened substan
tially from the first to the second quarter as the value 
of petroleum imports increased.  

The narrowly defined money stock rose only slightly in 
July, after having grown at an annual rate of 6 per cent 
over the first half of the year. Net inflows at banks 
of time deposits other than money market CD's slowed 
somewhat in July, and deposit experience at nonbank insti
tutions worsened materially in July and early August.



8/20/74 -5

Growth in business loans and in total bank credit was 
substantial in July, although the pace of expansion 
slackened after the early part of the month. To finance 
loan growth, banks reduced their holdings of Treasury 
securities and increased their outstanding volume of 
large-denomination CD's by substantial amounts. Interest 
rates on most private market instruments have declined 
a little in recent weeks, and in association with some 
easing of tensions in financial markets, yield spreads 
between prime- and lower-quality issues--which had widened 
sharply--have narrowed. Yields on Government securities, 
particularly Treasury bills, have increased, in part 
because new Treasury offerings relieved a market shortage 
of such securities.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to resisting inflationary 
pressures, supporting a resumption of real economic growth, 
and achieving equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and 
money market conditions consistent with moderate growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be subject to the call of Chairman Burns.  

Secretary's note: On August 22, 1974, the members 
were advised that the Chairman had called for a 
meeting of the Committee to be held on Wednesday, 
September 11, 1974, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


