











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 15, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 15, 1975, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Baughman 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
Jackson 
MacLaury 
Mayo 

Wallich 
Debs, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Atlanta, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 

Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Davis, Green, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations



7/15/75

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel, Assistant Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Klaput, Open Market Secretariat, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Jordan, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Brandt, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities and Acceptances 
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 16-17, 1975, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on May 20, 1975, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 17 through July 14, 1975,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



7/15/75

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements maturing 

in the period from August 5 through 14, 1975, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period June 17 through July 14, 1975, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Holland dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accord

ance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services leveled off in 
the second quarter of the year, as consumer spending 
continued to strengthen. Activity in residential real 
estate markets has picked up in recent months. In June 
industrial production rose slightly, following 8 months 
of decline. The calculated unemployment rate declined 
substantially, but this was attributed mainly to prob
lems of seasonal adjustment. Average wholesale prices 
of industrial commodities rose somewhat more in June 
than in the preceding 3 months, chiefly because of 
increases in prices of petroleum products, but prices 
of farm and food products declined appreciably. From 
the first to the second quarter of the year, the ad
vance in average wage rates continued to moderate.  

In recent weeks the average exchange value of the 
dollar against leading foreign currencies has risen 
considerably, as interest rates on U.S. dollar assets 
increased relative to rates on foreign currency assets 
after mid-June. In May the U.S. foreign trade balance



7/15/75

registered a substantial surplus, as imports dropped 
more sharply than exports. U.S. banks reported a 
sizable increase in claims on foreigners, while 
liabilities to foreigners were reduced slightly.  

Growth in M1, M2, and M3--which was substantial 
in May--was extremely rapid in June, in part because 
of Federal income tax rebates and of supplementary 
social security payments; beginning late in the month, 
after completion of such payments, the aggregates 
weakened. Business demands for short-term credit 
remained unusually weak both at banks and in the 
commercial paper market, while demands in the long
term market continued exceptionally strong. Market 
interest rates in general have risen appreciably in 
recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to stimulating 
economic recovery, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and working toward equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
the forthcoming Treasury financing and of developments 
in domestic and international financial markets, the 
Committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing bank 
reserve and money market conditions over the period 
immediately ahead, provided that growth in monetary 
aggregates appears to be slowing substantially from 
the bulge during the second quarter.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, August 19, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 
Secretary


