











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 18, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 18, 1975, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Francis, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Kansas City, Atlanta, and 
Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Chase, Davis, Green, 

Kareken, Pierce, Reynolds, and Scheld, 
Associate Economists



3/18/75

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Farar, Economist, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Jordan, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, St.  
Louis, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Brandt, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Atlanta 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

The Secretary reported that advices had been received of 

the election by the Federal Reserve Banks of members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the term of one 

year beginning March 1, 1975; that it appeared that such persons 

were legally qualified to serve; and that they had executed their 

oaths of office.

The elected members and alternates were as follows:



3/18/75

David P. Eastburn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, with Robert P. Black, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate; 

Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with Richard A. Debs, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

Ernest T. Baughman, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Dallas, with Darryl R. Francis, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate; 

Bruce K. MacLaury, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Minneapolis, with John J. Balles, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 29, 1976, with the understanding that in the event of 

the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board 

of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee:



3/18/75

Arthur F. Burns 

Alfred Hayes 
Arthur L. Broida 
Murray Altmann 
Normand R. V. Bernard 
Thomas J. O'Connell 
Edward G. Guy 
John Nicoll 
J. Charles Partee 

Stephen H. Axilrod 

Lyle E. Gramley 
Robert Solomon 

Edward G. Boehne, Ralph C. Bryant, 
Samuel B. Chase, Jr., Richard G.  
Davis, Ralph T. Green, John 

Kareken, James L. Pierce, 
John E. Reynolds, and 
Karl O. Scheld

Chairman 
Vice Chairman 
Secretary 
Deputy Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Deputy General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Senior Economist 
Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Economist (Domestic Business) 
Economist (International Finance) 

Associate Economists

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market 

Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee after February 29, 1976.  

By unanimous vote, the action by Committee members on 

March 10, 1975, increasing from $1 billion to $2 billion the dollar 

limit specified in paragraph 2 of Authorization for Domestic Open 

Market Operations on System holdings of short-term certificates of 

indebtedness purchased directly from the Treasury, was ratified.  

With Mr. Holland dissenting, the Committee voted to maintain the 

dollar limit specified in paragraph 2 of Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations at $2 billion for a period of one year from 

the date of this meeting, unless in the interim the Committee 

should decide otherwise.



3/18/75 -5

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 

19, 1975, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 19 through March 

17, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 

months of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium 

maturing on April 17 and 24, 1975, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period February 19 through March 17, 1975, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Bucher, Eastburn, and Sheehan dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions for 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services is continuing to fall 
sharply in the current quarter. In February industrial 
production and employment declined substantially further.  
The unemployment rate was unchanged, at 8.2 per cent, as 
the civilian labor force declined sharply. Average whole
sale prices of industrial commodities rose moderately again 
in February, and prices of farm and food products declined



3/18/75

sharply further. The advance in average wage rates, 
although large, remained well below the increases of 
last spring and summer.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar declined 
in February, but it strengthened somewhat in early 
March, as short-term interest rates abroad fell further 
and as market attitudes toward the dollar improved some
what. In January the U.S. foreign trade deficit was 
only moderately above the rate in the fourth quarter 
of 1974 despite a large bulge in recorded imports of 
oil. Net outflows of capital reported by banks 
continued large as foreigners withdrew deposits.  

The narrowly defined money stock, which had declined 
sharply in January, expanded considerably in February, 
and broader measures of the money stock grew at substantial 
rates. Net inflows of consumer-type time and savings 
deposits were particularly large. Large-denomination 
CD's outstanding contracted in February and total bank 
credit showed little net change. Business demands for 
short-term credit remained weak, both at banks and in 
the commercial paper market, while demands in the long
term market continued exceptionally strong. Since mid
February short-term market interest rates have declined 
a little while longer-term yields have risen. Federal 
Reserve discount rates were reduced from 6-3/4 to 
6-1/4 per cent in early March.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to stimulating economic 
recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures and 
working toward equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with more rapid 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead 
than has occurred in recent months.



3/18/75

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the Committee voted to amend 

subsection 271.5(a) of the Rules Regarding Availability of Information 

as indicated below, effective March 24, 1975: 

SECTION 271.5 - DEFERMENT OF AVAILABILITY OF 
CERTAIN INFORMATION 

(a) Deferred availability of information. - In some 

instances, certain types of information of the Committee are not 

published in the Federal Register or made available for public 

inspection or copying until after such period of time as the Com

mittee may determine to be reasonably necessary to avoid the effects 

described in paragraph (b) of this section or as may otherwise be 

necessary to prevent impairment of the effective discharge of the 

Committee's statutory responsibilities. For example, the Committee's 

domestic policy directive adopted at each meeting of the Committee is 

published in the Federal Register approximately 45 days after the 

date of its adoption; and no information in the records of the Committee 

relating to the adoption of any such directive is made available for 

public inspection or coyping before it is published in the Federal 

Register or is otherwise released to the public by the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed its intention 

that the memoranda of discussion prepared for individual Committee 

meetings are not to be made available to the public until after the 

Committee has authorized their transfer to the National Archives.



3/18/75

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of review

ing such matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On February 28, 1975, certain con
tinuing authorizations of the Committee, listed below, 
had been distributed by the Secretary with the advice 
that, in accordance with procedures approved by the 
Committee, they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March organization meeting to 
give members an opportunity to raise any questions 
they had concerning them. Members were asked to so 
indicate if they wished to have any of the authori
zations in question placed on the agenda for conside
ration at this meeting, and no such requests were 
received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to whom 
weekly reports on open market operations may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued operation of 
the Committee and for certain actions by the 
Reserve Banks during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System 
Open Market Account.  

6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of 
Federal Reserve Banks.  

7. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information,1/ and Rules of Procedure.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed its intention 

that the memoranda of discussion prepared for individual Committee 

meetings are not to be made available to the public until after the 

Committee has authorized their transfer to the National Archives.  

1/ As recorded above, an amendment to Section 271.5(a) of the 
Rules Regarding Availability of Information was made at this meeting.



3/18/75

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open 

Market Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to 
carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at 
a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including 
securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that 

are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal 
and interest by, any agency of the United States in the open 
market, from or to securities dealers and foreign and inter

national accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for 
the System Open Market Account at market prices and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U.S. Government and Federal agency 
securities with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to 

allow them to mature without replacement; provided that the 

aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 
held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the close 

of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which 

action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall 
not be increased or decreased by more than $3.0 billion during the 

period commencing with the opening of business on the day follow

ing such meeting and ending with the close of business on the day 
of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell in the open market, from or to acceptance 
dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at 

market discount rates, prime bankers' acceptances with maturi

ties of up to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) 
arise out of the current shipment of goods between countries or 
within the United States, or (2) arise out of the storage with

in the United States of goods under contract of sale or expected 
to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or 
similar document conveying title to the underlying goods; pro
vided that the aggregate amount of bankers' acceptances held 
at any one time shall not exceed $1 billion;



3/18/75

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that are 
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and 
interest by, any agency of the United States, and prime bankers' 
acceptances of the types authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, 
from nonbank dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates 
that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying 
reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individ
ual dealers; provided that in the event Government securities 
or agency issues covered by any such agreement are not repur
chased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal 
thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the 
event bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement are 
not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be held 
by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or under special circumstances, 
such as when the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other 
Federal Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury for 
its own account (with discretion, in cases where it seems desi
rable, to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve 
Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates of 
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for the 
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the 
rate charged on such certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 
per cent below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York at the time of such purchases, and provided further 
that the total amount of such certificates held at any one time 
by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open market opera
tions, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S. Government securities 
held in the System Open Market Account to Government securities 
dealers and to banks participating in Government securities 
clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, 
under such instructions as the Committee may specify from time 
to time.

-10-



3/18/75

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market 
Account, to the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's 
foreign currency directive and express authorizations by the 
Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home and abroad, 
including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization Fund 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, 
with foreign monetary authorities, and with the Bank for 
International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in paragraph A 
above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, including curren
cies purchased from the Stabilization Fund, and sold forward 
to the Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or forward, up to the 
amounts necessary to fulfill other forward commitments;

-11-



3/18/75

(3) Additional currencies purchased spot or forward, 
up to the amount necessary for System operations to exert a 
market influence but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered or guaranteed 
basis in terms of the dollar, under agreement with the Bank of 
England, up to $200 million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments undertaken 

under paragraph A above to deliver foreign currencies, up to the 

following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign currencies to 
the Stabilization Fund, up to the limit specified in paragraph 

1B(1) above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to deliver foreign 

currencies, up to $550 million equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign 

banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency arrange

ments listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings by 

either party to any such arrangement shall be fully liquidated 
within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time was 

first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 

circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 

arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System Open Market 

Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months with the 

following foreign banks, which are among those designated 

by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under 

Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks 

and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew 

such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000

-12-



3/18/75

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 2,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 2,000 
Bank of Mexico 180 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 1,400 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 
European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1,250 

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System swap com
mitments may be purchased from the foreign central bank drawn 
on, at the same exchange rate as that employed in the drawing 
to be liquidated. Apart from any such purchases at the rate 
of the drawing, all transactions in foreign currencies under
taken under paragraph 1(A) above shall, unless otherwise 
expressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing 
market rates and no attempt shall be made to establish rates 
that appear to be out of line with underlying market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign central 
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions.  
In making operating arrangements with foreign central banks 
on System holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York shall not commit itself to maintain any specific 
balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  
Any agreements or understandings concerning the administration 
of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 
review and approval to the Committee.

-13-



3/18/75

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as 
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances.  
Such investments shall be in accordance with Section 14(e) 
of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. The Subcommittee named in Section 272.4(c) of the 
Committee's rules of procedure is authorized to act on behalf 
of the Committee when it is necessary to enable the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to engage in foreign currency 
operations before the Committee can be consulted. All actions 
taken by the Subcommittee under this paragraph shall be re
ported promptly to the Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice Chairman of 
the Committee, and in the absence of both, the Vice Chairman 
of the Board of Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into 
any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of 
the Treasury about the division of responsibility for 
foreign currency operations between the System and the 
Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency operations, and 
to consult with the Secretary on such policy matters as may 
relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; and 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports 
and information to the National Advisory Council on Inter
national Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency 
operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign 

currency operations for System Account in accordance with 
paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of 
Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships of Federal 
Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

-14-



3/18/75

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown 

below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in foreign 
currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar in inter
national exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of international payments 
more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with central banks 
of other countries having convertible currencies, with the 
International Monetary Fund, and with other international 
payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements in exchange 
rates, within the limits stated in the International Monetary 
Fund Agreement or established by central bank practices, re
flect the interaction of underlying economic forces and thus 
serve as efficient guides to current financial decisions, 
private and public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international liquidity in 
accordance with the needs of an expanding world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee, System operations in foreign currencies shall 
be undertaken only when necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the flows of 
international payments, if such fluctuations (1) are deemed 
to reflect transitional market unsettlement or other tempo
rary forces and therefore are expected to be reversed in the 
foreseeable future; and (2) are deemed to be disequilibrating 
or otherwise to have potentially destabilizing effects on 
U.S. or foreign official reserves or on exchange markets, for 
example, by occasioning market anxieties, undesirable specu
lative activity, or excessive leads and lags in international 
payments;

-15-



3/18/75

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in spot 
exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums and discounts 
judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever supply or demand 
persists in influencing exchange rates in one direction, 
System transactions should be modified or curtailed unless 
upon review and reassessment of the situation the Committee 
directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions in exchange 
markets. Special factors that might make for exchange mar
ket instabilities include (1) responses to short-run increases 
in international political tension, (2) differences in phasing 
of international economic activity that give rise to unusually 
large interest rate differentials between major markets, and 
(3) market rumors of a character likely to stimulate specula
tive transactions. Whenever exchange market instability 
threatens to produce disorderly conditions, System transactions 
may be undertaken if the Manager reaches a judgment that they 
may help to reestablish supply and demand balance at a level 
more consistent with the prevailing flow of underlying pay
ments. In such cases, the Manager shall consult as soon as 
practicable with the Committee or, in an emergency, with the 
members of the Subcommittee designated for that purpose in 
paragraph 6 of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations; 
and 

D. To adjust System balances within the limits established 
in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations in light 
of probable future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements are appropriate 
when necessary to obtain foreign currencies for the purposes 
stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
transactions in forward exchange, either outright or in con
junction with spot transactions, may be undertaken only (i) 
to prevent forward premiums or discounts from giving rise to 
disequilibrating movements of short-term funds; (ii) to 
minimize speculative disturbances; (iii) to supplement exist
ing market supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly 
as a means of encouraging the retention or accumulation of 
dollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to allow

-16-



3/18/75

greater flexibility in covering System or Treasury 
commitments, including commitments under swap arrange
ments, and to facilitate operations of the Stabilization 

Fund; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for the 
settlement of System or Treasury commitments denominated 
in other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for System 
holdings of foreign currencies.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Monday and Tuesday, April 14 and 15, 1975, 

beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-17-


