











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 19, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 19, 1975, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
Jackson 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles and Winn, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Atlanta, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Guy, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Bryant, Green, Kareken, Reynolds, and 

Scheld, Associate Economists



8/19/75

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Brenneman,1/ Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. McWhirter,2/ Associate Director, Division 
of Federal Reserve Bank Operations, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struble, Chief, Government Finance Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board 

of Governors 
Mr. Maroni,2/ Senior Economist, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Rankin and Leonard, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 

St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Jordan, Doll, 
and Sims, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, St. Louis, 
Kansas City, and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Hoskins and Hocter, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 

Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Sandberg, Thunberg, and Cox, Assistant 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, New York, and Atlanta, respectively 

1/ Left meeting before any actions were taken.  
2/ Participated in meeting at point indicated.



8/19/75

By unanimous vote, Paul A. Volcker was elected Vice 

Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee, effective imme

diately, to serve until the election of his successor at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 1976, with 

the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance of 

his official connection with the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York he would cease to have any official connection with the 

Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the action taken 

by members on August 6, 1975, increasing from $2 billion to $3 

billion the dollar limit on System Account holdings of certificates 

purchased directly from the Treasury, specified in paragraph 2 of 

Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, for the period 

through close of business August 19, 1975.  

The report of examination of the System Open Market 

Account, made by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank 

Operations as at the close of business April 25, 1975, was 

accepted.  

Mr. McWhirter joined the meeting for the discussion of 

the foregoing item.



8/19/75

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 15, 1975, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee on June 16-17, 1975, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period July 15 through August 

18, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized an increase 

of $180 million, to $360 million, in the Federal Reserve swap 

arrangement with the Bank of Mexico, and the conforming amendment 

to paragraph 2 of the authorization for System foreign currency 

operations, subject to the understanding that the action would 

become effective upon approval by Chairman Burns after a final 

review of technical details.  

Secretary's note: Chairman Burns approved 
the increase on August 29, 1975.  

Mr. Maroni joined the meeting for the discussion 

of the foregoing item.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period July 15 through August 18, 1975, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.



8/19/75

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that output of goods and services bottomed out in the 

second quarter and is likely to increase appreciably in 
the current quarter. In July retail sales expanded 
further and industrial production rose moderately for 
the second consecutive month, following 8 months of 
decline. Conditions in labor markets improved further: 
employment increased, the unemployment rate declined 
from 8.6 to 8.4 per cent, and the average workweek in 
manufacturing lengthened considerably. Average whole
sale prices rose sharply in July, chiefly because of 
increases in prices of agricultural and energy products.  
The advance in average wage rates has continued to 
moderate over recent months.  

In recent weeks the average exchange value of the 
dollar against leading foreign currencies has risen 
considerably further, reflecting additional increases 
in interest rates on U.S. dollar assets relative to 
rates on foreign currency assets. In June the U.S.  
foreign trade surplus rose substantially, as exports 
increased sharply while imports declined slightly further.  

In July M1 increased relatively little and growth 
in M2 and M3 slowed substantially, following a sharp 
increase in depositors' balances in May and June in 
connection with Federal income tax rebates and supple
mentary social security payments. Market interest rates 
in general have risen appreciably further in recent 
weeks, in association with indications of strengthening 
economic activity, more rapid inflation, and large cur
rent and prospective Treasury financing requirements.  
Corporate bond offerings moderated somewhat in July but 
State and local government offerings continued large.  
Financial markets reflected considerable uncertainty 
stemming from New York City financing problems. Busi
ness demands for short-term credit remained weak, 
although less so than in earlier months.



8/19/75

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to stimulating economic 
recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures and 
contributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on September 16, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


