











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 19, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, February 19, 1975, 

at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Holland 1/ 
Kimbrel 
Mitchel 
Sheehan 2/ 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles, Eastburn, and Francis, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 

Banks of San Francisco, Philadelphia, 
and St. Louis, respectively

Broida, Secretary 
Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
O'Connell, General Counsel

Entered meeting at point indicated.  
Left meeting at point indicated.



2/19/75

Mr. Guy,1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod,1/ Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Solomon,1/ Economist (International 

Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt,1/ Bryant 1 / Davis,1/ Doll 1/ 

Hocter,1/ Parthemos,1/ and Reynolds,1/ 

Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes,1/ Manager, System Open Market 

Account 

Mr. Pardee,1/ Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir,1/ Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell,1/ Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger,1/ Boehne,1 / Scheld,1/ and 
Jordan,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Green,1/ Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Duprey,1/ Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Keran,1/ Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Ozog,1/ Manager, Acceptances and Securities 

Department, Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York 

By unanimous vote, the resignation of Charles A. Coombs as 

Special Manager for Foreign Currency Operations was accepted, effect

ive immediately.

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.



2/19/75

By unanimous vote, Section 5 of the Rules of Organization 

was amended to read as follows, effective immediately: 

Manager and Deputies. The Committee selects a 
Manager of the System Open Market Account, a Deputy 
Manager for Domestic Operations, and a Deputy Manager 

for Foreign Operations. All of the foregoing shall 
be satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank selected 
by the Committee to execute open market transactions 

for such Account, and all shall serve at the pleasure 

of the Committee. The Manager or his Deputies keep 
the Committee informed on market conditions and on 

transactions they have made and render such reports 

as the Committee may specify.  

By unanimous vote, subsections (d) and (e) of Section 272.3 

of the Rules of Procedure were amended to read as follows, effective 

immediately: 

Section 272.3--Meetings 

(d) Attendance at meetings.--Attendance at Committee 

meetings is restricted to members and alternate members of 

the Committee, the Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks who 

are not at the time members or alternates, staff officers 

of the Committee, the Manager and Deputy Managers, and such 

other advisers as the Committee may invite from time to time.  

(e) Meeting agendas.--The Secretary, in consultation 

with the Chairman, prepares an agenda of matters to be dis

cussed at each meeting and the Secretary transmits the 

agenda to the members of the Committee within a reasonable 
time in advance of such meeting. In general, the agendas 
include approval of minutes of actions and acceptance of 
memoranda of discussion for previous meetings; reports by 

the Manager or Deputy Managers on open market operations 

since the previous meeting, and ratification by the Committee 
of such operations; reports by Economists on, and Committee 
discussion of, the economic and financial situation and 
outlook; Committee discussion of monetary policy and action 
with respect thereto; and such other matters as may be 
considered necessary.



2/19/75

By unanimous vote, paragraph 2(C) of the Foreign Currency 

Directive was amended to read as follows, effective immediately: 

To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions in exchange 
markets. Special factors that might make for exchange 
market instabilities include (1) responses to short-run 
increases in international political tension, (2) dif
ferences in phasing of international economic activity 
that give rise to unusually large interest rate dif
ferentials between major markets, and (3) market rumors 
of a character likely to stimulate speculative trans
actions. Whenever exchange market instability threatens 
to produce disorderly conditions, System transactions may 
be undertaken if the Manager reaches a judgment that they 
may help to reestablish supply and demand balance at a 

level more consistent with the prevailing flow of under

lying payments. In such cases, the Manager shall consult 

as soon as practicable with the Committee or, in an emer

gency, with the members of the Subcommittee designated 

for that purpose in paragraph 6 of the Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D. Sternlight, and 

Scott E. Pardee were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee 

in the capacities of Manager of the System Open Market Account, Deputy 

Manager for Domestic Operations, and Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations, respectively, on the understanding that their selection 

was subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice was subsequently received 

that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Mr. Holland, and staff members who were not present at the 

outset, entered the meeting prior to the following actions.



2/19/75

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee on January 30, 1975, amending a provision of para

graph 2 of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations by 

striking the word "if" in the clause "or, if the New York Bank is 

closed," and inserting in its place the words "under special circum

stances, such as when",was ratified.  

With this amendment, paragraph 2 reads as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, under 
special circumstances, such as when the New York Reserve 
Bank is closed, any other Federal Reserve Bank, to pur
chase directly from the Treasury for its own account 
(with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to 
issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve 
Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates 
of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time 
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; pro
vided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate of 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of 
such purchases, and provided further that the total 
amount of such certificates held at any one time by 
the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed $1 billion.  

By unanimous vote, Section 270.4(d) of the Regulation 

Relating to Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve Banks was 

amended, effective January 30, 1975, by striking the word "if" in 

the clause "or, if that Bank is closed," and inserting in its place 

the words "under special circumstances, such as when...." 

With this amendment, Section 270.4(d) reads as follows:



2/19/75

In accordance with such limitations, terms, and 
conditions as are prescribed by law and in authoriza
tions and directives issued by the Committee, the 
Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (or, under 
special circumstances, such as when that Bank is 
closed, any other Federal Reserve Bank) is authorized 
and directed, for its own account or the System Open 
Market Account, to purchase directly from the United 
States such amounts of Government securities as may be 
necessary from time to time for the temporary accommo
dation of the Treasury Department.  

By unanimous vote, the action of members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on February 18, 1975, incorporating a fee 

schedule as subsection 271.4(f) in the Committee's amended Rules 

Regarding the Availability of Information,was ratified. The 

subsection read as follows: 

Fee Schedule.--A person requesting access to or 
copies of particular records shall pay the costs of 
searching and copying such records at the rate of $10 
per hour for searching and 10 cents per standard page 
for copying. With respect to information obtainable 
only by processing through a computer or other informa
tion systems program, a person requesting such informa
tion shall pay a fee not to exceed the direct and rea
sonable cost of retrieval and production of the information 
requested. Detailed schedules of such charges are available 
upon request from the Secretary of the Committee. Documents 
may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge where 
the Secretary of the Committee or such person as he may des
ignate determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in 
the public interest because furnishing the information can 

be considered as primarily benefiting the general public, 
or where total charges are less than $2.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 20-21, 1975, were

approved.



2/19/75

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on January 20-21, 1975, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 21 through February 

18, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period January 21 through February 18, 1975, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Sheehan left the meeting prior to the following action.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services is continuing to fall 
sharply in the current quarter. In January declines in 
industrial production and employment were large and 
widespread for the third consecutive month. The unem
ployment rate rose a full percentage point to 8.2 per 
cent. Average wholesale prices of industrial commodities, 
which were unchanged in December,rose moderately in 
January, and prices of farm and food products declined 
further. In recent months increases in average wage rates 
have moderated, although they have still been large.  

The decline in the foreign exchange value of the 
dollar was arrested in early February by concerted central 
bank intervention and a sharp decline in European interest 
rates, but in recent days the dollar has declined somewhat.



2/19/75

In December the U S. foreign trade deficit increased, 
but it was smaller in the fourth quarter as a whole 
than in the third.  

The narrowly defined money stock, after having 
grown at an annual rate of about 4-1/2 per cent over 
the fourth quarter of 1974, declined sharply in January.  
However, net inflows of consumer-type time and savings 
deposits at banks and nonbank thrift institutions were 
large, and broader measures of the money stock continued 
to expand. Business demands for short-term credit have 
weakened in recent months, both at banks and in the 
commercial paper market, while demands in the long-term 
market have been exceptionally strong. Since mid-January 
short-term market interest rates have fallen substantially 
further, and yields on long-term securities also have 
declined. Federal Reserve discount rates were reduced 
from 7-1/4 to 6-3/4 per cent in early February.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to cushioning recessionary 
tendencies and stimulating economic recovery, while resisting 
inflationary pressures and working toward equilibrium in the 
country's balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and 
money market conditions consistent with more rapid growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead than has 
occurred in recent months.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, March 18, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


