











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 20, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1975, at 

9:30 a. m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Francis, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Kansas City, Atlanta, and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod,1/ Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, 1/ Economist (Domestic Business) 
Mr. Solomon,1/ Economist (International Finance)

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.



5/20/75

Messrs. Boehne,1/ Bryant,1/ Davis 1/ 
Green,1/ Kareken,1/ Reynolds,1/ and 
Scheld,1/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne,1/Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Rippey,2/ Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir,1/ Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Parar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell,1/ Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger,1/ Parthemos,1/ Jordan,1/ 
and Doll,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter 1/ and Brandt,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Atlanta 

Mr. Keran,1/ Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Meek,1/ Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

With Mr. Bucher dissenting, the Committee decided to decline 

to comply with the request of April 11, 1975, from Congressman Wright 

Patman, Chairman of the Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy of 

the House Committee on Banking, Currency and Housing, for the memo

randa of discussion at FOMC meetings in the years 1971-74, inclusive.  

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.  

2/ Left meeting at point indicated.



5/20/75

Secretary's Note: On June 3, 1975, the following 
letter was sent to Congressman Patman over the 
signature of Chairman Burns: 

Dear Mr. Chairman: 

Your request for the memoranda of discussion for meetings 
of the Federal Open Market Committee ("FOMC") in the years 
1971-74, inclusive, has been considered carefully by the 
Committee. In this connection, the FOMC has given full and 
deliberate consideration to the oversight responsibility 
that the Congress in general and your Subcommittee in partic
ular have with respect to its functions and operations.  

I might note at the outset that, apart from the memoranda 
which you request, there are three regularly available sources 
of information about the operations of the FOMC. One consists 
of weekly statistical releases published by the Board, which 
promptly and fully disclose the results of the Committee's open 
market operations. The most important of such weekly releases 
are the Federal Reserve Statement (H.4.1), the Weekly Summary 
of Banking and Credit Measures (H.9), and Money Stock Measures 
(H.6).  

A second source is the record of policy actions, which is 
prepared pursuant to a requirement of the Federal Reserve Act.  
These policy records disclose the Committee's intentions with 
respect to open market policy, as reflected in the actions 
reported. They include all votes, by name, cast by members 
of the Committee in connection with the determination of open 
market policies; the reasons underlying the policy actions, 
including descriptions of then-current and prospective 
economic developments and of conditions in domestic and 
international financial markets; and statements of the reasons 
for any dissenting votes.  

A third source, the minutes of actions, indicates all 
votes taken by the FOMC--including those relating to procedural 
matters as well as those relating to policy questions. The 
minute entries for policy actions are made available for public 
inspection on the same schedule as the policy records; the 
minute entries for most other actions are made available promptly 
after the meeting.



5/20/75

To this copious body of information concerning the 
operations of the FOMC, the memoranda of discussion add 
essentially one further type of material: reports of the 
deliberations through which the Committee reaches its 
decisions on policy and procedural matters. As you are 
aware, there is no legal requirement that such memoranda 
of FOMC meetings be prepared. However, they have proved 
valuable to the FOMC and its staff in connection with the 
ongoing work of the Committee, and we believe they consti

tute a useful historical record. For these reasons, they 

are maintained by the Committee and made available to the 
public after a time lag determined by the FOMC.  

The memoranda of discussion reflect the unfettered, 
spontaneous expressions of FOMC member views and opinions.  
Some of these expressions may be put forth primarily to elicit 
discussion and clarification of issues rather than as statements 
of firmly held views. Some may turn out to be inconclusive 
with respect to the FOMC's ultimate decisions, and others at 
odds with those decisions. All such expressions do, however, 
contribute to the decisional process.  

The informal "give and take" debate at FOMC meetings, as 

substantially reflected in the memoranda of discussion, in
volves the decision-making process utilized by the legislative, 
executive, and judicial branches of our Government since the 
founding of the Republic. Each branch of Government daily 
encounters the situation where individual opinions and advice, 
expressed and conveyed in the decision-making process, are 
re-thought, altered, or reversed on the hearing of opinions 
and views of other participants. Premature public exposure 
of such deliberations, whether involving legislative, 
executive, judicial, or administrative bodies, preceding as 
they do the official decisions and actions of such bodies, 
would quickly and certainly make such decisional process 
sterile. If the FOMC memoranda of discussion were to be 
released prematurely, the Committee would be faced with the 
choice of permitting a destructive diminution of candor in 
its deliberations or of preserving the members' ability to 
speak their minds freely and fully by terminating the prepara
tion of such memoranda. Neither alternative would be in the 
public interest.



5/20/75 -5

In addition, the matters commonly discussed at FOMC 
meetings include ongoing or prospective transactions in 
foreign exchange markets, the premature disclosure of which 
could have both immediate and longer-term adverse impact on 
international flows of funds. Moreover, references are 
frequently made to highly sensitive matters involving, or 
statements by or about, foreign central banks and governments.  
Clearly, continued FOMC access to such important and relevant 
communications must not be jeopardized by even a suggestion 
of untimely dissemination.  

In view of these considerations, the Committee has concluded 
that it must respectfully decline to comply with your request 
for the 1971-74 memoranda of discussion.  

The Committee's decision, premised in major part on its 
need to preserve the practice of free and uninhibited member 
contribution to discussions, reflects a legal position the 
concept of which was reaffirmed by the United States Supreme 
Court as recently as one month ago in the case of NLRB v. Sears, 
Roebuck, & Co., 95 S Ct. 1504, 1516 (1975). Justice White, 
speaking for the Court with respect to the need to protect 
the decision-making processes of government agencies, cited 
the Court's earlier position that "...experience teaches that 
those who expect public dissemination of their remarks may well 
temper candor with a concern for appearances...to the detriment 
of the decision-making process." 

As Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee I endorse 
whole-heartedly the foregoing principle.  

Mr. Rippey left and staff members who were not present at 

the outset entered the meeting prior to the following actions.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the action taken 

by members on April 17, 1975, revising the procedures for allocation 

of securities in the System Open Market Account to read as follows,

effective May 1, 1975:



5/20/75

1. Securities in the System Open Market Account shall 
be reallocated at least once each year as determined by the 
Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations and the 
Manager of the System Open Market Account for the purpose 
of settling Interdistrict clearings and approximately 
equalizing for each Federal Reserve Bank the ratio of gold 
certificate holdings to Federal Reserve notes outstanding.  

2. Until the next reallocation, the Account shall be 
apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in 
Paragraph 1.  

3. Profits and losses on the sale of securities from 
the account shall be allocated on the day of delivery of the 
securities sold on the basis of each Bank's current holdings 
at the opening of business on that day.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the action taken 

by members on April 30, 1975, increasing from $3 billion to $4 

billion the limit specified in paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization 

for Domestic Open Market Operations on changes between meetings 

in System Account holdings of U.S. Government and Federal agency 

securities, effective April 30, 1975, through the close of 

business May 20, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee decided to maintain the 

dollar limit specified in paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations at $4 billion for the period 

through the close of business June 17, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 14-15, 1975,

were approved.



5/20/75

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on March 18, 1975, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period April 15 through May 

19, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period April 15 through May 19, 1975, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that real output of goods and services--after having 

fallen sharply for two quarters--is declining much less 

rapidly in the current quarter. In April the pace of 

the decline in industrial production moderated consid

erably further, and total employment rose. However, 
the unemployment rate increased again, from 8.7 to 8.9 

per cent, as the civilian labor force increased consid

erably. Average wholesale prices of industrial commodi

ties changed little in April, as in March; prices of farm 
and food products rose sharply, following several months 

of large decreases. The advance in average wage rates 

so far this year has been considerably less rapid than the 

increase during the second half of 1974.



5/20/75

The foreign exchange value of the dollar has 
declined somewhat since mid-April, but it is still 
above the low of early March. U.S. imports fell 
sharply in the first quarter, and the foreign trade 
balance was in substantial surplus, in contrast to the 
deficits of preceding quarters. Net outflows of funds 
through banks were large in the first quarter, as loans 
to foreigners continued to increase while liabilities 
to foreigners declined.  

Both M1 and M2 grew moderately in April, but M3 
grew more rapidly as inflows of deposits to nonbank 
thrift institutions remained substantial. Business 
demands for short-term credit remained weak, both at 
banks and in the commercial paper market, while demands 
in the long-term market continued strong. Since mid
April short-term market interest rates have declined 
somewhat. Most longer-term yields have changed little 
on balance, and mortgage rates have risen. Federal 
Reserve discount rates were reduced from 6-1/4 to 6 
per cent in mid-May.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions conducive to stimulating 
economic recovery, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and working toward equilibrium in the country's 
balance of payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to maintain about the pre
vailing money market conditions over the period immedi
ately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates generally 
appear to be growing within currently acceptable short
run ranges of tolerance.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Monday and Tuesday, June 16 and 17, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


