











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 16, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 16, 1975, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
Jackson 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Francis, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Atlanta, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Davis, Green, Kareken, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists



9/16/75

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and Doll, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Snellings, Brandt, and Balbach, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 19, 1975, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on July 15, 1975, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 19 through September 15, 

1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.



9/16/75

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, maturing on 

October 17 and 24, 1975, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period August 19 through September 15, 1975, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that output of goods and services--which had turned up 
in the second quarter--is increasing appreciably further 
in the current quarter. In August industrial production 
and nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a faster pace 
than in July, and the average workweek in manufacturing 

continued to lengthen. The unemployment rate remained 
at 8.4 per cent, as the civilian labor force increased 
about as much as total employment. Retail sales apparently 
declined slightly, following 4 months of large gains.  
The index of wholesale prices of industrial commodities 
rose somewhat more in August than in July, chiefly be
cause of increases in prices of energy products; prices 
of farm and food products declined slightly. The advance 
in average wage rates over recent months has been some
what less rapid than in 1974 and early 1975.  

In recent weeks the exchange value of the dollar 
against leading foreign currencies has risen somewhat 
further. In July the U.S. foreign trade surplus declined 

from the very high second-quarter level, as imports rose



9/16/75

sharply. Bank-reported capital movements showed a net 
inflow, in contrast to the net outflows of earlier months, 
while U.S. liabilities to foreign official agencies, which 
earlier had been rising, declined.  

Expansion in M1 picked up somewhat in August from 
the low July rate. Growth in M2 and M3 slowed further, 
however, as inflows of consumer-type time and savings 
deposits to banks and to nonbank thrift institutions 
continued to moderate, reflecting in part the increased 
attractiveness of alternative investments. Interest 
rates on short-term securities and on longer-term 
Treasury and corporate securities have shown little 
net change in recent weeks, except that longer-term 
yields adjusted upward following the Treasury's Septem
ber 10 announcement of its sizable borrowing requirements 
over the rest of this year. Yields on State and local 
government securities rose to new highs in early 
September, as a result of widespread concern about 
possible repercussions of New York City's financial 
crisis; on September 9 a State program to assist the 
City was enacted.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to stimulating economic 
recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures and 
contributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on October 21, 1975, at 9:00 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


