











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 21, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 21, 1975, at 

9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
Jackson 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 

of Kansas City, Atlanta, and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 

Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 

Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Davis, Green, Kareken, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists



10/21/75

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Zeisel,1 / Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance Board of Governors 

Mr. Wendel,1/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 

Governors 
Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 
Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 

Assistant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, and Doll, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Richmond, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, and Balbach, Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, Atlanta, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal 

Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Ms. Tschinkel, Adviser, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/ Joined the meeting at point indicated.



10/21/75

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the action taken 

by members on October 3, 1975, increasing from $3 billion to $4 

billion the limit specified in paragraph 1(a) of Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations, on changes between meetings in 

System holdings of U.S. Government and Federal agency securities, 

effective October 3, 1975, through the close of business October 21, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 16, 1975, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, the memoranda of discussion for the meetings 

of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 19 and September 

16, 1975, were accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 16 through October 

20, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period September 16 through October 20, 1975, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss National 

Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing in the 

period November 5-14, 1975, was authorized.



10/21/75

Messrs. Zeisel and Wendel entered the meeting after the 

foregoing item and left prior to the following item.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that output of goods and services--which had turned up 
in the second quarter--increased sharply further in the 
third quarter. In recent months retail sales have been 
maintained at the higher levels reached in early summer, 
and industrial production has strengthened progressively.  
Nonfarm payroll employment continued to expand in September, 
and the unemployment rate edged down from 8.4 to 8.3 per 
cent. In September, as in August, average wholesale prices 
of industrial commodities rose somewhat faster than earlier 
in the year, in part because of increases in prices of 
energy products; prices of farm and food products rose 
sharply in September. The advance in average wage rates 
in recent months has remained somewhat less rapid than in 
1974 and early 1975.  

After rising further in late September, the exchange 
value of the dollar against leading foreign currencies has 
declined to about its mid-September level. In August the 
U.S. foreign trade surplus increased as agricultural exports 
rose. Bank-reported private capital movements showed a 
further net inflow, while U.S. liabilities to foreign 
official agencies declined again.  

M1 rose slightly on the average in September but 
declined in the latter part of the month and in early 
October. From the second to the third quarter, however, 
M1 grew at a 6.9 per cent annual rate. Inflows of con
sumer type-time and savings deposits to banks and to



10/21/75

nonbank thrift institutions continued to moderate in 
September, reflecting in part the attractiveness of 
alternative investments, and growth in M2 and M 3 slowed 
further. Although conditions in markets for State and 
local government securities continued to be adversely 
affected by New York's financial problems, most short
and long-term interest rates have declined in recent 
weeks. On October 15 the Board of Governors announced 
a reduction of member bank reserve requirements on 
long-term time deposits.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures 
and contributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 

markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and 
money market conditions consistent with moderate growth 
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on November 18, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


