











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 16-17, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, June 16-17, 

1975, beginning at 3:30 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Baughman 
Bucher 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Wallich 
Debs, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Balles, Black, Francis, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Kansas City, Atlanta, and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 

Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business)



6/16-17/75

Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Davis, Green, 
Kareken, Reynolds, and Scheld, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 

Mr. Allison,1/ Secretary of the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Keir, Kichline,1/ and Zeisel,1/ 
Advisers, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Pizer,1/ Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner,1/ Associate Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Peret,1/ Taylor,1/ and Wendel,1/ 
Assistant Advisers, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Siegman,1/ Assistant Adviser, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Beeman,1/ Chief, National Income, Labor 
Force and Trade Section, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 

Governors 

Mr. Smith,1/ Chief, Financial Markets Section, 

Division of International Finance, Board 

of Governors 

Mr. Enzler,1/ Senior Economist, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Annable, 1/ Economist, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Fleisig,1/ Hooper,1/ and Wilson, 1/ 

Economists, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors

1/ Attended Monday session only.



6/16-17/75

Mrs. Cooper,1/ Economic Assistant, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assist
ant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Jordan, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, 
St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter and Brandt, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities and Acceptances 
Division, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's Note: The actions listed immediately 

below were taken on Monday, June 16, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on May 20, 1975, were 

approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee on April 14-15, 1975, was accepted.  

Secretary's Note: All of the actions listed below 
were taken on Tuesday, June 17, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 20 through June 16, 1975, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

1/ Attended Monday session only.



6/16- 17/75

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium maturing on 

July 17 and 24, 1975, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period May 20 through June 16, 1975, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Bucher and Coldwell dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions for the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real output of goods and services--after having fallen 
sharply for two quarters--has leveled off in the current 
quarter. In May retail sales strengthened considerably.  
Industrial production declined slightly further, but 
total employment advanced for the second consecutive 
month. The unemployment rate increased again, from 
8.9 to 9.2 per cent, as the civilian labor force rose 
substantially further. The rise in average wholesale 
prices of industrial commodities continued to be slow; 
prices of farm and food products increased moderately 
further. The advance in average wage rates so far this 
year has been considerably less rapid than the increase 
during the second half of 1974.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar has changed 
little since mid-May. The U.S. foreign trade balance 
continued in substantial surplus in April but at a rate



6/16-17/75

much reduced from the first quarter. After large net 
outflows in the first quarter, there was a small net 

inflow of funds through banks in April, as liabilities 

to foreigners rose more than claims.  

Growth in M1, M2, and M3 was substantial in May, 
reflecting in part large Federal income tax rebates 

deposited at both banks and nonbank thrift institutions.  
Business demands for short-term credit both at banks 
and in the commercial paper market remained unusually 

weak, while demands in the long-term market continued 
very strong. Market interest rates in general changed 

little during the latter part of May, but since then 

rates in longer-term markets and on Treasury bills have 
declined. Mortgage rates have eased over the past month.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to stimulating economic 
recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures and 
working toward equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 

markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.  

With Mr. Holland dissenting, number 5 of the guidelines 

for the conduct of System operations in Federal agency issues was 

amended to read as follows: 

5. System holdings of any one issue at any one time will 
not exceed 30 per cent of the amount of the issue out
standing. Aggregate holdings of the issues of any one 
agency will not exceed 15 per cent of the amount of 
outstanding issues of that agency.



6/16-17/75

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(c) of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to read as follows: 

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers' acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized 

by the Committee, shall be determined by competitive 
bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the 
volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues 
covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the 
dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, 
they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that 
in the event bankers' acceptances covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they shall 
continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall 
be sold in the open market.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on July 15, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary


