











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 20-21, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, January 20-21, 

1975, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Black 
Bucher 
Clay 
Coldwell 
Holland 
Kimbrel 
Mitchell 
Sheehan 1/ 
Wallich 
Winn 
Debs, Alternate for Mr. Hayes

Messrs. Baughman, MacLaury, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Francis, and Balles, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



1/20-21/75

Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, Bryant, Davis, Doll, Hocter, 

Parthemos, Pierce, and Reynolds, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coyne,1/ Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Scheld, and Jordan, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Pardee, Kaminow, and Green, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Philadelphia, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Secretary's note: The actions listed immediately 
below were taken on Monday, January 20, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 17, 1974, through 

January 20, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



1/20-21/75

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, 

maturing in the period February 4-14, 1975, was authorized.  

Secretary's note: All of the following actions were 
taken on Tuesday, January 21, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 

16-17, 1974, were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on December 16-17, 1974, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period December 17, 1974, through January 20, 1975, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services fell sharply in 
the fourth quarter of 1974 and that further declines 
are in prospect for the months immediately ahead. In 
December declines in industrial production and employment 
again were sharp and widespread, and the unemployment rate



1/20-21/75

increased from 6.5 to 7.1 per cent. Average wholesale 
prices of industrial commodities were unchanged, after 
having risen much less rapidly from August to November 
than earlier in the year, and prices of farm and food 
products declined. In recent months increases in 
average wage rates have been large, but not so large as 
in the spring and summer.  

In his State of the Union message, the President set 
forth a program of fiscal stimulus, including tax rebates 
for individuals and a temporary increase in the investment 
tax credit for business. The President also proposed 
a new program to reduce the consumption of energy; 
the program includes new taxes in the energy area along 
with measures of tax relief that, on balance, are de
signed to have a neutral effect on the size of the Federal 
deficit.  

The dollar in December and early January continued 
the gradual decline against leading foreign currencies 
that began in September. In November, as in October, 
the U.S. foreign trade deficit was moderate; sizable in
flows of official funds from oil-exporting countries con
tinued, while other capital inflows and outflows reported 
by banks were roughly offsetting.  

The narrowly defined money stock grew at an annual 
rate of 4 per cent over the fourth quarter of 1974, while 
the more broadly defined measure of the stock grew at a 
rate of nearly 7 per cent. In December and early January, 
however, the narrowly defined money stock changed little.  
Net inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits 
at banks slowed sharply in December, although they continued 
to improve at nonbank thrift institutions; in early January 
deposit inflows at banks picked up. Business demands for 
short-term credit, both at banks and in the commercial 
paper market, moderated further in December, while demands 
in the long-term market remained strong. Over recent weeks 

short-term market interest rates have declined substantially, 
but yields on long-term securities have changed little, on 
balance. Federal Reserve discount rates were reduced from



1/20-21/75

7-3/4 to 7-1/4 per cent in early January, and on 
January 20 the Board announced a reduction in reserve 
requirements on demand deposits estimated to release 
$1.1 billion in required reserves.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee, while 
resisting inflationary pressures and working toward 
equilibrium in the country's balance of payments, to 
foster financial conditions conducive to cushioning 
recessionary tendencies and stimulating economic recovery.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of the 
forthcoming Treasury financing, developments in domestic 
and international financial markets, and the Board's action 
on reserve requirements, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with 
more rapid growth in monetary aggregates over the months 
ahead than has occurred in recent months.  

By unanimous vote, Sections 271.4 and 271.6 of the 

Committee's Rules Regarding the Availability of Information were 

amended to read as follows, effective February 19, 1975: 

Section 271.4--Records Available to the 
Public on Request 

(a) Records available.--Records of the Committee are made 
available to any person, upon request, for inspection or 
copying in accordance with the provisions of this section 
and subject to the limitations stated in §§ 271.5 and 271.6.  
Records falling within the exemptions from disclosure set 
forth in section 522(b) of Title 5 of the United States 
Code and in § 271.6 may nevertheless be made available in 
accordance with this section to the fullest extent con
sistent, in the Committee's judgment, with the effective 
performance of the Committee's statutory responsibilities and 
with the avoidance of injury to a public or private interest 
intended to be protected by such exemptions.



1/20-21/75

(b) Place and time.--In general, the records of 
the Committee are held in the custody of the Board, 
but certain of such records, or copies thereof, are 

held in the custody of one or more of the Federal 
Reserve Banks. Any such records subject to this 
section will be made available for inspection or 
copying during regular business hours at the offices 
of the Board in the Federal Reserve Building, 20th 
and Constitution Avenue, Washington, D.C., 20551, or, 
in certain instances as provided in paragraph (c) of 
this section, at the offices of one or more designated 
Federal Reserve Banks.  

(c) Obtaining access to records.--Any person re
questing access to records of the Committee shall sub
mit such request in writing to the Secretary of the 

Committee. In any case in which the records requested, 
or copies thereof, are available at a Federal Reserve 
Bank, the Secretary of the Committee may so advise the 
person requesting access to the records. Every request 
for access to records of the Committee shall state the 
full name and address of the person requesting them and 

shall describe such records in a manner reasonably suf
ficient to permit their identification without undue 

difficulty. The Secretary of the Committee shall deter

mine within ten working days after receipt of a request 
for access to records of the Committee whether to comply 

with such request; and he shall immediately notify the 
requesting party of his decision, of the reasons therefor, 
and of the right of the requesting party to appeal to 
the Committee any refusal to make available the requested 

records of the Committee.  

(d) Appeal of denial of access to records of the 

Committee.--Any person who is denied access to records 

of the Committee, properly requested in accordance with 

paragraph (c) of this section, may file, with the 

Secretary of the Committee, within ten days of notifi

cation of such denial, a written request for review of 
such denial. The Committee, or such member or members 

as the Committee may designate (pursuant to section 

272.4(c) of its Rules of Procedure), shall make a deter

mination with respect to any such appeal within 20



1/20-21/75

working days of its receipt, and shall immediately 
notify the appealing party of the decision on the 
appeal and of the right to seek court review of any 
decision which upholds, in whole or in part, the re
fusal of the Secretary of the Committee to make 
available the requested records.  

(e) Extension of time requirements in unusual 
circumstances.--In unusual circumstances as provided 
in 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(b), the time limitations 
imposed upon the Secretary of the Committee or the 
Committee or its designated representative(s) in 
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section may be extended 
by written notice to the requesting party for a period 
of time not to exceed a total of ten working days.  

* * * 

Section 271.6--Information 
Not Disclosed 

Except as may be authorized by the Committee, 
information of the Committee that is not available to 
the public through other sources will not be published 
or made available for inspection, examination, or 
copying by any person if such information 

(a) is exempted from disclosure by statute or 
is specifically authorized under criteria established 
by an executive order to be kept secret in the interest 
of national defense or foreign policy and is in fact 
properly classified pursuant to such executive order; 

(b) relates solely to internal personnel rules or 
practices or other internal practices of the Committee; 

(c) relates to trade secrets or commercial or 
financial information obtained from any person and 
privileged or confidential;



1/20-21/75

(d) is contained in inter-agency or intra-agency 
memoranda or letters, including records of delibera
tions and discussions at meetings of the Committee and 
reports and documents filed by members or staff of the 
Committee that would not be routinely available to a 
private party in litigation with the Committee; 

(e) is contained in personnel, medical, or similar 
files (including financial files) the disclosure of 
which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion 
of personal privacy; or 

(f) is contained in or related to examination, 
operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf 
of, or for the use of any agency responsible for the 
regulation or supervision of financial institutions.  

Except as provided by or pursuant to this Part, no 
person shall disclose, or permit the disclosure of, 
any information of the Committee to any person, 
whether by giving out or furnishing such information 
or copy thereof, by allowing any person to inspect, 
examine, or reproduce such information or copy there
of, or by any other means, whether the information is 
located at the offices of the Board, any Federal Reserve 
Bank, or elsewhere, unless such disclosure is required 
in the performance of duties for, or pursuant to the 
direction of, the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, publication for comment in the Federal 

Register of the following proposed uniform schedule of fees, 

intended for incorporation in the Committee's Rules Regarding the 

Availability of Information, was authorized: 

Fee Schedule.--A person requesting access to or 
copies of particular records shall pay the costs of 
searching and copying such records at the rate of 
$10 per hour for searching and 10 cents per standard 
page for copying. With respect to information obtain
able only by processing through a computer or other



1/20-21/75 -9

information systems program, a person requesting such 
information shall pay a fee not to exceed the direct and 
reasonable cost of retrieval and production of the infor
mation requested. Detailed schedules of such charges 
are available upon request from the Secretary of the 
Committee. Documents may be furnished without charge 
or at a reduced charge where the Secretary of the 
Committee or such person as he may designate determines 
that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public 
interest because furnishing the information can be 
considered as primarily benefiting the general public.  

By unanimous vote, responsibility for making determina

tions with respect to appeals of denial of access to Committee 

records, under the provisions of 271.4(d) of the Committee's 

Rules Regarding Availability of Information, was delegated 

to Mr. Holland, and in his absence, to Mr. Coldwell.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of 

the FOMC memoranda of discussion for 1969, on the basis described 

in memoranda from the Secretariat dated January 13, 1975, was 

authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Wednesday, February 19, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


