











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 14-15, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, April 14 and 15, 

1975, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Baughman 
Mr. Bucher 1/ 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. Holland 
Mr. MacLaury 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Francis, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Kansas City, Atlanta, and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Guy, 2/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 

1/ Left meeting at point indicated.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



4/14-15/75

Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 

Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 

Messrs. Boehne, Bryant, Davis, Green, Kareken, 

Pierce,1/ Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Rippey,1/ Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir,2/ Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Parthemos, Jordan, and Doll, Senior 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Richmond, St. Louis, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Messrs. Fieleke, Hocter, and Brandt, Vice 

Presidents of Boston, Cleveland, and 

Atlanta 
Mr. Keran, Director of Research, Federal 

Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Ms. Tschinkel, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's note: The actions listed immediately 
below were taken on Monday, April 14, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 18, 1975, 

were approved.  

The memorandum of discussion for the meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee held on February 19, 1975, was accepted.  

1/ Attended Monday session only.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



4/14-15/75

Secretary's note: All of the actions listed below 
were taken on Tuesday, April 15, 1975.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 18 through April 14, 1975, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss National 

Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing in the 

period May 5 through 14, 1975, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances, 

during the period March 18 through April 14, 1975, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Bucher left the meeting prior to the following action.  

With Mr. Eastburn dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services fell sharply in 
the first quarter. However, retail sales strengthened 
during the quarter, and the rate of decline in over-all 
activity has slowed in recent weeks. In March industrial 
production and employment declined less than they had on 
average in the preceding 4 months, but the unemployment 
rate increased from 8.2 to 8.7 per cent, as the civilian 
labor force grew. Average wholesale prices of industrial



4/14-15/75

commodities rose little in March and prices of farm and 
food products declined sharply. The advance in average 
wage rates during the first quarter was large, but it 
was still below the increases of last spring and summer.  

The prospect of an upturn in economic activity has 
been strengthened by enactment of the Tax Reduction Act 
of 1975, which will be adding soon to growth in dispos
able personal income.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar has risen 
since early March, as short-term interest rates abroad 
have declined further and market attitudes toward the 
dollar have continued to improve. In January-February 
the U.S. foreign trade balance was in surplus, as agri
cultural exports reached a new high and the volume of 
imports other than fuels declined. Net outflows of 
funds through banks continued large in February but 
appear to have diminished in March. In early April 
reserve requirements on foreign borrowings by member 
banks were reduced from 8 to 4 per cent.  

The narrowly defined money stock rose moderately 
on balance over the first quarter, while broader mea
sures of the money stock expanded more rapidly. Growth 
was substantial in March, apparently in part because of 
the effects of accelerated tax refunds on deposits at 
banks and nonbank thrift institutions. Business demands 
for short-term credit remained weak, both at banks and 
in the commercial paper market, while demands in the 
long-term market continued exceptionally strong. Since 
mid-March short-term market interest rates have increased 
somewhat and longer-term yields have risen considerably 
further.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions conducive to stimulating economic 
recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures and 
working toward equilibrium in the country's balance of 
payments.



4/14- 15/75

To implement this policy, while taking account of 

the forthcoming Treasury financing and of developments 
in domestic and international financial markets, the 
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market 
conditions consistent with somewhat more rapid growth in 

monetary aggregates over the months ahead than has occurred 

on average in recent months.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account, contained 

in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Opera

tions, should be retained at this time, subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the changes in 

the terms and conditions for lending securities from the System 

Open Market Account recommended by the Manager in a memorandum 

dated March 7, 1975.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 20, 1975.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


