











































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 16, 1975 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 16, 1975, at 

9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Holland 
Jackson 
MacLaury 
Mayo 
Mitchell 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Francis, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Kansas City, Atlanta, and 
Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Partee, Senior Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Davis, Green, Kareken, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists



12/16/75

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Doll, and Sims, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Richmond, Kansas City, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, and Balbach, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, Atlanta, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 18, 1975, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, the memorandum of discussion for the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 21, 1975,

was accepted.



12/16/75

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period November 18 through 

December 15, 1975, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, an adjustment in the exchange rate 

on the System's outstanding Swiss franc swap debt, to reflect the 

December 1971 Smithsonian realignment of currency values and the 

February 1973 devaluation of the dollar, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accept

ances during the period November 18 through December 15, 1975, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that output of goods and services--which had increased 
very sharply in the third quarter--is expanding more 
moderately in the current quarter. In November the 
rise in industrial production and in nonfarm payroll 
employment slowed further. The dollar volume of retail 
sales rose again, however, and residential construction 
activity expanded, reflecting recent substantial increases 
in private housing starts. The unemployment rate--which 
had risen 0.3 percentage points to 8.6 per cent in 
October--fell back to 8.3 per cent in November, reflect
ing a sizable decline in the civilian labor force. The



12/16/75

increase in average wholesale prices of industrial com
modities, although below that in October, was still 
relatively large; prices of farm products declined 
appreciably, following 2 months of large increases.  
The advance in average wage rates in November was 
again substantial.  

The exchange value of the dollar against leading foreign 
currencies has risen somewhat since mid-November. The net 
outflow of bank-reported private capital appears to have 
declined from the high rate reported for October. In October 
the U.S. foreign trade surplus remained substantial.  

M1--which had declined in October--rose sharply in 
Novemer. Growth in M2 and M3 was substantial, as inflows 
of consumer-type time and savings deposits to banks 
strengthened while inflows to nonbank thrift institutions 
remained relatively favorable. Long-term interest rates 
have fluctuated in a narrow range in recent weeks, while 
short-term market rates have risen somewhat.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions that will encourage continued economic recovery, 
while resisting inflationary pressures and contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of develop
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the 
Committee seeks to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money 
market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided 
that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the 
rates currently expected.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of 

the FOMC memoranda of discussion for 1970, on the basis described 

in memoranda from the Secretariat dated December 4, 1975, was

authorized.



12/16/75 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on January 20, 1976.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


