














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 18, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 18, 1976, 

at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee

Messrs.  
the 
and

MacLaury and Roos, Presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis 
St. Louis, respectively

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley,1/ Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt,1/ Hocter,1/ Keran,1/ Kichline, 1/ 

Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,1/ and Zeisel,1/ 
Associate Economists

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.



Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee,1/ Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 
Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Keir,1/ Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Adviser, Division of International 

Finance Board of Governors 
Mrs. Farar,/ Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market 

Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Willes,1/ First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Boehne 1/ and Doll,1/ Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Burns,1/ and Davis,1/ Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St.  
Louis, Dallas, and New York respectively 

Mrs. Nichols 1/ and Mr. Kareken,1/ Economic 
Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. McNees,1/ Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Hill,1/ Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the Committee approved 

a motion that the memorandum of discussion be discontinued after 

the memorandum for the meeting of March 15-16, 1976.  

With Mr. Coldwell abstaining, the Committee approved a 

motion that the record of policy actions for each meeting of the 

Committee be released to the public shortly after the next regularly 

scheduled meeting.

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.



By unanimous vote, the Committee amended Section 271.5(a) 

of its Rules Regarding the Availability of Information to delete 

the sentence reading "For example, the Committee's domestic 

policy directive adopted at each meeting of the Committee is 

published in the Federal Register approximately 45 days after 

the date of its adoption; and no information in the records of 

the Committee relating to the adoption of any such directive 

is made available for public inspection or copying before it 

is published in the Federal Register or is otherwise released 

to the public by the Committee." 

With this amendment, Section 271.5(a) read as follows: 

(a) Deferred availability of information.-
In some instances, certain types of information of 
the Committee are not published in the Federal 
Register or made available for public inspection 
or copying until after such period of time as the 
Committee may determine to be reasonably necessary 
to avoid the effects described in paragraph (b) 
of this section or as may otherwise be necessary 
to prevent impairment of the effective discharge 
of the Committee's statutory responsibilities.  

Staff members who were not present at the outset entered 

the meeting prior to the following actions.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 20, 

1976, were approved.



By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period April 20 through May 17, 

1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances, during the period April 20 through May 1.7, 1976, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Coldwell, dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive; 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services is 
continuing at a vigorous pace in the current quarter.  
In April recovery in industrial production continued, 
and gains in employment were large and widespread.  
However, the civilian labor force also increased 
substantially, and the unemployment rate continued 
at 7.5 per cent. Retail sales remained at the March 
level. The wholesale price index for all commodities 
rose appreciably in April, reflecting a sharp 
increase in average prices of farm products and foods 
and a modest increase in prices of industrial 
commodities. Over recent months, the index of average 
wage rates has advanced moderately.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has been relatively steady in 
recent weeks. During the first quarter, there was 
a sizable U.S. foreign trade deficit, in contrast to 
the large surpluses in the preceding four quarters.  

M1, which had expanded moderately in February and 
March, increased sharply in April, reflecting in part 
a drop in U.S. Government deposits. Inflows of time 
and savings deposits other than negotiable CD's were



strong at banks and nonbank thrift institutions, and 
M2 and M3 increased substantially. In recent weeks, 
both short- and long-term market interest rates have 
risen.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster financial conditions that will encourage con
tinued economic recovery, while resisting inflationary 
pressures and contributing to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on June 22, 1976.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


