














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 20, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 20, 1976, at 

9:00 a.m.

Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Baughman 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. Holland 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. MacLaury 
Mr, Mayo 
Mr. Mitchell 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Balles, Black, and 
Members of the Federal 
Committee

Winn, Alternate 

Open Market

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Atlanta, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 

Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Mr. Solomon, Economist (International Finance) 
Messrs. Boehne, Davis, Green, Kareken, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists

PRESENT:



Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Kichline and Zeisel, Associate 
Directors, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Parthemos, Balbach, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Richmond, St. Louis, and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Hocter, Brandt, and Keran, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 16, 1975, were approved.  

The memoranda of discussion for the meetings of the Federal 

Open MarketCommittee on November 18 and December 16, 1975, were



By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period December 16, 1975, through 

January 19, 1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, maturing 

in the period January 30 through February 28, 1976, was authorized.  

It was understood that the System's outstanding drawing of 

$600 million on the Bank for International Settlements, maturing 

on February 13, 1976, would be transferred on that date to the Swiss 

National Bank under arrangements made between those two institutions.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved an agreement with 

the Swiss National Bank for the sharing of losses incurred in the 

repayment of the System's swap liability to that Bank on the basis 

recommended by the Manager in his memorandum to the Committee 

dated January 15, 1976, subject to final approval by the Chairman 

on receipt of advice that the agreement was acceptable to the 

Board of Directors of the Swiss National Bank.  

Secretary's note: Chairman Burns approved the agreement 
on February 2, 1976, following receipt of advice that the 
agreement was acceptable to the Board of Directors of the 
Swiss National Bank.



By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period December 16, 1975, through January 19, 1976, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accord

ance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that output of goods and services--which had increased 
very sharply in the third quarter of 1975--expanded more 
moderately in the fourth quarter. In December retail 
sales rose sharply, but the increase in the fourth 
quarter as a whole was less than that in the third 
quarter. After having slowed over the preceding 2 
months, the rise in industrial production and in non
farm payroll employment accelerated in December.  
However, the unemployment rate remained at 8.3 per cent, 
as the civilian labor force grew about as much as total 
employment. The increase in average wholesale prices of 
industrial commodities was again relatively large, but 
average prices of farm products and foods declined sharply 
further. The index of average wage rates was unchanged 
in December, following 2 months of large increases.  

The exchange value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies held steady in December but eased 
somewhat in early January. Another sizable foreign 
trade surplus was registered in November.  

M1 declined in December, and growth in M2 and M3 
slowed considerably. At commercial banks, inflows of 
time and savings deposits other than large-denomination 
CD's slowed, despite a continuing build-up of business



1/20/76

savings accounts, while inflows of deposits to nonbank 
thrift institutions were relatively well maintained.  
In terms of quarterly averages, growth in M1 from the 
third to the fourth quarter was modest, while growth 
in M2 and M3 was more substantial. In recent weeks 
interest rates on both short- and long-term securities 
have declined appreciably. In mid-January Federal 
Reserve discount rates were reduced from 6 to 
5-1/2 per cent.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic recovery, while resisting inflationary 
pressures and contributing to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account 
of developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to maintain prevailing 
bank reserve and money market conditions over the 
period immediately ahead, provided that monetary 
aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates 
currently expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Wednesday, February 18, 1976, at 9:00 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


