














































Minutes of Actions


12/20-21/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 20-21, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D.C., on Monday and Tuesday, December 20-21, 

1976, beginning at 3:30 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Gardner 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Lilly 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, 1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, 2/ Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Kichline, Parthemos, 

Reynolds, and Zeisel, 2/ Associate Economists 

1/ Attended Monday session only.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/20-21/76

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill and Kalchbrenner, 3/ 
Advisers, Divisions of International 
Finance and Research and Statistics, 
respectively, Board of Governors 

Mr. Paulus, 3/ Chief, Banking Section, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Smith, 3/ Chief, Financial Markets Section, 
Division of International Finance, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Beck, 3/ Senior Economist, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, Doll, Eisenmenger, and 
Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, Boston and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Burns, Karnosky, and Keran, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas, St. Louis, and San Francisco 
respectively 

Mr. Hall, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Duprey, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Tschinkel, Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York

3/ Attended part of Monday session only.

- 2 -



12/20-21/76

By unanimous vote, the following revised Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations, revised Foreign Currency Directive, 

and Special Authorization were approved, on the understanding that 

they would become effective upon the resolution subsequent to the 

meeting of a technical question concerning the wording of a clause 

in the Directive. The actions were effective December 28, 1976.  

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for 
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary 
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive 
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant 
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions 
as the Committee may issue from time to time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through 
spot or forward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the 
U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by 
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with 
foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other 
international financial institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese Yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs

- 3 -



12/20-21/76

B. To hold balances of, and to have 
outstanding forward contracts to receive 
or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed 
in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the 
reciprocal currency arrangements listed 
in paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings 
by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 
after any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because 
of exceptional circumstances, specifically 
authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an over-all open position 
in all foreign currencies not exceeding 
$1.0 billion, unless a larger position is 
expressly authorized by the Committee.  
For this purpose, the over-all open position 
in all foreign currencies is defined as the 
sum (disregarding signs) of open positions 
in each currency. The open position in a 
single foreign currency is defined as holdings 
of balances in that currency, plus outstanding 
contracts for future receipt, minus outstand
ing contracts for future delivery of that 
currency, i. e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 
arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the System Open 
Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those 
designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under Section 214. 5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements 
on maturity:

- 4 -



12/20-21/76 - 5 

Amount of 
arrangement 

(Millions of 
Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1, 000 
Bank of Canada 2, 000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3, 000 
Bank of France 2, 000 
German Federal Bank 2, 000 
Bank of Italy 3, 000 
Bank of Japan 2, 000 
Bank of Mexico 360 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 1, 400 
Bank for International 

Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 

European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1, 250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and 
the proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be 
authorized, shall be referred for review and approval to the 
Committee.  

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System swap 
commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 
purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions in foreign 
currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) above shall, 
unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, be 
at prevailing market rates.



12/20-21/76 - 6 

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency trans
actions. In making operating arrangements with foreign 
central banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or 
understandings concerning the administration of the accounts 
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with 
the Foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214. 5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 
review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as 
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances.  
Such investments shall be in accordance with Section 14(e) of 
the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding 
paragraphs shall be reported daily to the Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists 
of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice 
Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other member 
of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence 
of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other 
Board Members designated by the Chairman as alternates, and 
in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his 
alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called 
at the request of any member, or at the request of the Manager, 
for the purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated operations 
and of consulting with the Manager on other matters relating 
to his responsibilities. At the request of any member of the 
Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and 
consultations shall be referred for determination to the 
Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to 
enter into any needed agreement or under
standing with the Secretary of the Treasury 
about the division of responsibility for foreign 
currency operations between the System and 
the Treasury;



12/20-21/76

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency 
operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National 
Advisory Council on International Monetary 
and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign 
currency operations to appropriate officials of 
the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of 
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to 
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated 
January 1, 1944.  

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally 
be directed at countering disorderly market conditions, 
provided that market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar 
reflect actions and behavior consistent with the proposed 
IMF Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and 
sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") 
arrangements with selected foreign central 
banks and with the Bank for International 
Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central 
banks of other countries and with international 
monetary institutions.

- 7 -



12/20-21/76

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of 
probable future needs for currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System 
and Treasury commitments in particular 
currencies, and to facilitate operations 
of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly 
authorized by the Commttee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and 
cooperation with the United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with 
foreign monetary authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of 
the United States in the International Monetary 
Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 
proposed IMF Article IV.  

SPECIAL AUTHORIZATION UNDER PARAGRAPH 1(D) OF 
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain an over-all 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding the figure of 
$1.0 billion specified in paragraph 1(D) of the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations by an amount equal to the 
remaining forward commitment associated with the System's 
outstanding 1971 swap drawings in Swiss francs.  

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the following procedural instructions 

relating to foreign currency operations were approved, to become

effective simultaneously with the foregoing instruments:

- 8 -



12/20-21/76

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization 
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set 
forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 
and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, through the Manager of the System Open 
Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural 
understandings with respect to consultations and clearance 
with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, 
and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported 
promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with 
the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation 
with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any transaction which would result in a change 
in the System's over-all open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $100 million on any day or 
$300 million since the most recent regular meeting 
of the Committee.  

B. Any transaction which would result in gross 
transactions (excluding swap drawings and repayments) 
in a single foreign currency exceeding $100 million on 
any day or $300 million since the most recent regular 
meeting of the Committee.  

C. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 
15 per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with 
the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that 
consultation with the full Committee is not feasible in the 
time available, or with the Chairman, if the Chairman 
believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not 
feasible in the time available):

- 9 -



12/20-21/76

A. Any transaction which would result in a 
change in the System's over-all open position in 
foreign currencies exceeding $500 million since 
the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign 
bank exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or 
(ii) 15 per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee 
or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, 
and about any transactions that are not of a routine character.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken on 

Tuesday, December 21, 1976.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Commitee held on November 16, 1976, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System Open Market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period November 16 through December 20, 

1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period November 16 through December 20, 1976, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive:

- 10 -



12/20-21/76

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services in the 
fourth quarter has remained at about the reduced pace of 
the third quarter. In both October and November retail 
sales increased substantially. Industrial production 
rose appreciably in November--following 2 months of 
decline--in large part as a result of termination of 
strikes in two major industries, although advances in 
output were widespread among other industries. Employ
ment in manufacturing also recovered from the effects 
of strikes. According to household survey data, the 
gain in total employment was large, but the unemploy
ment rate increased from 7.9 to 8.1 per cent as the 
civilian labor force--which had changed little over 
the preceding 3 months--increased considerably. The 
wholesale price index for all commodities rose as much 

in November as in October, reflecting another substan
tial increase in average prices of industrial commodities; 
average prices of farm products and foods changed little.  
The advance in the index of average wage rates over 
recent months has remained below the rapid rate of 
increase during 1975.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has declined slightly in recent 
weeks. The pound sterling and also the currencies 
associated in the European "snake" arrangement 
strengthened against the U. S. dollar, while the 
Canadian dollar depreciated sharply. In October the 
U. S. foreign trade deficit remained substantial.  

M-1, which had expanded sharply in October, was 
unchanged in November. Although growth in M-2 and 
M-3 moderated, it remained substantial as inflows of 
the time and savings deposits included in these broader 
aggregates continued strong. Interest rates have 
declined appreciably in recent weeks. In late November 
Federal Reserve discount rates were reduced from 5-1/2 
to 5-1/4 per cent, and in mid-December member bank 
reserve requirements were lowered somewhat.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.

- 11 -



12/20-21/76 - 12 -

To implement this policy, while taking 
account of developments in domestic and 
international financial markets, the Committee 
seeks to maintain prevailing bank reserve and 
money market conditions over the period 
immediately ahead, provided that monetary 
aggregates appear to be growing at about the 
rates currently expected.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives 

of the FOMC memoranda of discussion for 1971, on the basis 

described in a memorandum from the Secretariat dated 

December 8, 1976, was authorized.  

The Committee took note of the present state of 

de facto suspension of paragraph 2 of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations as a consequence of the 

expiration, on October 31, 1976, of the underlying statutory 

authority contained in a provision of Section 14(b) of the 

Federal Reserve Act.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on January 18, 1977, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


