














































Minutes of Actions


9/21/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 21, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 21, 

1976, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Wallich 
Winn 
Balles

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Keran, Kichline, 

Parthemos, Reynolds, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists



9/21/76

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Doll, Eisenmenger, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Kansas City, Boston, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Burns, Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Hall, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Hill, Senior Economist, Open Market 
Operations, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 17,

1976, were approved.

- 2 -



9/21/76

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 17 through September 20, 

1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of drawings on 

the System by the Bank of England, maturing on September 23 and 30, 

1976, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period August 17 through September 20, 1976, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services has 
remained moderate in the current quarter. In August 
industrial production continued to expand at about the 
average rate in the preceding 4 months. Retail sales 
apparently rose vigorously, after having changed little 
on balance since April. Payroll employment in nonfarm 
establishments rose appreciably further, but according 
to household survey data, the unemployment rate edged 
up from 7.8 to 7.9 per cent. The wholesale price index 
for all commodities was about unchanged in August, as a 
substantial decline in average prices of farm products 
and foods offset another large increase in average prices 
of industrial commodities. So far this year the advance 
in the index of average wage rates has been somewhat 
below the rapid rate of increase during 1975.

- 3 -



9/21/76

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has remained relatively steady in 
recent weeks, declining somewhat against most of these 
currencies but rising against the pound sterling. The 
Mexican peso was allowed to depreciate on September 1 
and in recent days has been about 37 per cent below its 
old value against the dollar. In July the U.S. foreign 
trade deficit increased sharply.  

M1 and M2 grew at moderate rates in August. Inflows 
of the time and savings deposits included in M2 were 
relatively strong, although they slackened from the high 
rate in July. Inflows of deposits to nonbank thrift 
institutions accelerated, however, and growth in M3 
remained rapid. Most market interest rates have 
declined somewhat further in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pressures 
and contributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on October 19, 1976, at 9:30 a.m.

The meeting adjourned.

- 4 -


