














































Minutes of Actions


7/20/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 19-20, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, 

July 19-20, 1976, beginning at 6:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn 1/

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Gramley,1/ Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Davis,1/ Keran,1/ Kichline,1/ 

Parthemos, 1/ Reynolds,1/ and Zeisel,1/ 
Associate Economists.

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



7/20/76

Mr. Pardee,./ Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Advisor, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struble,1/ Chief, Government Finance 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, OpenMarket 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Boehne,1/ Doll,1/ 
Eisenmenger,1/ and Scheld,1/ Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Philadelphia, Kansas 
City, Boston, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Burns 1/ and Cox,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Meek,1/ Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Duprey,/ Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, and with Mr. Mayo voting as 

alternate for Mr. Winn, the Committee reaffirmed its decision of 

May 18, 1976, to discontinue the memorandum of discussion after the 

memorandum for the meeting of March 15-16, 1976.  

Secretary's note: All of the following actions 
were taken on Tuesday, July 20, 1976.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 22, 1976, 

were approved.

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



7/20/76

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 22 through July 19, 1976, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 

months of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium and the 

Swiss National Bank maturing August 13, 1976, was authorized.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances, 

during the period June 22 through July 19, 1976, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Volcker dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services, which 
had been vigorous in the first quarter, moderated in the 
second quarter as a consequence of a smaller advance in 
consumer spending and little change in the rate of inventory 
accumulation. In June growth in industrial production 
slowed and nonfarm payroll employment changed little.  
The unemployment rate edged up to 7.5 per cent from 7.3 
per cent in May, but this increase may have partly 
reflected seasonal adjustment problems. Retail sales 
rebounded strongly in June. The rise in the wholesale 
price index for all commodities remained moderate, as 
the advance in average prices of farm products and foods 
slowed further. However, average prices of industrial 
commodities rose more than in other recent months. The 
advance in. the index of average wage rates slowed con
siderably in June following a sharp rise in May; over 
the second quarter as a whole the index rose at about 
the same rate as in the first quarter.

-3-



-4-

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has remained relatively steady in 
recent weeks. In May there was a small surplus in the 
U.S. foreign trade balance.  

M1, which had grown moderately in May, declined 
slightly in June. From the first to the second quarter, 
however, M1 expanded at an 8.4 per cent annual rate 
because of the exceptional rise in April. Growth in 
M2 and M3 moderated in June, mainly because of the 
decline in M1, although inflows of the time and savings 
deposits included in the broader aggregates also slowed 
somewhat. Short-term market interest rates have declined 
somewhat in recent weeks, and most long-term rates have 
edged down.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on August 17, 1976, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


