














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 15-16, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, March 15-16, 

1976, beginning at 3:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Holland 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Mayo, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, Guffey, and MacLaury, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Kansas City, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley,1/ Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Hocter, Keran, Kichline,1/ 

Parthemos, and Reynolds, Associate Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/15-16/76

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Kalchbrenner 1/ and Keir,2/ Advisers, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill,2/ Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Henry,1/ Associate Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Boehne, Doll, Eisenmenger, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas City, Boston, 
and. Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach and Burns, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and 
Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Acceptance and Securities 
Departments, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices 

of the election of the following members and alternate members of 

the Federal Open Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1976, 

1/ Attended Monday session only.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/15-16/76

had been received by the Secretary and the named individuals 

had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 
with Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Boston, as alternate; 

Paul A. Volcker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York, with Richard A. Debs, First Vice President of 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Cleveland, with Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

Monroe Kimbrel, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 

Atlanta, with Ernest T. Baughman, President of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate; 

Mr. John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco.  

Secretary's note: All of the following actions 
were taken on Tuesday, March 16, 1976.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of 

their successors at the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1977, with the understanding that in the event of 

the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board 

of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, 

they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee:



3/15-16/76

Arthur F. Burns Chairman 
Paul A. Volcker Vice Chairman 

Arthur L. Broida Secretary 
Murray Altmann Deputy Secretary 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Thomas J. O'Connell General Counsel 
Edward G. Guy Deputy General Counsel 
Baldwin B. Tuttle Assistant General Counsel 
Stephen H. Axilrod Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Ralph C. Bryant 1/ Economist (International Finance) 
Lyle E. Gramley Economist (Domestic Business) 

Harry Brandt, Richard G. Davis, 
William J. Hocter, Michael Keran, 
James L. Kichline, James 
Parthemos, John E. Reynolds, 
and Joseph S. Zeisel Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market 

Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Federal 

Open Market Committee after February 28, 1977.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D. Sternlight, and 

Scott E. Pardee were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee 

in the capacities of Manager of the System Open Market Account, Deputy 

Manager for Domestic Operations, and Deputy Manager for Foreign Opera

tions, respectively, on the understanding that their selection was 

subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently received 
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

1/ Currently on leave of absence.



3/15-16/76

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 

17-18, 1976, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period February 18 through March 

15, 1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period February 18 through March 15, 1976, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
output of goods and services has continued to expand at a 
moderate rate in the current quarter. In February retail 
sales rose considerably and recovery in industrial production 
continued. Gains in nonfarm employment were again widespread 
and the unemployment rate dropped from 7.8 to 7.6 per cent.  
Wholesale prices of all commodities declined again in 
February, as average prices of .farm products and foods fell 

appreciably further. Average wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities increased somewhat less than in January, owing 
in part to a reduction in crude oil prices required by the 
Energy Policy and Conservation Act. Over recent months, the 
advance in the index of average wage rates has moderated 
somewhat.



3/15-16/76 -6

The average value of the dollar against leading foreign 
currencies has increased in recent weeks to its highest level 
in 2 years. In the exchange markets, the British pound has 
depreciated sharply; the lira has weakened further; and most 
recently, the French franc has depreciated after abandonment 
of efforts to maintain fixed margins with certain other Euro
pean currencies. In January the U.S. foreign trade balance 
shifted into deficit.  

M1 , which had increased only a little in January, expanded 
moderately in February; M2 and M3 rose sharply. At commercial 
banks and nonbank thrift institutions, inflows of time and 
savings deposits other than large-denomination CD's remained 
large. Since mid-February, both short- and long-term interest 
rates have changed little on balance.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the policy 
of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster financial 
conditions that will encourage continued economic recovery, 
while resisting inflationary pressures and contributing to 
a sustainable pattern of international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic financial markets and the sensitive 
state of foreign exchange markets, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent 
with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the period 
ahead.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee removed the 1-year time 

limitation it had attached on March 18, 1975, to an increase from 

$1 billion to $2 billion in the dollar limit, specified in paragraph 

2 of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, on 

System holdings of special short-term certificates of indebtedness

purchased directly from the Treasury.



3/15-16/76

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of 

Government securities from the System Open Market Account, contained 

in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Opera

tions, should be retained at this time, subject to annual review.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations 

of the Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of review

ing such matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On February 25, 1976, certain con
tinuing authorizations of the Committee, listed below, 
had been distributed by the Secretary with the advice 
that, in accordance with procedures approved by the Com
mittee, they were being called to the Committee's attention 
before the March organization meeting to give members an 
opportunity to raise any questions they had concerning them.  
Members were asked to so indicate if they wished to have 
any of the authorizations in question placed on the agenda 
for consideration at this meeting, and no such requests 
were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the System 
Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to whom weekly 
reports on open market operations may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal Reserve 
Bank as agent to operate the System Account in case the 
New York Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued operation of the 
Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 
during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System 
Open Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency is'sues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.

-7-



3/15-16/76

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open 

Market Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to 
carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at 
a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including 
securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that 
are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal 
and interest by, any agency of the United States in the open 
market, from or to securities dealers and foreign and inter
national accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for 
the System Open Market Account at market prices and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U.S. Government and Federal agency 
securities with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to 
allow them to mature without replacement; provided that the 
.aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 
held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the close 
of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which 
action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall 
not be increased or decreased by more than $3.0 billion during the 
period commencing with the opening of business on the day follow
ing such meeting and ending with the close of business on the day 
of the next such meeting; 

(b) To buy or sell in the open market, from or to acceptance 
dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at 
market discount rates, prime bankers' acceptances with maturi
ties of up to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) 
arise out of the current shipment of goods between countries or 
within the United States, or (2) arise out of the storage with
in the United States of goods under contract of sale or expected 
to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or 
similar document conveying title to the underlying goods; pro
vided that the aggregate amount of bankers' acceptances held 
at any one time shall not exceed $1 billion;



3/15-16/76

(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that, 
are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal 
and interest by, any agency of the United States, and prime 
bankers' acceptances of the types authorized for purchase under 
1(b) above, from dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of such securi
ties, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, after 
applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements 
with individual dealers; provided that in the event Government 
securities or agency issues covered by any such agreement are 
not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a 
renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred 
to the System Open Market Account; and provided further that in 
the event bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement 
are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be held 
by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or under special.circumstances, 
such as when the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other 

Federal Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from the Treasury for 
its own account (with discretion, in cases where it seems desi
rable, to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve 
Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates of 
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for the 
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the 
rate charged on such certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 
per cent below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York at the time of such purchases, and provided further 
that the total amount of such certificates held at any one time 
by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open market opera
tions, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S. Government securities 
held in the System Open Market Account to Government securities 
dealers and to banks participating in Government securities 
clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, 
under such instructions as the Committee may specify from time 
to time.



3/15-16/76

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market 
Account, to the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's 
foreign currency directive and express authorizations by the 
Committee pursuant thereto: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home and abroad, 
including transactions with the U.S. Stabilization Fund 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, 
with foreign monetary authorities, and with the Bank for 
International Settlements: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold foreign currencies listed in paragraph A 
above, up to the following limits: 

(1) Currencies purchased spot, including curren
cies purchased from the Stabilization Fund, and sold forward 
to the Stabilization Fund, up to $1 billion equivalent; 

(2) Currencies purchased spot or forward, up to the 
amounts necessary to fulfill other forward commitments;

-10-



3/15-16/76

(3) Additional currencies purchased spot or forward, 
up to the amount necessary for System operations to exert a 
market influence but not exceeding $250 million equivalent; and 

(4) Sterling purchased on a covered or guaranteed 
basis in terms of the dollar, under agreement with the Bank of 
England, up to $200 million equivalent.  

C. To have outstanding forward commitments undertaken 
under paragraph A above to deliver foreign currencies, up to the 
following limits: 

(1) Commitments to deliver foreign currencies to 
the Stabilization Fund, up to the limit specified in paragraph 
1B(1) above; and 

(2) Other forward commitments to deliver foreign 
currencies, up to $550 million equivalent.  

D. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign 
banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency arrange
ments listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings by 
either party to any such arrangement shall be fully liquidated 
within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 
arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for System Open Market 
Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months with the 
following foreign banks, which are among those designated 
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks 
and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew 
such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(millions of..  

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000

-11-



3/15-16/76

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

National Bank of Denmark 250 

Bank of England 3,000 

Bank of France 2,000 

German Federal Bank 2,000 

Bank of Italy 3,000 

Bank of Japan 2,000 

Bank of Mexico 360 

Netherlands Bank 500 

Bank of Norway 250 

Bank of Sweden 300 

Swiss National Bank 1,400 

Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 

Dollars against authorized 

European currencies other 

than Swiss francs 1,250 

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System swap com

mitments may be purchased from the foreign central bank drawn 

on, at the same exchange rate as that employed in the drawing 

to be liquidated. Apart from any such purchases at the rate 

of the drawing, all transactions in foreign currencies under

taken under paragraph 1(A) above shall, unless otherwise 

expressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing 

market rates and no attempt shall be made to establish rates 

that appear to be out of line with underlying market forces.  

4. It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign central 

banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions.  

In making operating arrangements with foreign central banks 

on System holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York shall not commit itself to maintain any specific 

balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  

Any agreements or understandings concerning the administration 

of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 

under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 

review and approval to the Committee.

-12-



3/15-16/76

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practi

cable, considering needs for minimum working balances. Such invest

ments shall be in accordance with Section 14(e) of the Federal 

Reserve Act.  

6. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee is authorized to act on 

behalf of the Committee when it is necessary to enable the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York to engage in foreign currency operations 

before the Committee can be consulted. The Foreign Currency Sub

committee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, 

the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other member of 

the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of members 

of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members desig

nated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 

Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). All actions taken by the 

Foreign Currency Subcommittee under this paragraph shall be reported 

promptly to the Committee.  

7. The Chairman (and in his absence the Vice Chairman of 
the Committee, and in the absence of both, the Vice Chairman 
of the Board of Governors) is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into 
any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of 
the Treasury about the division of responsibility for 
foreign currency operations between the System and the 
Secretary; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency operations, and 
to consult with the Secretary on such policy matters as may 
relate to the Secretary's responsibilities; and 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports 
and information to the National Advisory Council on Inter
national Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency 
operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign 
currency operations for System Account in accordance with 
paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of 
Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships of Federal 
Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

-13-



3/15-16/76

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown 

below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. The basic purposes of System operations in foreign 
currencies are: 

A. To help safeguard the value of the dollar in inter
national exchange markets; 

B. To aid in making the system of international payments 
more efficient; 

C. To further monetary cooperation with central banks 
of other countries having convertible currencies, with the 
International Monetary Fund, and with other international 
payments institutions; 

D. To help insure that market movements in exchange 

rates, within the limits stated in the International Monetary 
Fund Agreement or established by central bank practices, re
flect the interaction of underlying economic forces and thus 
serve as efficient guides to current financial decisions, 
private and public; and 

E. To facilitate growth in international liquidity in 
accordance with the needs of an expanding world economy.  

2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee, System operations in foreign currencies shall 
be undertaken only when necessary: 

A. To cushion or moderate fluctuations in the flows of 
international payments, if such fluctuations (1) are deemed 
to reflect transitional market unsettlement or other tempo
rary forces and therefore are expected to be reversed in the 
foreseeable future; and (2) are deemed to be disequilibrating 
or otherwise to have potentially destabilizing effects on 
U.S. or foreign official reserves or on exchange markets, for 
example, by occasioning market anxieties, undesirable specu
lative activity, or excessive leads and lags in international 
payments;

-14-



3/15-16/76

B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in spot 

exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums and discounts 
judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever supply or demand 

persists in influencing exchange rates in one direction, 

System transactions should be modified or curtailed unless 

upon review and reassessment of the situation the Committee 

directs otherwise; 

C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditions in exchange 
markets. Special factors that might make for exchange mar
ket instabilities include (1) responses to short-run increases 
in international political tension, (2) differences in phasing 
of international economic activity that give rise to unusually 
large interest rate differentials between major markets, and 
(3) market rumors of a character likely to stimulate specula
tive transactions. Whenever exchange market instability 
threatens to produce diorderly conditions, System transactions 
may be undertaken if the Manager reaches a judgment that they 
may help to reestablish supply and demand balance at a level 
more consistent with the prevailing flow of underlying pay
ments. In such cases, the Manager shall consult as soon as 
practicable with the Committee or, in an emergency, with the 
members of the Subcommittee designated for that purpose in 
paragraph 6 of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations; 
and 

D. To adjust System balances within the limits established 
in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations in light 
of probable future needs for currencies.  

3. System drawings under the swap arrangements are appropriate 
when necessary to obtain foreign currencies for the purposes 
stated in paragraph 2 above.  

4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
transactions in forward exchange, either outright or in con
junction with spot transactions, may be undertaken only (i) 
to prevent forward premiums or discounts from giving rise to 
disequilibrating movements of short-term funds; (ii) to 
minimize speculative disturbances; (iii) to supplement exist
ing market supplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly 
as a means of encouraging the retention or accumulation of 
dollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) to allow

-15-



3/15-16/76 -16

greater flexibility in covering System or Treasury 
commitments, including commitments under swap arrange
ments, and to facilitate operations of the Stabilization 
Fund; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for the 
settlement of System or Treasury commitments denominated 
in other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover for System 
holdings of foreign currencies.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Monday, March 29, 1976, beginning at 10:00 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


