














































Minutes of Actions


8/17/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 17, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 17, 

1976, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn 
Guffey, Alternate for Mr. Balles

Messrs. Baughman, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Keran, Kichline, Parthemos, 

and Reynolds, Associate Economists



8/17/76

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 

Secretariat, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 

Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, Doll, and Eisenmenger, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas 
City, and Boston respectively 

Mr. Green and Kaminow, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Philadelphia respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Messrs. Fousek, Kareken, and Mrs. Nichols, 
Economic Advisers, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, Minneapolis, and 
Chicago respectively 

Mr. Hall, Economist and Director of Domestic 
Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Acceptances and 
Securities Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 19-20,

1976 were approved.

-2-



8/17/76

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 20 through August 16, 1976, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period July 20 through August 16, 1976, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions for the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services is 
remaining moderate in the current quarter. In July 
industrial production changed little, but total employ
ment expanded by a substantial amount. The civilian 
labor force also increased sharply, and the unemployment 
rate rose from 7.5 to 7.8 per cent. Retail sales declined 
in July, following the rebound in June. The rise in the 
wholesale price index for all commodities remained moder
ate, as average prices of farm products and foods declined.  
However, average prices of industrial commodities rose 
more than in other recent months. So far this year the 
advance in the index of average wage rates has been some
what below the rapid rate of increase during 1975.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has remained relatively steady in 
recent weeks, despite some disturbances in exchange 
markets for European currencies. In June the U. S. foreign 
trade deficit increased, but the deficit for the second 
quarter as a whole was somewhat smaller than that for the 
first quarter.



8/17/76

M1, which had declined slightly in June, expanded 
appreciably in July. Inflows of the time and savings 
deposits included in the broader aggregates were con
siderably stronger than in June, and growth in M2 and 
M3 was rapid. Market interest rates have declined some
what further in recent weeks.  

In light of.the foregoing devlopments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to maintain prevailing 
bank reserve and money market conditions over the 
period immediately ahead, provided that monetary 
aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates 
currently expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on September 21, 1976, at 9:30 a.m.

The meeting adjourned.


