














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

November 16, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 16, 

1976, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Par tee 
Wallich 
Winn 
Guffey, Alternate for Mr. Balles

Messrs. Baughman, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Kichline, Reynolds, 

and Zeisel, Associate Economists



11/16/76

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Scheld, and 
Sims, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Chicago, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Burns, Davis, and Snellings, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Kansas City, and 
Richmond, respectively 

Mr. McNees, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Hall, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 19

and November 8, 1976, were approved.

- 2 -



11/16/76

The report of examination of the System Open Market 

Account, made by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank 

Examinations and Budgets as of the close of business August 20, 

1976, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, the System Open Market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period October 19 through November 15, 

1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period October 19 through November 15, 1976, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services in 
the fourth quarter may be falling somewhat below the 
third-quarter rate. In October retail sales increased 
little following a decrease in September. Industrial 
production and employment in manufacturing declined, 
in part because of strikes. After adjustment for 
strikes, total payroll employment in nonfarm establish
ments rose somewhat further. According to household 
survey data, the unemployment rate edged up from 7.8 
to 7.9 per cent. The wholesale price index for all 
commodities rose less rapidly in October than in 
September as average prices of farm products and foods

- 3 -



11/16/76

declined; however, average prices of industrial com
modities rose sharply further. The advance in the 
index of average wage rates over recent months has 
remained somewhat below the rapid rate of increase 
during 1975.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has remained steady in recent weeks, 
declining slightly against the German mark and associated 
European currencies but rising against the pound sterling 
and the lira. In September the U. S. foreign trade 
deficit widened again, and the third-quarter deficit was 
about double the average of the first two quarters of 1976.  

M1, which was about unchanged in September, expanded 
sharply in October. Growth in M2 and M3 accelerated as 
inflows of the time and savings deposits included in these 
broader aggregates continued exceptionally strong. Interest 
rates have fluctuated in a narrow range in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and 
money market conditions consistent with moderate growth 
in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

begin on December 20 and continue on December 21, 1976.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 4 -


