














































Minutes of Actions


10/19/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 19, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 19, 

1976, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Keran, Kichline, 

Parthemos, Reynolds, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists



10/19/76

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Doll, Eisenmenger, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Kansas City, Boston, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Green, Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Hall, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 21, 

1976, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period September 21 through October 18,

1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 2 -



10/19/76

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances 

during the period September 21 through October 18, 1976, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services slowed 
somewhat further in the third quarter. In September 
retail sales changed little, following a sizable increase 
in August. Industrial production was unchanged in September; 
in the latter half of the month output of automobiles and 
trucks was curtailed by a strike at plants of a major pro
ducer. Payroll employment in nonfarm establishments rose 
further; according to household survey data, the unemploy
ment rate edged down from 7.9 to 7.8 per cent, as total 
employment and the civilian labor force both declined.  
The wholesale price index for all commodities rose sharply 
in September; average prices of farm products and foods 
increased, after 2 months of substantial declines, and 
average prices of industrial commodities rose somewhat 
more than in other recent months. The advance in the 
index of average wage rates has remained somewhat below 
the rapid rate of increase during 1975.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has remained relatively steady in 
recent weeks, declining somewhat against the German mark 
and associated European currencies but rising against 
the pound sterling and the French franc. On October 18 
the mark was revalued by an average of 3 per cent 
against the associated European currencies. In August

- 3 -



10/19/76

the U. S. foreign trade deficit remained larger than 
the monthly average in the second quarter; over all, 
the current account had been in surplus in the second 
quarter.  

M1 was about unchanged in September. However, M2 
and M3 grew substantially, as inflows of the time and 
savings deposits included in these broader aggregates 
were exceptionally strong. Market interest rates gen
erally have declined further in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next regular meeting of the 

Committee would be held on November 16, 1976, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's Note: At its meeting on September 21, 1976, 

the Committee had unanimously approved the following special 

authorization: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to arrange 
for repayment of the System's outstanding swap commit
ments to the Swiss National Bank (concurrent with repay
ment by the U. S. Treasury of Treasury notes denominated

- 4 -



10/19/76 - 5 

in Swiss francs and held by the Swiss National Bank), 
within a 3-year period by means of quarterly payments 
on a schedule that is mutually satisfactory to the Swiss 
National Bank, the U. S. Treasury, and the Federal 
Reserve. This authorization shall become effective upon 
final approval of technical details by the Chairman of 
the Federal Open Market Committee.  

Chairman Burns approved the technical details of the arrange

ment on October 26, 1976, so that the special authorization became 

effective on that date.

Secretary


