














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 17 - 18, 1976

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A-meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday and Wednesday, February 

17-18, 1976, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Tuesday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 

Baughman 

Coldwell 

Eastburn 
Holland 

Jackson 
MacLaury 

Mayo 
Partee 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, and 
Members of the Federal 
Committee

Winn, Alternate 
Open Market

Messrs. Clay, Kimbrel, and Morris, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Atlanta, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Boehne, Davis, Green, Kareken, 

Reynolds, and Scheld, Associate Economists



2/17-18/76

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Kichline and Zeisel, Associate 

Directors, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill,1/ Adviser, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Ferrell, Open Market Secretariat 
Assistant, Board of Governors 

Mr. Leonard, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Eisenmenger,2/ Parthemos, Balbach, and 
Doll, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, Richmond, St. Louis, and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt and Keran, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Ms. Tschinkel, Adviser, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Hall, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland 

Secretary's note: All of the following actions 
were taken on Wednesday, February 18, 1976.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 20, 1976, 

were approved.  

1/ Attended Wednesday session only.  
2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period January 20, 1976, through 

February 17, 1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 6 of the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations was amended to read as follows: 

6. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee is authorized to act 
on behalf of the Committee when it is necessary to enable 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to engage in foreign 
currency operations before the Committee can be consulted.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman 
and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the 
Board of Governors, and such other member of the Board as the 
Chairman may designate (or in the absence of members of the 
Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence 
of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). All 
actions taken by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee under this 
paragraph shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period January 20, 1976, through February 17, 1976, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic

policy directive:



2/18/76

-4

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that output of goods and services is continuing to expand 
at a moderate rate in the current quarter. In January 
retail sales remained at an advanced level and recovery 
in industrial production continued. Gains in nonfarm employ
ment were large and widespread and the unemployment rate 
dropped from 8.3 per cent to 7.8 per cent. Average whole
sale prices of industrial commodities increased somewhat 
less than in the preceding 2 months, and average prices 
of farm products and foods declined appreciably further.  
The index of average wage rates advanced substantially 
in January, but a significant part of the rise reflected 
an increase in the minimum wage on the first of the month.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar has changed 
little over the past 4 weeks. There have been disturbances 
in foreign exchange markets affecting primarily European 
currencies, and rates for several currencies have moved 
considerably. In December the foreign trade surplus was 
substantial, although not as large as in other recent months, 
and bank-reported private capital movements shifted to a 
net outflow.  

M1, which had declined in December, increased only a 
little in January, but M2 and M3 rose considerably. At 
commercial banks and nonbank thrift institutions, inflows 
of time and savings deposits other than large-denomination 
CD's expanded substantially. Inflows into savings accounts 
were especially large in January, as short-term market 
interest rates continued to decline early in the month and 
fell below Regulation Q ceiling rates on such accounts. In 
recent weeks, interest rates on both short- and long-term 
securities have changed little, while mortgage interest 
rates have declined somewhat.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic recovery, while resisting inflationary pressures 
and contributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions.



2/18/76

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to maintain prevailing 
bank reserve and money market conditions over the 
period immediately ahead, provided that monetary 
aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates 
currently expected.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, March 16, 1976.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

-5-


