














































Minutes of Actions


6/22/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 22, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 22, 1976, 

at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn 
Baughman, Alternate for Mr. Kimbrel

Messrs. Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramleyl 1/ Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt 1/ Davis,1/ Hocter,1/ 

Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,1/ and Zeisel,1/ 
Associate Economists

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.  
2/ Left meeting at point indicated.



6/22/76

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Keir,1 / Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Guenther,2/ Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill,1/ Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Fossum, First Vice President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Scheld,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ Sims,1/ 
and Doll,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Boston, 
San Francisco, and Kansas City, respectively 

Messrs. Burns 1/ and Karnosky,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
St. Louis respectively 

Mr. Kareken,1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Greene,1/ Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 

Ms. Tschinkel,1/ Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Mullineaux,1/ Research Officer, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

In connection with the suit relating to membership on 

the Committee by Reserve Bank Presidents filed in Federal District 

1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.  
2/ Left meeting at point indicated.



6/22/76

Court on June 21, 1976, by Congressman Henry S. Reuss of Wisconsin, 

the Committee, by unanimous vote, authorized its General Counsel 

to employ, if determined by him to be necessary and appropriate, 

outside legal counsel to assist the Committee in defense of the suit.  

Prior to the following actions, Mr. Guenther left the 

meeting and the staff members who were not present at the outset 

entered.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 18, 1976, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 18 through June 21, 1976, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Renewal for a further period of 3 months of a drawing on 

the System by the Bank of Mexico, maturing on July 9, 1976, was 

noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' accep

tances, during the period May 18 through June 21, 1976, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the



6/22/76

Committee, to execute transactions for the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services, which 
had been vigorous in the first quarter, has moderated in 
the current quarter. In May retail sales declined from 
the March-April level and were near the monthly average 
of the first quarter. However, recovery in industrial 
production continued at about the average pace of the 
first 4 months of the year, and the gain in employment 
again was substantial. The unemployment rate declined 
from 7.5 to 7.3 per cent. The rise in the wholesale 
price index for all commodities, which had been large 
in April, was moderate in May; average prices of farm 
products and foods rose much less than in April. Average 
prices of industrial commodities changed little in May, 
but in recent weeks price increases have been announced 
for some major industrial materials. The rise in con
sumer prices in May was somewhat faster than the average 
increase in earlier months of the year, owing to increases 
in prices of food and energy items. The advance in the 
index of average wage rates was larger in May than the 
gains in other recent months, owing in part to implemen
tation of a new labor contract in a major industry.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has been relatively steady in recent 
weeks. On June 7 a total of $5.3 billion of 6-month 
stand-by credits to the United Kingdom was announced, 
including $1 billion under the Federal Reserve System's 
swap line and $1 billion from the Exchange Stabilization 
Fund. Subsequently, the decline in the pound sterling 
was halted and partly reversed. In April the U. S.  
foreign trade deficit was at the same rate as in the 
first quarter.  

Growth in monetary aggregates slowed substantially 
in May and early June from the exceptionally rapid rates 
recorded in April, mainly because of a sharp slackening 
in expansion of demand deposits at commercial banks; 
inflows of those time and savings deposits included in 
the broader aggregates were relatively well maintained.

-4-



6/22/76

Market interest rates in general rose somewhat further 
in the latter part of May, but since then, short-term 
rates have fluctuated in a narrow range and long-term 
rates have edged down.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic expansion, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

By unanimous vote, responsibility for making determinations 

with respect to appeals of denial of access to Committee records, 

under the provisions of 271.4(d) of the Committee's Rules Regarding 

Availability of Information, was delegated to Mr. Gardner, and in 

his absence, to Mr. Coldwell.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on July 20, 1976.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


