














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 20, 1976 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 20, 1976, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Holland 1/ 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn, MacLaury, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Minneapolis, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Guy, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Hocter, Keran, Kichline, 

Parthemos, Reynolds, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists

1/ Left meeting at point indicated.



4/20/76

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 

Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Keir, Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 
Miss Klaput, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, Doll, Eisenmenger, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas City, Boston, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach and Burns, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and 
Dallas, respectively 

Messrs. Fousek and Kareken, Economic Advisers, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 15-16, 

1976, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period March 16 through April 19, 

1976, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months 

of System drawings on the National Bank of Belgium and the Swiss 

National Bank, maturing on May 6 and May 13, 1976, was authorized.

-2-



4/20/76

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances, 

during the period March 16 through April 19, 1976, were approved, 

ratified, and confirmed.  

Mr. Holland left the meeting prior to the following action.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Com

mittee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services picked 
up in the first quarter. In March retail sales rose 
sharply further and recovery in industrial production 
continued. Gains in non-farm employment were again 
widespread and the unemployment rate declined from 7.6 
to 7.5 per cent. Over the first quarter wholesale prices 
of farm products, foods, and fuels declined appreciably, 
but average wholesale prices of other commodities rose 
almost as rapidly as during the second half of 1975.  
Over recent months, the advance in the index of average 
wage rates has moderated somewhat.  

The average value of the dollar against leading 
foreign currencies has been relatively steady in recent 
weeks, while the British pound and the Italian lira have 
remained under considerable downward pressure. In 
February the U.S. foreign trade balance registered a 
second successive monthly deficit; reported net out
flows of private capital remained moderate.  

Monetary aggregates expanded moderately in March.  
At commercial banks, inflows of time and savings deposits 
other than negotiable CD's fell substantially from the 
exceptional pace of February; inflows to nonbank thrift 
institutions remained strong. Since mid-March, both 
short- and long-term market interest rates have declined.

-3-



4/20/76

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
financial conditions that will encourage continued 
economic recovery, while resisting inflationary pres
sures and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking account of 
developments in domestic and international financial 
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve 
and money market conditions consistent with moderate 
growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on May 18, 1976.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


