














































Minutes of Actions


9/20/77

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 20, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 20, 

1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, 

Ettin, Kichline, Reynolds, Scheld, and 
Truman, Associate Economists



9/20/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager,System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Miss Klaput, Open Market Secretariat, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis and Parthemos, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Fousek, Kaminow, and 
Keran, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, New York, 
Philadelphia, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Clarkin, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 16, 

1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 15 through September 

19, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 2 -



9/20/77

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period August 15 through September 19, 

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Messrs. Lilly, Morris, Roos, and Wallich dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
has grown less rapidly in the current quarter 
than in the second quarter. In August industrial 
output declined by about as much as it had risen 
in July. Employment increased moderately but the 
labor force rose more and the unemployment rate 
edged up to 7.1 per cent, the same as in June.  
The dollar value of total retail sales, which had 
turned up in July, rose appreciably in August.  
The wholesale price index for all commodities was 
about unchanged; average prices of farm products 
and foods declined sharply for the third successive 
month, and average prices of industrial commodities 
continued to rise at a more moderate pace than in 
the early months of 1977. So far this year the 
index of average hourly earnings has advanced at 
about the same pace as it had on the average 
during 1976.  

The weighted average exchange rate for the 
dollar against leading foreign currencies has 
recovered further in recent weeks, returning to 
the level of late June. In July the U. S. foreign 
trade deficit was at about the second-quarter rate, 
and there were sizable net inflows of foreign 
private and official capital.

- 3 -



9/20/77

Growth in M-1 and M-2 slowed in August from 
the exceptionally rapid rates in July. Expansion 
of both demand deposits and time and savings deposits 
at banks slackened. Growth in M-3 also slowed, 
although inflows to nonbank thrift institutions 
remained strong. Business short-term borrowing 
increased somewhat from the reduced pace in July, 
but remained below the volume of preceding months.  
Short-term interest rates, which had risen 
appreciably in early August, most recently have 
advanced somewhat further. Yields on longer-term 
market securities, however, have changed little 
on balance in recent months. Federal Reserve 
discount rates were increased from 5-1/4 to 5-3/4 
per cent in late August and early September, and 
member bank borrowings receded from the high levels 
of the latter part of August.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster bank reserve and other financial conditions 
that will encourage continued economic expansion 
and help resist inflationary pressures, while 
contributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions.  

At its meeting on July 19, 1977, the Committee 
agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 within 
ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 7 to 9-1/2 per cent, 
and 8-1/2 to 11 per cent, respectively, from the 
second quarter of 1977 to the second quarter of 
1978 appears to be consistent with these objectives.  
These ranges are subject to reconsideration at any 
time as conditions warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term 
rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed 
to be reasonably consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the pre
ceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it 
expects the annual growth rates over the September
October period to be within the ranges of 2 to 7 
per cent for M-1 and 4 to 8 per cent for M-2. In 
the judgment of the Committee such growth rates

- 4 -



9/20/77

are likely to be associated with a weekly-average 
Federal funds rate of about 6-1/4 per cent. If, 
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, 
it appears that growth rates over the 2-month 
period will deviate significantly from the mid
points of the indicated ranges, the operational 
objective for the Federal funds rate shall be 
modified in an orderly fashion within a range 
of 6 to 6-1/2 per cent.  

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, October 18, 1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's Note: 

On September 30, 1977, Committee members voted to 

increase from $2 billion to $3 billion the limit on Federal Reserve 

Bank holdings of special short-term certificates of indebtedness 

purchased directly from the Treasury specified in paragraph 2 of 

the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, effective 

immediately.  

Votes for this action: Messrs.  
Burns, Coldwell, Gardner, Guffey, 
Jackson, Lilly, Mayo, Partee, Roos, 
Wallich, Eastburn and Timlen. Votes 
against this action; None. (Messrs.  
Eastburn and Timlen voted as alternates 
for Messrs. Morris and Volcker, respectively.)

Secretary

- 5 -


