














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 21, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 21, 1977, 

beginning at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black and Willes, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Guy, Deputy General Counsel 
Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, 

Kichline, Scheld, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists



6/21/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Fossum and Smoot, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta and Philadelphia, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, J. Davis, and Eisenmenger, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Burns, Sims,and 
Willey, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, 

Dallas, San Francisco, and New York, 

respectively 
Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 
Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

May 17, 1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period May 17 through June 20, 1977,

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 2 -



6/21/77

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive.  

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
has grown in the current quarter at about the 
rapid rate of the first quarter. In May industrial 
output and employment continued to expand at a 
substantial pace, and the unemployment rate edged 
down from 7.0 to 6.9 per cent. Total retail 
sales increased from the advanced March-April 
level. The rise in the wholesale price index 
for all commodities slowed substantially in May, 
as average prices of farm products and foods 
changed little after having increased sharply 
for three consecutive months; average prices of 
industrial commodities also rose less than in 
other recent months.  

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies has changed little on 
balance over the past month. The U. S. foreign 
trade deficit was nearly as large in April as in 
March.  

M-1 increased only slightly in May, after 
rising at an exceptionally rapid rate in April.  
Reflecting mainly the behavior of M-1, growth in 
M-2 and M-3 also slowed sharply. Inflows to 
banks of time and savings deposits other than 
large-denomination CD's continued to slacken, 
but inflows to nonbank thrift institutions 
remained sizable. Business short-term borrowing 
moderated from the sharply increased pace of 
April, and corporate borrowing in the capital 
markets was reduced further. Short-term market 
interest rates have changed little on balance 
in recent weeks, while longer-term yields have 
declined.

- 3 -



6/21/77

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster bank reserve and other financial con
ditions that will encourage continued economic 
expansion and help resist inflationary pressures, 
while contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

At its meeting on April 19, 1977, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and 
M-3 within ranges of 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent, 
7 to 9-1/2 per cent, and 8-1/2 to 11 per cent, 
respectively, from the first quarter of 1977 
to the first quarter of 1978 appears to be 
consistent with these objectives. These ranges 
are subject to reconsideration at any time as 
conditions warrant.  

At this time, the Committee seeks to 
maintain about the prevailing money market 
conditions during the period immediately ahead, 
provided that monetary aggregates appear to be 
growing at approximately the rates currently 
expected, which are believed to be on a path 
reasonably consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the 
preceding paragraph. Specifically, the Committee 
seeks to maintain the weekly-average Federal 
funds rate at about 5-3/8 per cent, so long as 
M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing over the June
July period at annual rates within ranges of 
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent and 6 to 10 per cent, 
respectively. If, giving approximately equal 
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth 
rates over the 2-month period are approaching 
or moving beyond the limits of the indicated 
ranges, the operational objective for the weekly
average Federal funds rate shall be modified in 
an orderly fashion within a range of 5-1/4 to 
5-3/4 per cent.  

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.

- 4 -



6/21/77

Prior to the following action Chairman Burns left 

the meeting and Vice Chairman Volcker assumed the chair for 

the remainder of the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period May 17 through June 20, 

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on. Tuesday, July 19, 1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Deputy Secretary

- 5 -


