














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

January 17-18, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, 

January 17-18, 1977, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Gardner 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Lilly 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Roos, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley,2/ Economist (Domestic Business) 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.



1/17-18/77

Messrs. Brandt,1/ Davis,1/ Keran,1/ 
Kichline,1/ Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,3/ 
and Zeisel,1/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee,3/ Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne, Guenther,4/ and Keir,1/ 
Assistants to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill,1/ Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Truman,4/ Associate Adviser, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Van Nice,First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Doll,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ 
and Scheld,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Boston, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Burns 1/ and Kaminow,1/ Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Hall,1/ Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Duprey,1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Ozog,1/ Manager, Acceptances and 
Securities Department, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.  
3/ Attended part of Monday session and all of Tuesday session.  
4/ Attended part of Monday session only.



1/17-18/77

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified (a) the 

agreement in principle reached in Basle, Switzerland, on 

January 10, 1977, by governors of participating central banks 

for a $3 billion medium-term credit facility to the Bank of 

England relating to official sterling balances, and (b) an 

agreement regarding joint Federal Reserve-U. S. Treasury 

participation in that facility as described in the following 

letter to Chairman Burns from Secretary of the Treasury Simon: 

January 14, 1977 

Dear Mr. Chairman: 

With respect to the official sterling 
balances facility that has been the subject 
of extensive discussion among the U. S.  
Treasury, the Federal Reserve System, the 
Bank of England and the governors of the 
other central banks represented at the BIS 
in Basle, I should like to confirm the 
following agreement between the Treasury 
and the Federal Reserve.  

In light of the agreement that has now 
been reached in Basle and of our existing 
mutual understanding about the prospective 
implementation of that agreement we agree to 
the following arrangements for joint Federal 
Reserve-U. S. Treasury participation in the 
facility.  

-- If the U. S. is required to 
provide financing to the BIS in 
support of that facility, the funds 
will be provided initially by the 
Federal Reserve through its existing 
swap arrangement with the BIS, taking 
the form of a usual three-month swap 
renewable three times.  

-- Should the Federal Reserve be 
called upon to provide financing under

- 3 -



1/17-18/77

the terms of the facility continuously 
for more than one year, in light of 
the close cooperation between the 
Treasury and Federal Reserve, such 
financing will be provided to the 
Federal Reserve System by the U. S.  
Treasury, acting through the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

-- Risk associated with U. S.  
financing of the facility, whether 
such financing is provided by the 
Federal Reserve or the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund, will be borne 
equally by the Federal Reserve and 
the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

I understand that the BIS has agreed, as 
part of the sterling balance facility, to make 
every effort to finance any U. K. drawing by 
raising funds in other markets, thereby 
limiting the need for official financing for 
the facility.  

Sincerely yours, 

(Signed) 

William E. Simon 

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved arrangements 

to warehouse eligible foreign currencies for the Exchange 

Stabilization Fund of the U. S. Treasury on the basis set forth 

in the following exchange of letters between Secretary Simon 

and Chairman Burns: 

January 14, 1977 

Dear Arthur: 

I have written to you today under separate 
cover a letter confirming our understandings

- 4 -



1/17-18/77

with respect to United States participation 
in the official sterling balance facility 
agreed in principle at Basle on January 10.  

I am very pleased that we have been 
able to work out arrangements for cooperation 
in this matter which meet the needs of both 
the Federal Reserve System and the Treasury.  
In view of the potential liquidity strains on 
the ESF arising from this and other claims on 
the ESF I would appreciate your willingness to 
work out, along the lines we had discussed, 
warehousing arrangements for the ESF of $1-1/2 
billion, $750 million of which would be provided 
for periods of twelve months and the remainder 
for periods of six months. I understand that 
the recent modification in language in the 
FOMC guidelines did not change the authorization 
for such warehousing which has existed for a 
number of years.  

Given our joint participation in the 
official sterling balances facility, and our 
sharing equally of the risks, I am sure you 
will agree that Treasury and the Federal 
Reserve will need to work out together any 
questions related to implementation of the 
Basle agreement. In this connection, it is 
my understanding, in the event the IMF 
Managing Director finds that the United 
Kingdom is not fulfilling the provisions of 
the agreement, that the Federal Reserve and 
the Treasury would jointly have to agree if 
U. S. financing were to be continued despite 
the Managing Director's findings. I am 
confident that our two institutions will be 
able to agree on this and other questions of 
implementation in the spirit of cooperation 
which has characterized our relationship and 
it is on this basis that I have agreed to the 
understandings set forth in our exchange of 
letters.  

Sincerely, 

(Signed)

William E. Simon

- 5 -



1/17-18/77

January 17, 1977 

Dear Mr. Secretary: 

At its meeting today the Federal Open 
Market Committee took note of the suggestion 
in your letter of January 14, 1977, that the 
Federal Reserve provide, along the lines we 
had discussed, warehousing arrangements for 
the ESF of $1-1/2 billion, $750 million of 
which would be available for periods of twelve 
months and the remainder for periods of six 
months.  

I am pleased to inform you that the 
Federal Reserve will be prepared, if 
requested by the Treasury, to warehouse 
eligible foreign currencies for the ESF on 
the basis you have suggested.  

I and my colleagues share your confidence 
that our two institutions will be able to work 
out together any questions related to the 
Basle agreement in the spirit of cooperation 
that has long characterized our relationship.  

Sincerely yours, 

(Signed) 

Arthur F. Burns 

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken 

on Tuesday, January 18, 1977.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

December 20-21, 1976, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period December 21, 1976, 

through January 17, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 6 -



1/17-18/77

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period December 21, 1976, through 

January 17, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted the following 

ranges for rates of growth in monetary aggregates for the 

period from the fourth quarter of 1976 to the fourth quarter 

of 1977: M-1, 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent; M-2, 7 to 10 per cent; 

and M-3, 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent.  

With Mr. Balles dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that growth in real output of goods and 
services slowed somewhat further in the fourth 
quarter, mainly because of a sharp decline in the 
rate of inventory accumulation. In December retail 
sales increased sharply, following strong gains 
in the preceding 2 months. Industrial production 
and total employment rose further, and the unemploy
ment rate declined from 8.1 to 7.9 per cent. The 
wholesale price index for all commodities rose sub
stantially, reflecting a sharp increase in average 
prices of farm products and foods; the rise in 
average prices of industrial commodities slowed, 
owing largely to declines in prices of fuels. The

- 7 -



1/17-18/77

advance in the index of average wage rates 
over recent months has remained below the 
rapid rate of increase during 1975.  

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies declined in December 
but has since recovered somewhat. The pound 
sterling strengthened following negotiation 
of an IMF stand-by arrangement and of a medium
term facility to offset reductions in official 
sterling balances. In November the U. S.  
foreign trade deficit increased, bringing the 
October-November average deficit to about the 
third-quarter rate.  

M-1, which was unchanged in November, 
expanded appreciably in December; from the 
third to the fourth quarter growth in M-1 was 
moderate. Inflows of the time and savings 
deposits included in M-2 and M-3 were almost 
as large in December as in November, and 
growth in these broader aggregates was sub
stantial. Interest rates changed little in 
late December but recently have moved up.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster financial conditions that will encourage 
continued economic expansion, while resisting 
inflationary pressures and contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  

To implement this policy, while taking 
account of developments in domestic and inter
national financial markets,the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
consistent with moderate growth in monetary 
aggregates over the period ahead.  

It was agreed that the next regular meeting of the 

Committee would be held on February 15, 1977, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 8 -


