














































Minutes of Actions


2/15/77

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 15, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 15, 

1977, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Roos, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt,1/ Davis,1/ Keran,1/ 

Kichline,1, Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,1/ 
and Zeisel,1/ Associate Economists

1/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.



2/15/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee,1/ Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir,1/ Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin,1/ Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Truman,1/ Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Van Nice, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Boehne,1/ Davis,1/ and 
Scheld,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland,and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Davis,1/ and Green,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. McNees,1/ Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken,1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Hill,1/ Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the following 

statement of policy regarding the Government in the Sunshine 

Act:

1/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.

- 2 -



2/15/77

Policy Regarding the 
Government in the Sunshine Act 

On September 13, 1976, there was enacted into 

law the Government in the Sunshine Act, Pub. L. No.94

409, 90 Stat. 1241 ("Sunshine Act"), established 
for the purpose of providing the public with the 
"fullest practicable information regarding the 
decisionmaking processes of the Federal Government...  

while protecting the rights of individuals and the 

ability of the Government to carry out its responsi

bilities."1/ The Sunshine Act applies only to those 

Federal agencies that are defined in Section 552(e) 

of Title 5 of the United States Code and "headed by 

a collegial body composed of two or more individual 

members, a majority of whom are appointed to such 

position by the President with the advice and con
sent of the Senate, and any subdivision thereof 
authorized to act on behalf of the agency. "2/ 

The Federal Open Market Committee ("FOMC") is 
a separate and independent statutory body within 
the Federal Reserve System. In no respect is it an 
agent or 'subdivision' of the Board. It was originally 
established by the Banking Act of 1933 and restructured 
in its present form by the Banking Act of 1935 and 
subsequent legislation in 1942 (generally see 12 U.S.C.  
§263(a)). The FOMC's membership is composed of the seven 
members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System ("Board of Governors") and five representatives of 

1/ Government in the Sunshine Act, Pub. L. No. 94

409, §2, 90 Stat. 1241 (1976).  
2/ Government in the Sunshine Act, Pub. L. No. 94

409, §3(a), 90 Stat. 1241 (1976).

- 3 -



2/15/77

the Federal Reserve Banks who are selected annually 
in accordance with the procedures set forth in 
Section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C.  
§263(a). Members of the Board of Governors serve 
in an ex officio capacity on the FOMC by reason of 
their appointment as Members of the Board of 
Governors, not as a result of an appointment "to 
such position" (the FOMC) by the President.  
Representatives of the Reserve Banks serve on the 
FOMC not as a result of an appointment "to such 
position" by the President, but rather by virtue 
of their positions with the Reserve Banks and their 
selection pursuant to Section 12A of the Federal 
Reserve Act. It is clear therefore that the FOMC 
does not fall within the scope of an 'agency' or 
'subdivision' as defined in the Sunshine Act and 
consequently is not subject to the provisions of 
that Act.  

As explained below, the Act would not require 
the FOMC to hold its meetings in open session even 
if the FOMC were covered by the Act. However, 
despite the conclusion reached that the Sunshine 
Act does not apply to the FOMC, the FOMC has 
determined that its procedures and timing of public 
disclosure already are conducted in accordance with 
the spirit of the Sunshine Act, as that Act would 
apply to deliberations of the nature engaged in by 
the FOMC.  

In the foregoing regard, the FOMC has noted 
that while the Act calls generally for open meetings 
of multi-member Federal agencies, 10 specific 
exemptions from the open meeting requirement are 
provided to assure the ability of the Government to 
carry out its responsibilities. Among the exemp
tions provided is that which authorizes any agency 
operating under the Act to conduct closed meetings 
where the subject of a meeting involves information 
"the premature disclosure of which would--in the 
case of an agency which regulates currencies, 
securities, commodities, or financial institutions,

- 4 -



2/15/77

be likely to lead to significant financial specula
tion in currencies, securities, or commodities."3/ 

As to meetings closed under such exemption, the 
Act requires the maintenance of either a transcript, 
electronic recording or minutes and sets forth 
specified, detailed requirements as to the contents 
and timing of disclosure of certain portions or all 
of such minutes. The Act permits the withholding 
from the public of the minutes where disclosure 
would be likely to produce adverse consequences of 
the nature described in the relevant exemptions.  

The FOMC has reviewed the agenda of its monthly 
meetings for the past three years and has determined 
that all such meetings could have been closed pur
suant to the exemption dealing with financial 
speculation or other exemptions set forth in the 
Sunshine Act. The FOMC has further determined that 
virtually all of its substantive deliberations could 
have been preserved pursuant to the Act's minutes 
requirements and that such minutes could similarly 
have been protected against premature disclosure 
under the provisions of the Act.  

The FOMC's deliberations are currently reported 
by means of a document entitled "Record of Policy 
Actions" which is released to the public approxi
mately one month after the meeting to which it 
relates. The Record of Policy Actions complies with 
the Act's minutes requirements in that it contains 
a full and accurate report of all matters of policy 
discussed and views presented, clearly sets forth 
all policy actions taken by the FOMC and the reasons 
therefor, and includes the votes by individual 
members on each policy action. The timing of 
release of the Record of Policy Actions is fully 
consistent with the Act's provisions assuring 
against premature release of any item of discussion 
in an agency's minutes that contains information 
of a sensitive financial nature. In fact, by 

3/ Government in the Sunshine Act, Pub. L. No. 94
409, §3(a), 90 Stat. 1242 (1976).

- 5 -



2/15/77

releasing the comprehensive Record of Policy Actions 
to the public approximately a month after each 
meeting, the FOMC exceeds the publication require
ments that would be mandated by the letter of the 
Sunshine Act.  

Recognizing the Congressional purpose under
lying enactment of the Sunshine Act, the FOMC has 
determined to continue its current practice and 
timing of public disclosures in the conviction 
that its operations thus conducted are consistent 
with the intent and spirit of the Sunshine Act.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

January 17-18, 1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee amended Section 

271.6(a) of its Rules Regarding Availability of Information to 

read as follows, effective March 12, 1977: 

271.6 Information not Disclosed 

Except as may be authorized by the Committee, 
information of the Committee that is not available 
to the public through other sources will not be 
published or made available for inspection, examina

tion, or copying by any person if such information 

(a) is specifically exempted from dis
closure by statute (other than 
section 552b of Title 5 United 
States Code), provided that such 
statute (A) requires that the 
matters be withheld from the public 
in such a manner as to leave no dis
cretion on the issue, or (B) estab
lishes particular criteria for with
holding or refers to particular

- 6 -



2/15/77

types of matters to be withheld; or 
is specifically authorized under 
criteria established by an executive 
order to be kept secret in the 
interest of national defense or 
foreign policy and is in fact 
properly classified pursuant to 
such executive order.  

* * * * * 

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period January 18, 1977, 

through February 14, 1977, were approved, ratified, and 

confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period January 18, 1977, through 

February 14, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests underlying strength in economic activity, 
although industrial production and retail sales 
were held down in January by the effects of 
unusually severe weather. Housing starts rose 
sharply in December, and labor market surveys 
completed by mid-January indicated a further rise 
in employment and a decline in the unemployment 
rate from 7.8 to 7.3 per cent. The wholesale 
price index for all commodities continued to

- 7 -



2/15/77

rise, reflecting increases in the average both for 
farm products and foods and for industrial 
commodities. The index of average wage rates 
rose sharply in January as a result of marked 
increases in the volatile construction and service 
sectors.  

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies has risen somewhat over 
the past month. In December the U. S. foreign 
trade deficit increased further; in the fourth 
quarter as a whole the deficit was a little larger 
than in the third quarter.  

M-1, which had expanded appreciably in 
December, grew at a moderate pace in January.  
Growth in M-2 and M-3 also moderated. At banks 
and thrift institutions, inflows of time and 
savings deposits other than large-denomination CD's 
slowed somewhat. Interest rates have changed 
relatively little on balance since mid-January.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster bank reserve and other financial con
ditions that will encourage continued economic 
expansion, while resisting inflationary pressures 
and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

At its meeting on January 18, 1977, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and 
M-3 within ranges of 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent, 7 
to 10 per cent, and 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent, 
respectively, from the fourth quarter of 1976 to 
the fourth quarter of 1977 appears to be consistent 
with these objectives. These ranges are subject 
to reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term 
rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed 
to be reasonably consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the pre
ceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it

- 8 -



2/15/77

expects the annual growth rates over the February
March period to be within the ranges of 3 to 7 per 
cent for M-1 and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 per cent for M-2.  
In the judgment of the Committee such growth rates 
are likely to be associated with a weekly average 
Federal funds rate of about 4-5/8 to 4-3/4 per 
cent. If, giving approximately equal weight to 
M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 
2-month period will deviate significantly from the 
midpoints of the indicated ranges, the operational 
objective for the Federal funds rate shall be modified 
in an orderly fashion within a range of 4-1/4 to 5 
per cent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the operating constraints specified 
above are proving to be significantly inconsistent, 
the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman who 
will then decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee.  

By unanimous vote,the Committee revised No. 4 of 

the Guidelines for the Conduct of System Operations in Federal 

Agency Issues to read as follows, effective immediately; 

4. Purchases will be limited to fully taxable 
issues, not eligible for purchase by the 
Federal Financing Bank, for which there is 
an active secondary market. Purchases will 
also be limited to issues outstanding in 
amounts of $300 million or over in cases 
where the obligations have a maturity of five 
years or less at the time of issuance, and 
to issues outstanding in amounts of $200 
million or over in cases where the securities 
have a maturity of more than five years at 
the time of issuance.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on March 15, 1977, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 9 -


