














































Minutes of Actions


5/17/77

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 17, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 17, 1977, 

beginning at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Ettin, Kichline, 

Reynolds, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists



5/17/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, Eisenmenger, and 
Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, 
Boston, and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Fousek, Kaminow, 
and Keran, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, 
New York, Philadelphia, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Ms. Tschinkel, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

April 19, 1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period April 19 through 

May 16, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period April 19 through May 16, 1977, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 2 -



5/17/77

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
is growing at a rapid rate in the current quarter.  
In April industrial output and employment con
tinued to expand at a substantial pace, and the 
unemployment rate declined from 7.3 to 7.0 per 
cent. Total retail sales remained at the advanced 
level reached in March. The wholesale price 
index for all commodities rose substantially in 
April for the third consecutive month; increases 
again were particularly sharp among farm products 
and foods, and they remained sizable for industrial 
commodities.  

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies has changed little on 
balance over the past month. The U. S. foreign 
trade deficit widened further in March; for the 
first quarter as a whole, the deficit was twice 
as large as for the preceding quarter,.  

The increase in M-1, which had been moderate 
in the first quarter, was exceptionally large in 
April. Inflows of the time and savings deposits 
included in the broader aggregates were slower 
than earlier in the year, but because of the rapid 
expansion in M-1, growth in M-2 and M-3 accelerated.  
Business short-term borrowing expanded sharply 
while corporate financing in the capital markets 
was reduced. Market interest rates have risen in 
recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster bank reserve and other financial conditions 
that will encourage continued economic expansion 
and help resist inflationary pressures, while 
contributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions.

- 3 -



5/17/77

At its meeting on April 19, 1977, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 
within ranges of 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent, 7 to 
9-1/2 per cent, and 8-1/2 to 11 per cent, res
pectively, from the first quarter of 1977 to the 
first quarter of 1978 appears to be consistent 
with these objectives. These ranges are subject 
to reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term 
rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed 
to be reasonably consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the pre
ceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it 
expects the annual growth rates over the May
June period to be within the ranges of 0 to 4 
per cent for M-1 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 per cent for 
M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such 
growth rates are likely to be associated with a 
weekly average Federal funds rate of about 5-3/8 
per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight 
to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over 
the 2-month period will deviate significantly 
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the 
operational objective for the Federal funds rate 
shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a 
range of 5-1/4 to 5-3/4 per cent.  

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, June 21, 1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 4 -


