














































Minutes of Actions


8/16/77 

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

August 16, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 16, 1977, beginning at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Mr. Kimbrel, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Atlanta 

Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Kichline, 

Reynolds, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations



Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the Board 

of Governors 
Mrs. Farar, Economist Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 
Miss Klaput, Open Market Secretariat, Board of 

Governors 

Messrs. Rankin and Van Nice, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. J. Davis, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Burns, Hoskins, Keran, 
and Karnosky, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Dallas, Philadelphia, 
San Francisco, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. John Hill, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 19, 1977, were approved.  

Secretary's Note: On August 5, 1977, by unanimous vote (with 

Messrs. Balles and Timlen voting as alternates for Messrs. Guffey and 

Volcker, respectively, and Messrs. Coldwell, Gardner, and Lilly absent), 

the Committee modified the inter-meeting range for the Federal funds 

rate specified in the next-to-last paragraph of the domestic policy 

directive issued on July 19, 1977, by increasing the upper limit from 

5-3/4 to 6 per cent.



By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period July 19 through August 15, 1977, were 

approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and banker's acceptances during 

the period July 19 through August 15, 1977, were approved, ratified, 

and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that real output of goods and services is growing less 

rapidly in the current quarter than in the second 
quarter. In July industrial output rose a little less 
than in June. The rise in payroll employment in non
farm establishments was substantial. According to the 
household survey data, total nonagricultural employment 
was unchanged and the unemployment rate edged down to 
6.9 per cent, the same as in May. The dollar value of 
total retail sales rose somewhat, after 2 months of 

decline. The wholesale price index for all commodities 
was about unchanged in July; average prices of farm 
products and foods declined sharply further, and average 

prices of industrial commodities continued to rise at a 
more moderate pace than in the early months of 1977.  
The index of average hourly earnings has continued to 
advance at about the same pace that it had on the average 
during 1976.  

The weighted average exchange rate for the dollar 

against leading foreign currencies has recovered more 

than 1 per cent from the low point reached in late July.  
In June the U.S. foreign trade deficit rose sharply, and 
the deficit was larger for the second quarter as a whole 
than for the first.



The increase in M-1 was exceptionally large in July.  

Inflows to banks of the time and savings deposits 

included in the broader monetary aggregates strengthened, 

and growth in M-2 and M-3 also accelerated sharply. Busi

ness short-term borrowing moderated from the rapid pace 

in June. Interest rates on short- and intermediate-term 

market instruments have risen appreciably in recent weeks, 

while yields on longer-term bonds have changed little.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 

policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 

bank reserve and other financial conditions that will 
encourage continued economic expansion and help resist 
inflationary pressures, while contributing to a sustain
able pattern of international transactions.  

At its meeting on July 19, 1977, the Committee 
agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 within ranges 
of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 7 to 9-1/2 per.cent, and 8-1/2 
to 11 per cent, respectively, from the second quarter 
of 1977 to the second quarter of 1978 appears to be 
consistent with these objectives. These ranges are 
subject to reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates 
of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be rea
sonably consistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary 

aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, 
at present, it expects the annual growth rates .over the 
August-September period to be within the ranges of 0 to 
5 per cent for M-1 and 3 to 8 per cent for M-2. In the 
judgment of the Committee such growth rates are likely to 
be associated with a weekly-average Federal funds rate of 
about 6 per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight 
to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 
2-month period will deviate significantly from the mid
points of the indicated ranges, the operational objective 
for the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly 
fashion within a range of 5-3/4 to 6-1/4 per cent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the operating constraints specified above 
are proving to be significantly inconsistent, the Manager 
is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.



-5

It.was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, September 20, 1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Deputy Secretary


