














































Minutes of Actions


10/17-18/77

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 17-18, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, 

October 17-18, 1977, beginning at 3:00 p.m. on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 1/ 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin, 

Kichline, Reynolds, Scheld, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



10/17-18/77

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner 2/, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. McIntosh, Moriarty, and Smoot, 
First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, St. Louis, and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. J. Davis 1/, Senior Vice President 

Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burns, Cox, Kaminow, and 
Keran, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond, Dallas, Atlanta, 
Philadelphia, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

September 20, 1977, were approved.  

Note: The following actions were taken on Tuesday, 

October 18, 1977.

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  

2/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.

- 2 -



10/17-18/77 - 3 

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period September 20 through 

October 17, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period September 20 through October 17, 

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee amended paragraph 

2 of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations to 

lower the dollar limit on Federal Reserve Bank holdings of 

special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased 

directly from the Treasury from $3 billion to $2 billion, 

effective immediately.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Committee adopted 

the following ranges for rates of growth in monetary aggregates 

for the period from the third quarter of 1977 to the third 

quarter of 1978: M-1, 4 to 6-1/2 per cent; M-2, 6-1/2 to 9 

per cent; and M-3, 8 to 10-1/2 per cent.  

With Mr. Morris dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive:



10/17-18/77

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services slowed 
in the third quarter, mainly because of a reduction in 
the rate of inventory accumulation. In September 
industrial production expanded, returning to about 
the level reached in July, and employment increased 
substantially. The unemployment rate edged down to 
6.9 per cent, but remained near the level prevailing 
since April. The dollar value of total retail sales 
declined after having risen appreciably in July and 
August. The wholesale price index for all commodities, 
which had declined on balance since May, advanced in 
September; average prices of farm products and foods 
changed little following 3 months of sharp decreases, 
and average prices of industrial commodities rose 
more than in the immediately preceding months. So far 
this year the index of average hourly earnings has 
advanced at about the same pace as it had on the 
average during 1976.  

Pressure on the dollar in foreign exchange markets 
emerged at the end of September, and the dollar has 
declined against most major foreign currencies and 
particularly against the Japanese yen. In August the 
U.S. foreign trade deficit widened; the July-August 
average was somewhat above the second-quarter rate.  

M-1 and M-2 expanded somewhat more in September 
than in August, and increased substantially further 
in early October. Inflows to banks of time and savings 
deposits increased little in September from the reduced 
rate in August, while inflows to nonbank thrift insti
tutions remained strong. Short-term interest rates 
have risen further in recent weeks, and yields on 
longer-term market securities have increased.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
bank reserve and other financial conditions that will 
encourage continued economic expansion and help resist 
inflationary pressures, while contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  

Growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 within ranges of 4 to 
6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 8 to 10-1/2 
per cent, respectively, from the third quarter of 
1977 to the third quarter of 1978 appears to be 
consistent with these objectives. These ranges are 
subject to reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.

- 4 -



10/17-18/77

At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain 
about the prevailing money market conditions during 
the period immediately ahead, provided that monetary 
aggregates appear to be growing at approximately the 
rates currently expected, which are believed to be on 
a path reasonably consistent with the longer-run ranges 
for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph.  
Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the 
weekly-average Federal funds rate at about 6-1/2 per 
cent, so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing 
over the October-November period at annual rates 
within ranges of 3 to 8 per cent and 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 
per cent, respectively. If, giving approximately 
equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth 
rates over the 2-month period are approaching or 
moving beyond the limits of the indicated ranges, 
the operational objective for the weekly-average 
Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly 
fashion within a range of 6-1/4 to 6-3/4 per cent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the operating constraints specified 
above are proving to be significantly inconsistent, 
the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman who 
will then decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, November 15, 1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


