














































Minutes of Actions


7/19/77

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 19, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 19, 1977, 

beginning at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Altanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Tuttle, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, 

Ettin, Kichline, Reynolds, Scheld, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists



7/19/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis and Parthemos, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Cleveland and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Fousek, Green, and Kaminow, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta, New York, Dallas, and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Bisignano, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Miss Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 21, 

1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period June 21 through July 18,

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 2 -



7/19/77 - 3 

With Messrs. Coldwell, Jackson, and Roos dissenting, 

the Committee adopted the following ranges for rates of growth 

in monetary aggregates for the period from the second quarter 

of 1977 to the second quarter of 1978: M-1, 4 to 6-1/2 per cent; 

M-2, 7 to 9-1/2 per cent; and M-3, 8-1/2 to 11 per cent.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period June 21 through July 18, 1977, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
grew in the second quarter at about the rapid 
rate of the first quarter. In June industrial 
output continued to expand at a substantial pace, 
The rise in employment moderated, and the unemploy
ment rate edged up from 6.9 to 7.1 per cent.  
Total retail sales remained at about the level 
reached in March; for the second quarter as a 
whole, however, sales were moderately above the 
first-quarter level. The wholesale price index 
for all commodities declined in June, owing to 
sharp decreases among farm products and foods; 
as in May, average prices of industrial commodities 
rose appreciably less than in earlier months of 
1977. The index of average hourly earnings rose 
over the first half of the year at about the same 
pace that it had on the average during 1976, 

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies has declined more than 
1 per cent over the past month; the declines were 
especially marked against the Japanese, German, 
and Swiss currencies. In May the U. S. foreign



7/19/77

trade deficit diminished somewhat from the high 
rate in the first 4 months of the year.  

M-1, after rising at an exceptionally rapid 
rate in April, increased little in May and grew at 
a moderate pace in June. Growth in M-2 and M-3 also 
was moderate in June. Inflows to banks of the time 
and savings deposits included in M-2 picked up 
somewhat, after having slackened for a number of 
months, and inflows to nonbank thrift institutions 
remained sizable. Business short-term borrowing 
expanded sharply in June. Market interest rates 
in general have changed little in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster bank reserve and other financial conditions 
that will encourage continued economic expansion 
and help resist inflationary pressures, while 
contributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions.  

Growth in M-1, M-2, and M-3 within ranges of 
4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 7 to 9-1/2 per cent, and 
8-1/2 to 11 per cent, respectively, from the 
second quarter of 1977 to the second quarter of 
1978 appears to be consistent with these objectives.  
These ranges are subject to reconsideration at any 
time as conditions warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term 
rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed 
to be reasonably consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the pre
ceding paragraph. Specifically, at present,, it 
expects the annual growth rates over the July
August period to be within the ranges of 3-1/2 to 
7-1/2 per cent for M-1 and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 per cent 
for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such 
growth rates are likely to be associated with a 
weekly-average Federal funds rate of about 5-3/8 
per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight 
to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over 
the 2-month period will deviate significantly from 
the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the opera
tional objective for the Federal funds rate shall 
be modified in an orderly fashion within a range 
of 5-1/4 to 5-3/4 per cent.

- 4 -



7/19/77

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, August 16, 1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


