














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 19, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 19, 

1977, beginning at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, 
Members of the Federal 
Committee

and Winn, Alternate 
Open Market

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin, 

Kichline, Reynolds, Scheld, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists



4/19/77

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, J. Davis, and Eisenmenger, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Burns, and 
Keran, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, 
Dallas, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Sandberg, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

March 15, 1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period March 15 through 

April 18, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period March 15 through April 18, 

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

- 2 -



4/19/77

With Mr. Partee dissenting, the Committee adopted 

the following ranges for rates of growth in monetary aggregates 

for the period from the first quarter of 1977 to the first 

quarter of 1978: M-1, 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent; M-2, 7 to 

9-1/2 per cent; and M-3, 8-1/2 to 11 per cent.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that growth in real output of goods 
and services increased in the first quarter 
from the reduced pace in the fourth quarter 
of 1976. In March industrial output, retail 
sales, and employment expanded substantially 
further. Although the labor force also 
increased sharply, the unemployment rate 
declined from 7.5 to 7.3 per cent. The 
wholesale price index for all commodities 
again rose substantially; increases were 
particularly sharp among farm products and 
foods, and there were sizable advances for 
many industrial commodities. The index of 
average wage rates rose in the first quarter 
of 1977 at a somewhat faster pace than it 
had on the average during 1976, reflecting 
largely an increase in the minimum wage.  

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies has declined some
what over the past month, returning to about 
the level at the beginning of the year.  
Demand for the Japanese yen and the U.K.

- 3 -



4/19/77

pound intensified. The U. S. foreign trade 
deficit continued large in February.  

M-1 grew at a moderate pace in March but 
increased substantially in early April. At 
banks and thrift institutions, inflows of time 
and savings deposits other than large
denomination CD's continued to slacken in 
March. Market interest rates declined con
siderably in mid-April, after having changed 
little since mid-March.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster bank reserve and other 
financial conditions that will encourage con
tinued economic expansion, while resisting 
inflationary pressures and contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international trans
actions.  

Growth in M-1, M-2, and M-3 within ranges 
of 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent, 7 to 9-1/2 per cent, 
and 8-1/2 to 11 per cent, respectively, from 
the first quarter of 1977 to the first quarter 
of 1978 appears to be consistent with these 
objectives. These ranges are subject to 
reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term 
rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path 
believed to be reasonably consistent with the 
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited 
in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, at 
present, it expects the annual growth rates over 
the April-May period to be within the ranges of 
6 to 10 per cent for M-1 and 8 to 12 per cent 
for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such 
growth rates are likely to be associated with a 
weekly average Federal funds rate of about 4-3/4 
per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight 
to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates 
over the 2-month period will deviate significantly 
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the

- 4 -



4/19/77

operational objective for the Federal funds 
rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion 
within a range of 4-1/2 to 5-1/4 per cent.  

If it appears during the period before 
the next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

Secretary's Note: On May 6, 1977, by unanimous 

vote (with Mr. Winn voting as alternate for Mr. Mayo), the 

Committee modified the intermeeting range for the Federal 

funds rate specified in the next to last paragraph of the 

domestic policy directive issued on April 19, 1977, by 

increasing the upper limit from 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 per cent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 17, 1977, beginning 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


