














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 15, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 15, 

1977, beginning at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 

Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black and Kimbrel, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
Altanta, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Ettin, 

Kichline, Reynolds, Scheld, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists



3/15/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Van Nice, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Boehne, Davis, and Parthemos, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Richmond, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Fieleke, Fousek, 
and Keran, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, 
Boston, New York, and San Francisco 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported 

that advices of the election of the following members and 

alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for

- 2 -



3/15/77

the year commencing March 1, 1977, had been received by the 

Secretary and the named individuals had executed their 

oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were 

as follows: 

Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston, with David P. Eastburn, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate; 

Paul A. Volcker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

Lawrence K. Roos, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis, with Ernest T. Baughman, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate; 

James R. Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, with John J. Balles, President of the 
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the 

Federal Open Market Committee were elected to serve until 

the election of their successors at the first meeting of 

the Committee after February 28, 1978, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official 

connection with the Board of Governors or with a Federal 

Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they would cease to 

have any official connnection with the Federal Open Market 

Committee:

- 3 -



3/15/77

Arthur F. Burns 
Paul A. Volcker 

Arthur L. Broida 
Murray Altmann 
Normand R. V. Bernard 
Thomas J. O'Connell 
Edward G. Guy 
Baldwin B. Tuttle 
Stephen H. Axilrod 

Anatol Balbach, Richard G.  
Davis, Thomas Davis, Robert 
Eisenmenger, Edward Ettin, 
James L. Kichline, Karl 
Scheld, John E. Reynolds, 
Edward M. Truman, Joseph 
S. Zeisel

Chairman 
Vice Chairman 

Secretary 
Deputy Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Deputy General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Economist 

Associate Economists

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was selected to execute transactions for the 

System Open Market Account until the adjournment of the 

first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after 

February 28, 1978.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D.  

Sternlight, and Scott E. Pardee were selected to serve at 

the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of Manager 

of the System Open Market Account, Deputy Manager for 

Domestic Operations, and Deputy Manager for Foreign Oper

ations, respectively, on the understanding that their 

selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

- 4 -



3/15/77

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently 
received that the selections indicated above 
were satisfactory to the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken 

at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held 

on February 15, 1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period February 15 through 

March 14, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period February 15 through March 14, 

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that growth in real output of goods 
and services has increased in the current 
quarter from the reduced pace in the fourth 
quarter of 1976. In February industrial 
output and retail sales expanded substantially 
after being held down for a time by the effects 
of unusually severe weather. Employment rose 
considerably further; the unemployment rate

- 5 -



3/15/77

increased somewhat to 7.5 per cent--as the 
labor force more than recovered the decline 
of January--but it remained below the 7.8 
per cent of December. The wholesale price 
index for all commodities rose substantially 
in February, reflecting large increases 
for farm products and foods and for fuels 
and power. The index of average wage rates 
rose more moderately over the first 2 months 
of 1977 than it had on the average during 
1976.  

The average value of the dollar against 
leading foreign currencies has changed little 
over the past month. In January the U. S.  
foreign trade deficit increased further; 
exports were down a little from the fourth
quarter rate and imports were substantially 
higher.  

Growth in M-1 slowed sharply in February 
from the moderate pace in January. At banks 
and thrift institutions, inflows of time 
and savings deposits other than large
denomination CD's continued to slacken.  
Business demands for short-term credit appear 
to have strengthened further in early 1977.  
Since mid-Februay short-term market interest 
rates have changed little on balance, but most 
longer-term rates have edged higher.  

In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster bank reserve and other 
financial conditions that will encourage 
continued economic expansion, while resisting 
inflationary pressures and contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international trans
actions.  

At its meeting on January 18, 1977, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and 
M-3 within ranges of 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent, 
7 to 10 per cent, and 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent, 
respectively, from the fourth quarter of 1976 
to the fourth quarter of 1977 appears to 
be consistent with these objectives.

- 6 -



3/15/77

These ranges are subject to reconsideration 
at any time as conditions warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near
term rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a 
path believed to be reasonably consistent 
with the longer-run ranges for monetary 
aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph.  
Specifically, at present, it expects the 
annual growth rates over the March-April 
period to be within the ranges of 4-1/2 to 
8-1/2 per cent for M-1 and 7 to 11 per cent 
for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee 
such growth rates are likely to be associ
ated with a weekly average Federal funds rate 
of about 4-5/8 to 4-3/4 per cent. If, 
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 
and M-2, it appears that growth rates over 
the 2-month period will deviate significantly 
from the mid-points of the indicated ranges, 
the operational objective for the Federal 
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly 
fashion within a range of 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 
per cent.  

If it appears during the period before 
the next meeting that the operating con
straints specified above are proving to be 
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will 
then decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing 

authorizations of the Committee, in accordance with the 

customary practice of reviewing such matters at the first 

meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On February 25, 1977, 
certain continuing authorizations of the 
Committee, listed below, had been distributed 
by the Secretary with the advice that, in 
accordance with procedures approved by the

- 7 -



3/15/77

Committee, they were being called to the 
Committee's attention before the March 
organization meeting to give members an 
opportunity to raise any questions they 
had concerning them. Members were asked 
to so indicate if they wished to have any of 
the authorizations in question placed on the 
agenda for consideration at this meeting, 
and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities 
in the System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to 
whom weekly reports on open market 
operations may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a 
Federal Reserve Bank as agent to operate 
the System Account in case the New York 
Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued 
operation of the Committee and for certain 
actions by the Reserve Banks during an 
emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of 
the System Open Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System opera
tions in Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Opera
tions of Federal Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding 
Availability of Information, and Rules of 
Procedure.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending 

of Government securities from the System Open Market Account,

- 8 -



3/15/77

contained in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations, should be retained at this time, 

subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(b) of the Authori

zation for Domestic Open Market Operations, relating to 

outright purchases and sales of bankers' acceptances, was 

amended, effective immediately, by adding the words "when 

appropriate" at the beginning of the paragraph and by reducing 

the dollar limit on holdings, specified at the end of the 

paragraph, from $1 billion to $100 million.  

In connection with this action, it was understood 

that present outright holdings of bankers' acceptances would 

be allowed to mature without replacement and that, while 

this process was under way, actual holdings would exceed the 

newly established limit of $100 million for a few months.  

By unanimous vote, the paragraphs of the Authori

zation for Domestic Open Market Operations not affected by 

the preceding actions were reaffirmed. Reflecting the 

amendment to paragraph 1(b), the authorization reads as 

follows:

- 9 -



3/15/77 - 10 -

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy 
directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, 
including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and 
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency 
of the United States in the open market, from or to 
securities dealers and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
System Open Market Account at market prices and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U. S. Government and 
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the 
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of U. S.  
Government and Federal agency securities held in such 
Account (including forward commitments) at the close of 
business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which 
action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive 
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $3.0 
billion during the period commencing with the opening of 
business on the day following such meeting and ending 
with the close of business on the day of the next such 
meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open 
market, from or to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a 
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the account 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers' acceptances with maturities of up to 
nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out 
of the current shipment of goods between countries or 
within the United States, or (2) arise out of the storage 
within the United States of goods under contract of sale 
or expected to move into the channels of trade within a 
reasonable time and that are secured throughout their life 
by a warehouse receipt or similar document conveying title 
to the underlying goods; provided that the aggregate 
amount of bankers' acceptances held at any one time shall 
not exceed $100 million;



3/15/77

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers' acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, 
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of 
agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the 
event Government securities or agency issues covered by 
any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they 
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the System 
Open Market Account; and provided further that in the 
event bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement 
are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue 
to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or,under special 
circumstances, such as when the New York Reserve Bank is 
closed, any other Federal Reserve Bank, to purchase 
directly from the Treasury for its own account (with 
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue 
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) 
such amounts of special short-term certificates of 
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for 
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided 
that the rate charged on such certificates shall be a 
rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such 
purchases, and provided further that the total amount 
of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U. S.  
Government securities held in the System Open Market 
Account to Government securities dealers and to banks 
participating in Government securities clearing arrange
ments conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under 
such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.

- 11 -



3/15/77 - 12 -

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for 
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary 
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive 
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant 
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions 
as the Committee may issue from time to time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through 
spot or forward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the 
U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by 
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with 
foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other 
international financial institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs



3/15/77

B. To hold balances of, and to have 
outstanding forward contracts to receive 
or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed 
in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the 
reciprocal currency arrangements listed 
in paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings 
by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 
after any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because 
of exceptional circumstances, specifically 
authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an over-all open position 
in all foreign currencies not exceeding 
$1.0 billion, unless a larger position is 
expressly authorized by the Committee.  
For this purpose, the over-all open position 
in all foreign currencies is defined as the 
sum (disregarding signs) of open positions 
in each currency. The open position in a 
single foreign currency is defined as holdings 
of balances in that currency, plus outstanding 
contracts for future receipt, minus outstand
ing contracts for future delivery of that 
currency, i. e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 
arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the System Open 
Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those 
designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements 
on maturity:

- 13 -



3/15/77 - 14 -

Amount of 
arrangement 

(Millions of 
Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 2,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 2,000 
Bank of Mexico 360 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 1,400 
Bank for International 

Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 

European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1, 250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and 
the proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be 
authorized, shall be referred for review and approval to the 
Committee.  

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System swap 
commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 
purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions in foreign 
currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) above shall, 
unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, be 
at prevailing market rates.



3/15/77

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency trans
actions. In making operating arrangements with foreign 
central banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or 
understandings concerning the administration of the accounts 
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with 
the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214. 5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 
review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as 
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances.  
Such investments shall be in accordance with Section 14(e) of 
the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding 
paragraphs shall be reported daily to the Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists 
of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice 
Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other member 
of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence 
of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other 
Board Members designated by the Chairman as alternates, and 
in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his 
alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called 
at the request of any member, or at the request of the Manager, 
for the purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated operations 
and of consulting with the Manager on other matters relating 
to his responsibilities. At the request of any member of the 
Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and 
consultations shall be referred for determination to the 
Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to 
enter into any needed agreement or under
standing with the Secretary of the Treasury 
about the division of responsibility for foreign 
currency operations between the System and 
the Treasury;

- 15 -



3/15/77 - 16 -

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency 
operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National 
Advisory Council on International Monetary 
and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency 
operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury 
Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in 
accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of 
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to 
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated 
January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally 
be directed at countering disorderly market conditions, 
provided that market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar 
reflect actions and behavior consistent with the proposed 
IMF Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and 
sales of foreign exchange.



3/15/77 - 17 -

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") 
arrangements with selected foreign central 
banks and with the Bank for International 
Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central 
banks of other countries and with international 
monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of 
probable future needs for currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System 
and Treasury commitments in particular 
currencies, and to facilitate operations 
of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly 
authorized by the Commttee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and 
cooperation with the United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with 
foreign monetary authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of 
the United States in the International Monetary 
Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 
proposed IMF Article IV.  

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions

shown below were reaffirmed:



3/15/77 - 18 -

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization 
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set 
forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 
and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, through the Manager of the System Open 
Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural 
understandings with respect to consultations and clearance 
with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, 
and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported 
promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with 
the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation 
with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any transaction which would result in a change 
in the System's over-all open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $100 million on any day or 
$300 million since the most recent regular meeting 
of the Committee.  

B. Any transaction which would result in gross 
transactions (excluding swap drawings and repayments) 
in a single foreign currency exceeding $100 million on 
any day or $300 million since the most recent regular 
meeting of the Committee.  

C. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 
15 per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with 
the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that 
consultation with the full Committee is not feasible in the 
time available, or with the Chairman, if the Chairman 
believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not 
feasible in the time available): 

A. Any transaction which would result in a 
change in the System's over-all open position in 
foreign currencies exceeding $500 million since 
the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign 
bank exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or 
(ii) 15 per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.



3/15/77

3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee 
or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, 
and about any transactions that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Special Authorization shown 

below was reaffirmed: 

SPECIAL AUTHORIZATION UNDER PARAGRAPH 1 (D) OF 
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

The Federal Open Market Commitee authorizes the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York to maintain an over-all open position in 

foreign currencies exceeding the figure of $1 billion specified in 

paragraph 1(D) of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations by 

an amount equal to the remaining forward commitment associated with 

the System's outstanding 1971 swap drawings in Swiss francs.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 19, 1977, beginning 

at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 19 -


