














































Minutes of Actions


12/19-20/77 

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 19-20, 1977 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, 

December 19-20, 1977, beginning at 4:00 p.m, on Monday.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist



12/19-20/77

Except as noted, the following attended the Tuesday 

session only: 

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Reynolds, Scheld 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Coyne 1/ and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Miss Klaput, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne and J. Davis, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Burns, and Keran, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta, Richmond, Dallas, and 
San Francisco respectively 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Note: All of the following actions were taken on 

Tuesday, December 20, 1977.

1/ Attended Monday and Tuesday sessions.

- 2 -



12/19-20/77

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

November 15, 1977, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period November 15 through 

December 19, 1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing in the period 

January 5-26, 1978, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period November 15 through December 19, 

1977, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

With Mr. Roos dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
is growing in the current quarter at about the 
pace in the third quarter. The dollar value 
of total retail sales, which had increased 
sharply in October, rose considerably further 
in November. Industrial production continued 
to expand, and employment increased substantially.

- 3 -



12/19-20/77

However, the unemployment rate, at 6.9 per 
cent, remained in the narrow range prevailing 
since April. The wholesale price index for all 
commodities rose sharply in November for the 
second successive month, reflecting another 
large increase in average prices of farm 
products and foods. However, the rise in 
average prices of industrial commodities was 
less rapid than in the preceding 2 months.  
The index of average hourly earnings has 
advanced at a somewhat faster pace so far this 
year than it had on the average during 1976.  

The dollar has been under considerable 
pressure in foreign exchange markets in recent 
weeks, and its trade-weighted value against 
major foreign currencies has declined more than 
3 per cent further since mid-November. In 
October the U. S. foreign trade deficit widened 
sharply, primarily as a result of the dock strike 
at many U. S. ports.  

M-1--which had expanded substantially in 
October--declined slightly in November, and 
M-2 increased relatively little. The total of 
savings deposits and small-denomination time 
deposits at commercial banks declined somewhat, 
but growth in large-denomination time deposits 
accelerated sharply further as credit demands 
remained strong. Inflows to nonbank thrift 
institutions slowed further in November. Market 
interest rates have changed relatively little 
since mid-November.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee 
to foster bank reserve and other financial con
ditions that will encourage continued economic 
expansion and help resist inflationary pressures, 
while contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions.  

At its meeting on October 18, 1977, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M- 2 ; and 
M-3 within ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2

- 4 -



12/19-20/77 -5-

to 9 per cent, and 8 to 10-1/2 per cent, 
respectively, from the third quarter of 1977 
to the third quarter of 1978 appears to be 
consistent with these objectives. These ranges 
are subject to reconsideration at any time as 
conditions warrant.  

At this time, the Committee seeks to main
tain about the prevailing money market condi
tions during the period immediately ahead, 
provided that monetary aggregates appear to be 
growing at approximately the rates currently 
expected, which are believed to be on a path 
reasonably consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the 
preceding paragraph. Specifically, the 
Committee seeks to maintain the weekly-average 
Federal funds rate at about the current level, 
so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing 
over the December-January period at annual 
rates within ranges of 2-1/2 to 8-1/2 per 
cent and 6 to 10 per cent, respectively. If, 
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and 
M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 2
month period are approaching or moving beyond 
the limits of the indicated ranges, the opera
tional objective for the weekly-average Federal 
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly 
fashion within a range of 6-1/4 to 6-3/4 per 
cent. In the conduct of day-to-day operations, 
account shall be taken of emerging financial 
market conditions, including the unsettled 
conditions in foreign exchange markets.  

If it appears during the period before 
the next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.

- 5 -



12/19-20/77 - 6 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, January 17, 1978, beginning at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


