














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 16, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 16, 1978, 

at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Miller, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Partee 
Wallich 
Willes 
Winn

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas 
City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Ettin, Kaminow, 
Keir, Kichline, Paulus, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists



5/16/78

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Henry, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Parthemos, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Boston, Richmond, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Fousek, Karnosky, 
and Keran, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, 
New York, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

April 18 and May 5, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period April 18 through

May 15, 1978, were ratified.

- 2 -



5/16/78

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing in the period 

May 29 through June 29, 1978, was noted without objection.  

Pursuant to paragraph 1D of the Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations, the Committee, by unanimous vote, 

expressly authorized an over-all open position in foreign 

currencies of $2.0 billion, effective immediately.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities,agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period April 18 through May 15, 1978, 

were ratified.  

With Mr. Willes dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
is growing at a rapid rate in the current 
quarter, after having declined somewhat in the 
first quarter when activity was adversely 
affected by the unusually severe weather and 
the lengthy strike in coal mining. In April 
retail sales, industrial production, and non
farm payroll employment increased substantially 
further and the unemployment rate declined 
from 6.2 to 6.0 per cent. The pace of the 
rise in wholesale prices remained rapid, 
reflecting mainly further large increases in 
farm products and processed foods. The index 
of average hourly earnings continued to

- 3 -



5/16/78

advance at about the fast pace that it had on 
the average during the first quarter.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies has risen 
over the past 4 weeks to the level prevailing 
at the beginning of the year. The trade 
deficit in the first quarter widened sub
stantially from the already large deficit 
recorded in the final quarter of 1977.  

M-1, which had grown moderately in the 
first quarter, rose sharply in April. Growth 
in M-2 and M-3 also stepped up but much less 
than growth in M-1, because inflows of the 
interest-bearing deposits included in these 
aggregates remained slow. Market interest 
rates have increased in recent weeks. On 
May 11 an increase in Federal Reserve discount 
rates from 6-1/2 to 7 per cent was announced.  

In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster bank reserve and other 
financial conditions that will resist in
flationary pressures while encouraging con
tinued moderate economic expansion and con
tributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions.  

At its meeting on April 18, 1978, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, 
and M-3 within ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 
6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 to 10 per 
cent, respectively, from the first quarter of 
1978 to the first quarter of 1979 appears to 
be consistent with these objectives. The 
associated range for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 
10-1/2 per cent. These ranges are subject to 
reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.

- 4 -



5/16/78

The Committee seeks to encourage near
term rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path 
believed to be reasonably consistent with the 
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates 
cited in the preceding paragraph. Specific
ally, at present, the ranges of tolerance for 
the annual growth rates over the May-June 
period will be 3 to 8 per cent for M-1 and 4 
to 9 per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the 
Committee such growth rates are likely to be 
associated with a weekly-average Federal funds 
rate slightly above the current level. If, 
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and 
M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 
2-month period will deviate significantly 
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, 
the operational objective for the Federal 
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly 
fashion within a range of 7-1/4 to 7-3/4 per 
cent. In the conduct of day-to-day operations, 
account shall be taken of emerging financial 
market conditions.  

If it appears during the period before 
the next meeting that the operating con
straints specified above are proving to be 
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then 
decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, June 20, 1978, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

- 5 -


