














































Minutes of Actions


2/28/78

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 28, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 28, 

1978, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Kichline, Scheld, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists



2/28/78

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Wallace 1/, Staff Director for Federal 
Reserve Bank Activities, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, J. Davis, and Parthemos, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Brandt, Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

January 17, 1978, were approved.  

The report of examination of the System Open Market 

Account, made by the Board's Office of Staff Director for 

Federal Reserve Bank Activities as of the close of business 

October 28, 1977, was accepted.

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.

- 2 -



2/28/78

Following the preceding actions, Mr. Wallace left 

the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period January 17 through 

February 27, 1978, were ratified.  

Pursuant to paragraph 1D of the Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations, the Committee, by unanimous vote, 

expressly authorized an over-all open position in foreign 

currencies of $2.0 billion, effective immediately.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing in the period 

March 5-31, 1978, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted the following 

ranges for rates of growth in monetary aggregates for the 

period from the fourth quarter of 1977 to the fourth quarter 

of 1978: M-1, 4 to 6-1/2 per cent; M-2, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent; 

and M-3, 7-1/2 to 10 per cent.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the peroiod January 17 through February 27, 

1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:

- 3 -



2/28/78

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that retail sales, industrial pro
duction, and housing starts were adversely 
affected in January by unusually severe 
weather. It appears, however, that there 
has been little change in the underlying 
economic situation. Employment increased 
further in January and the unemployment rate 
edged down from 6.4 to 6.3 per cent. Both 
the consumer price index and the wholesale 
price index rose substantially. The index of 
average hourly earnings advanced sharply, as 
higher minimum wages became effective at the 
beginning of the year.  

After a period of calm, the dollar came 
under renewed downward pressure around mid
February, and its trade-weighted value against 
major foreign currencies has declined about 
1-1/2 per cent. The Swiss franc and the German 
mark have registered the most pronounced 
appreciations against the dollar.  

M-1 expanded appreciably in January but 
declined somewhat in early February. Growth 
in M-2 picked up in January, reflecting some 
strengthening in inflows to banks of time and 
savings deposits other than negotiable CD's.  
Inflows to nonbank thrift institutions con
tinued to slow. Market interest rates have 
changed little in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, 
it is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster bank reserve and other 
financial conditions that will encourage con
tinued economic expansion and help resist 
inflationary pressures, while contributing to 
a sustainable pattern of international trans
actions.  

Growth of M-l, M-2, and M-3 within ranges 
of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent, 
and 7-1/2 to 10 per cent, respectively, from 
the fourth quarter of 1977 to the fourth quarter 
of 1978 appears to be consistent with these 
objectives. These ranges are subject to 
reconsideration at any time as conditions warrant.

- 4 -



2/28/78

At this time, the Committee seeks to main
tain about the prevailing money market conditions 
during the period immediately ahead, provided 
that monetary aggregates appear to be growing 
at approximately the rates currently expected, 
which are believed to be on a path reasonably 
consistent with the longer-run ranges for 
monetary aggregates cited in the preceding 
paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks to 
maintain the weekly-average Federal funds rate 
at about the current level, so long as M-1 and 
M-2 appear to be growing over the February
March period at annual rates within ranges of 
1 to 6 per cent and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 per cent, 
respectively. If, giving approximately equal 
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth 
rates over the 2-month period are approaching 
or moving beyond the limits of the indicated 
ranges, the operational objective for the weekly
average Federal funds rate shall be modified in 
an orderly fashion within a range of 6-1/2 to 7 
per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day opera
tions, account shall be taken of emerging 
financial market conditions, including the 
conditions in foreign exchange markets.  

If it appears during the period before 
the next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, March 21, 1978, beginning at 9:30 

a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


