














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 15, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C.,on Tuesday, August 15, 

1978, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Miller, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Partee 
Wallich 
Willes 
Winn

Messrs. Balles, Kimbrel, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Mr. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, 
Kaminow, Keir, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations



8/15/78

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Czerwinski, Moriarty, and Rankin, 
First Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St.  
Louis, and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. T. Davis, Eisenmenger, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, and Keran, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta, Richmond, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Burger, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Tschinkel, Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, Murray Altmann was elected 

Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee to serve until 

the election of his successor at the first meeting of the 

Committee after February 28, 1979, with the understanding that

- 2 -



8/15/78

in the event of the discontinuance of his official connection 

with the Board of Governors, he would cease to have any 

official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 

18, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period July 18 through 

August 14, 1978, were ratified.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank and the Swiss National 

Bank maturing in the period September 1 through September 29, 

1978, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period July 18 through August 14, 1978, 

were ratified.  

With Messrs. Partee and Willes dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed.  

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:

- 3 -



8/15/78

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services is 
growing moderately in the current quarter, although 
the pace is a little less than the average for the 
first two quarters of the year. In July retail 
sales remained at about the advanced level reached 
in April. Industrial production and nonfarm pay
roll employment continued to expand at lower rates 
than in the early spring months. The unemployment 
rate, which had dropped 0.4 of a percentage point 
in June, jumped 0.5 of a percentage point in July 
to 6.2 per cent, about the average rate in the 
first 5 months of the year. Average prices of 
goods and services have continued to rise rapidly, 
although producer prices of foods and foodstuffs 
declined in July. The advance in the index of 
average hourly earnings has been somewhat faster 
so far in 1978 than it had been on the average 
during 1977.  

Since mid-July the trade-weighted value of 
the dollar against major foreign currencies has 
declined sharply further. The U. S. trade deficit 
was lower in the second quarter than the very high 
rate of the first quarter.  

Growth in M-1 remained moderate in July. In
flows of the interest-bearing deposits included in 
M-2 and M-3 picked up, owing to substantial flows 
into large-denomination time deposits at banks and 
into the new money market certificates at nonbank 
thrift institutions. Nevertheless, expansion in 
the broader aggregates also remained moderate in 
July. Most market interest rates have declined 
appreciably on balance in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging 
continued moderate economic expansion and contri
buting to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. At its meeting on July 18, 1978, the 
Committee agreed that these objectives would be

- 4 -



8/15/78

furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the 
second quarter of 1978 to the second quarter of 
1979 at rates within ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 
6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 to 10 per cent, 
respectively. The associated range for bank credit 
is 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent. These ranges are 
subject to reconsideration at any time as conditions 
warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while 
giving due regard to developing conditions in 
domestic and international financial markets more 
generally. Early in the period until the next 
regular meeting, System open market operations 
shall be directed at attaining a weekly-average 
Federal funds rate slightly above the current 
level. Subsequently, operations shall be directed 
at maintaining the weekly-average Federal funds 
rate within the range of 7-3/4 to 8-1/4 per cent.  
In deciding on the specific objective for the 
Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided 
mainly by the relationship between the latest 
estimates of annual rates of growth in the 
August-September period of M-1 and M-2 and the 
following ranges of tolerance: 4 to 8 per cent 
for M-1 and 6 to 10 per cent for M-2. If, giving 
approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, their 
rates of growth appear to be significantly above 
or below the midpoints of the indicated ranges, 
the objective for the funds rate shall be raised 
or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear 
to be above the upper limit or below the lower limit 
of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective 
for the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.

- 5 -



8/15/78 - 6 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, September 19, 1978, beginning at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


