














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 18, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held 

in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 

System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 18, 1978, at 9:15 

a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Miller, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Jackson 
Partee 
Wallich 
Willes 
Winn

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Ettin, Keir, 
Kichline, Paulus, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists



7/18/78

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Henry, Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Czerwinski, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Parthemos, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, Boston, Richmond, and 
Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Fousek, and Keran, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta, New York, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 20, 

1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period June 20 through July 17,

1978, were ratified.

- 2 -



7/18/78

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 

months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing in 

the period August 2 through August 29, 1978, was authorized.  

With Messrs. Jackson and Partee dissenting, the 

Committee adopted the following ranges for rates of growth in 

monetary aggregates for the period from the second quarter of 

1978 to the second quarter of 1979: M-1, 4 to 6-1/2 per cent; 

M-2, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent; and M-3, 7-1/2 to 10 per cent. The 

associated range for bank credit is 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period June 20 through July 17, 1978, 

were ratified.  

With Messrs. Baughman, Willes, and Winn dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that growth in economic activity has 
slowed in recent months. Following substantial 
gains in March and April, increases in 
industrial production and nonfarm payroll 
employment moderated in May and June and 
retail sales changed little. In June, however, 
the unemployment rate dropped 0.4 of a per
centage point to 5.7 per cent. Average 
producer prices rose somewhat less rapidly 
in May and June than earlier in 1978, but

- 3 -



7/18/78

over the first half of this year prices 
increased at a considerably faster rate than 
they had on the average during 1977. The 
advance in the index of average hourly 
earnings also moderated in May and June but 
was at a somewhat faster pace over the first 
half of 1978 than during 1977.  

Since mid-June the trade-weighted value 
of the dollar against major foreign currencies 
has declined further to its lowest level of 
the year. The U. S. trade deficit in May was 
lower than the very high rate of the first 4 
months of the year.  

Growth in M-1 moderated in May and June, 
but reflecting the extraordinarily rapid pace 
in April, growth from the first to the second 
quarter was relatively high. Growth in M-2 
and M-3 has been moderate over recent months.  
In June inflows of small-denomination time 
deposits to commercial banks and other thrift 
institutions picked up, following introduction 
of the new 6-month certificate. Market interest 
rates have risen further in recent weeks. On 
June 30 an increase in Federal Reserve discount 
rates from 7 to 7-1/4 per cent was announced.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster monetary and financial 
conditions that will resist inflationary 
pressures while encouraging continued moderate 
economic expansion and contributing to a sus
tainable pattern of international transactions.  
The Committee agreed that these objectives 
would be furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and 
M-3 from the second quarter of 1978 to the second 
quarter of 1979 at rates within ranges of 4 to 
6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 
to 10 per cent, respectively. The associated 
range for bank credit is 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per 
cent. These ranges are subject to reconsidera
tion at any time as conditions warrant.

- 4 -



7/18/78

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer
run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, 
while giving due regard to developing conditions 
in financial markets more generally. During 
the period until the next regular meeting, 
System open market operations shall be directed 
at maintaining the weekly-average Federal funds 
rate within the range of 7-3/4 to 8 per cent.  
In deciding on the specific objective for the 
Federal funds rate the Manager shall be 
guided mainly by the relationship between the 
latest estimates of annual rates of growth in 
the July-August period of M-1 and M-2 and the 
following ranges of tolerance: 4 to 8 per cent 
for M-1 and 6 to 10 per cent for M-2. If, 
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and 
M-2, their rates of growth appear to be close 
to or beyond the upper or lower limits of the 
indicated ranges, the objective for the funds 
rate shall be raised or lowered in an orderly 
fashion within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates 
appear to be above the upper limit or below the 
lower limit of the indicated ranges at a time 
when the objective for the funds rate has 
already been moved to the corresponding limit 
of its range, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

The Committee took note of the present state of de 

facto suspension of paragraph 2 of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations as a consequence of the expira

tion, on April 30, 1978, of the underlying statutory authority 

contained in a provision of Section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve

Act.

- 5 -



8/17/78

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, August 15, 1978, beginning at 9:30 

a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 6 -


