














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 17, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 17, 

1978, at 9:15 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Baughman 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Willes 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, 
Keir, Kichline, Paulus, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account



10/17/78

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Henry, Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. McIntosh, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, T. Davis, and 
Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Cox and Keran, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

September 19, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period September 19 through 

October 16, 1978, were ratified.

- 2 -



10/17/78

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 

3 months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing 

November 10 through December 1, 1978, was authorized.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the Swiss National Bank maturing November 2 

through November 30, 1978, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the 

Manager to undertake negotiations involving certain technical 

changes in the terms of the reciprocal currency arrangements 

maintained with foreign central banks, subject to final 

approval by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period September 19 through October 16, 

1978, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Wallich, Willes, and Winn dissenting, 

the Committee adopted the following ranges for rates of growth 

in monetary aggregates for the period from the third quarter 

of 1978 to the third quarter of 1979: M-2, 6-1/2 to 9 per 

cent; and M-3, 7-1/2 to 10 per cent. M-1 was expected to grow 

within a range of 2 to 6 per cent over the period, depending 

in part on the speed and extent of transfers from demand to

- 3 -



10/17/78

savings deposits resulting from the introduction of the auto

matic transfer service. The associated range for bank credit 

is 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent. Growth of M-1+ (M-1 plus savings 

deposits at commercial banks and NOW accounts) in a range of 

5 to 7-1/2 per cent was thought to be generally consistent 

with the ranges of growth for the foregoing aggregates.  

With Mrs. Teeters and Mr. Willes dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
grew moderately in the third quarter, although 
the pace was somewhat below the average for the 
first two quarters of the year. In September, as 
in August, the dollar value of total retail sales 
rose considerably. Industrial production con
tinued to expand while nonfarm payroll employment 
changed little. The unemployment rate edged up 
from 5.9 to 6.0 per cent. Average producer prices 
of finished goods rose substantially in September, 
as prices of foods increased sharply after having 
declined for 2 months. The advance in the index 
of average hourly earnings has been somewhat faster 
so far in 1978 than it had been on the average 
during 1977.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has declined further since 
mid-September in frequently volatile exchange markets.  
The U. S. trade deficit fell sharply in August, 
reversing the jump recorded in July; for the 2 
months the deficit was close to the rate for the 
second quarter.

- 4 -



10/17/78 - 5 

Growth in M-1, which had been rapid in August, 
accelerated in September. Inflows of the interest
bearing deposits included in M-2 and M-3 remained 
strong, and expansion in the broader aggregates 
also accelerated somewhat. Short-term market 
interest rates have risen further in recent weeks; 
long-term rates also have increased, but they 
remain below their July peaks. An increase in 
Federal Reserve discount rates from 7-3/4 to 8 per 
cent was announced on September 22; another increase 
to 8-1/2 per cent was announced on October 13.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging 
continued moderate economic expansion and con
tributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. In setting ranges for the monetary 
aggregates, the Committee recognized the uncertainties 
concerning the effects that the November 1 intro
duction of the automatic transfer service (ATS) 
would have on measures of the money supply, especially 
M-1. Against that background, the Committee agreed 
that appropriate monetary and financial conditions 
would be furthered by growth of M-2 and M-3 from 
the third quarter of 1978 to the third quarter of 
1979 within ranges of 6-1/2 to 9 per cent and 7-1/2 
to 10 per cent, respectively. The narrowly defined 
money supply (M-1) was expected to grow within a 
range of 2 to 6 per cent over the period, depending 
in part on the speed and extent of transfers from 
demand to savings deposits resulting from the 
introduction of ATS. The associated range for 
bank credit is 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent. Growth of 
M-1+ (M-1 plus savings deposits at commercial banks 
and NOW accounts) in a range of 5 to 7-1/2 per cent 
was thought to be generally consistent with the 
ranges of growth for the foregoing aggregates.  
These ranges are subject to reconsideration at any 
time as conditions warrant.  

In the short-run, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions that are



10/17/78

broadly consistent with the longer-run ranges for 
monetary aggregates cited above, while giving due 
regard to developing conditions in domestic and 
international financial markets more generally and 
to uncertainties associated with the introduction 
of ATS. Early in the period until the next regular 
meeting, System open market operations shall be 
directed at attaining a weekly-average Federal 
funds rate slightly above the current level. Sub
sequently, operations shall be directed at main
taining the weekly-average Federal funds rate 
within the range of 8-3/4 to 9-1/4 per cent. In 
deciding on the specific objective for the Federal 
funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly by a 
range of tolerance for growth in M-2 over the 
October-November period of 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 per cent, 
provided that growth of M-1 over that period does 
not exceed an annual rate of 6-1/2 per cent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, November 21, 1978, beginning at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 6 -


