














































Minutes of Actions


1/17/78

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 17, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, January 17, 1978, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and 
Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Broida, Secretary 
Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
O'Connell, General Counsel 
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Kichiine, Scheld, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists



1/17/78

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. McIntosh, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Boehne, J. Davis, and Parthemos, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Richmond, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Fousek, and Keran, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, 
Richmond, Dallas, New York, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's Note: On January 6, 1978, pursuant to paragraph 

1D of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Committee, 

with Mr. Jackson absent and not voting, expressly authorized an over-all 

open position in foreign currencies of $1.5 billion, effective immediately.  

Secretary's Note: On January 9, 1978, the Committee, with Messrs.  

Lilly, Morris, and Partee dissenting and Mr. Jackson absent and not voting,

- 2 -



1/17/78

modified the domestic policy directive adopted at its meeting of December 

19-20, 1977, by raising the range for the Federal funds rate to 6-1/2 to 7 

per cent and by instructing the Manager to raise the rate to 6-3/4 per cent 

over the next few days.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 19-20, 1977, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period December 20, 1977, through January 16, 1978, 

were approved, ratified, and confirmed.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System drawings on 

the German Federal Bank maturing in the period February 2-24, 1978, was 

noted without objection.  

Pursuant to paragraph 1D of the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations, the Committee, by unanimous vote, expressly authorized an 

over-all open position in foreign currencies of $1.75 billion, effective 

immediately.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of the FOMC 

memoranda of discussion for 1972, on the basis described in a memorandum 

from the Secretariat dated December 12, 1977, was authorized.

- 3 -



1/17/78

By unanimous vote, the Committee amended the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations by the addition of the following new 

paragraph 4, effective immediately: 

4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of 
open market operations, while assisting in the provi
sion of short-term investments for foreign and inter
national accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York,the Federal Open Market Committee 
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell 
U. S. Government securities to such foreign and inter
national accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph 
1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by such 
accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on 
terms comparable to those available on such transactions 
in the market; and (b) for New York Bank account, when 
appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to the 
conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities 
in paragraph 1(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Govern
ment and agency securities, and to arrange corresponding 
sale and repurchase agreements between its own account 
and foreign and international accounts maintained at the 
Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under 
the provisions of this paragraph may provide for a 
service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period December 20, 1977,through January 16, 1978, were approved, ratified,

and confirmed.

- 4 -



1/17/78

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meetings suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services in the 
fourth quarter was close to the pace in the third quarter.  
The dollar value of total retail sales declined in December, 
but the gain from the third to the fourth quarter was sub
stantial. Industrial production expanded somewhat further 
in December, although the rise was limited by a strike in 
coal mining. Employment increased appreciably, and the 
unemployment rate declined from 6.7 per cent to 6.4 per 
cent. The wholesale price index for all commodities rose 
considerably less in December than in the preceding 2 months, 
reflecting a much smaller increase in average prices of 
farm products and foods. Prices of industrial commodities 
advanced at about the average pace in the preceding 2 months.  
The index of average hourly earnings advanced slightly faster 
during 1977 than it had during 1976.  

Exchange market pressure on the dollar has continued 
in recent weeks. On January 4 it was announced that the 
Exchange Stabilization Fund would be utilized actively 
together with the swap network operated by the Federal 
Reserve System to help reestablish order in the foreign 
exchange markets. On January 6 an increase in Federal 
Reserve discount rates from 6 to 6-1/2 per cent was 
announced. The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies declined about 2-1/2 per cent 
further from mid-December to the early days of January 
but subsequently recovered about 1-3/4 per cent.  

M-1--which had declined slightly in November--rose 
in December. Growth in M-2 remained relatively slow, as 
inflows to banks of time and savings deposits other than 
negotiable CD's were sharply curtailed. Inflows to non
bank thrift institutions slowed somewhat further. Market 
interest rates edged up in late December, and rates-
particularly for short-term securities--rose substantially 
further in the early weeks of January.

- 5 -



1/17/78

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
bank reserve and other financial conditions that will 
encourage continued economic expansion and help resist 
inflationary pressures, while contributing to a sustain
able pattern of international transactions.  

At its meeting on October 18, 1977, the Committee 
agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 within ranges 
of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 8 to 
10-1/2 per cent, respectively, from the third quarter 
of 1977 to the third quarter of 1978 appears to be con
sistent with these objectives. These ranges are subject 
to reconsideration at any time as conditions warrant.  

At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about 
the prevailing money market conditions during the period 
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates 
appear to be growing at approximately the rates currently 
expected, which are believed to be on a path reasonably 
consistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggre
gates cited in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, 
the Committee seeks to maintain the weekly-average Federal 
funds rate at about the current level, so long as M-1 and 
M-2 appear to be growing over the January-February period 
at annual rates within ranges of 2-1/2 to 7-1/2 per cent 
and 5 to 9 per cent, respectively. If, giving approxi
mately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth 
rates over the 2-month period are approaching or moving 
beyond the limits of the indicated ranges, the operational 
objective for the weekly-average Federal funds rate shall be 
modified in an orderly fashion within a range of 6-1/2 to 
7 per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day operations, 
account shall be taken of emerging financial market 
conditions, including the unsettled conditions in foreign 
exchange markets.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the operating constraints specified above 
are proving to be significantly inconsistent, the 
Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then 
decide whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.

- 6 -



-7-

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Wednesday, February 22, 1978, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

1/17/78


