














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 19, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 19, 

1978, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT; Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Baughman 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Willes 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, Keir, Kichline, Paulus, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists



12/19/78

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Guenther 1/, Assistants 
to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Henry, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Boston, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Fousek, and Keran, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta, Richmond, New York, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Mullineaux, Research Officer, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Levin, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

November 21, 1978, were approved.

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.

- 2 -



12/19/78

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period November 21 through 

December 18, 1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period November 21 through December 18, 

1978, were ratified.  

With Mrs. Teeters and Mr. Wallich dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that in the current quarter real output 
of goods and services has picked up somewhat 
from the rate in the third quarter. In November, 
as in October, the dollar value of total retail 
sales expanded substantially. Industrial pro
duction and nonfarm payroll employment rose 
considerably further, and the unemployment rate 
remained at 5.8 per cent. Over recent months, 
broad measures of prices and the index of 
average hourly earnings have risen rapidly.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies declined sharply 
following OPEC's announcement on December 17 of 
increased oil prices for 1979, after having 
declined slightly over the previous few weeks, 
but it remains substantially above the low 
reached just prior to the actions taken on 
November 1 to strengthen the dollar. The U. S.  
trade deficit in October was at about the rate 
recorded in the second and third quarters.

- 3 -



12/19/78

M-1 declined in November. only in part because 
of shifts of funds from demand deposits to savings 
deposits after the introduction of the automatic 
transfer service (ATS) at the beginning of the month.  
Over the first 11 months of 1978, M-1 grew at an 
annual rate of about 7-1/4 per cent. Growth of 
M-2 and M-3 slackened further in November; they 
grew at rates of about 8-1/4 and 9-1/4 per cent, 
respectively, over the first 11 months of the year.  
Inflows of deposits to nonbank thrift institutions 
slowed in November, after having grown rapidly in 
the preceding 3 months. Market interest rates in 
general have risen further in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging 
continued moderate economic expansion and con
tributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. At its meeting on October 17, 1978, 
in setting ranges for the monetary aggregates, the 
Committee recognized the uncertainties concerning 
the effects that the November 1 introduction of 
ATS would have on measures of the money supply, 
especially M-1. Against that background, the 
Committee agreed that appropriate monetary and 
financial conditions would be furthered by growth 
of M-2 and M-3 from the third quarter of 1978 to 
the third quarter of 1979 within ranges of 6-1/2 
to 9 per cent and 7-1/2 to 10 per cent, respectively.  
The narrowly defined money supply (M-1) was expected 
to grow within a range of 2 to 6 per cent over 
the period, depending in part on the speed and 
extent of transfers from demand to savings 
deposits resulting from the introduction of ATS.  
The associated range for bank credit is 8-1/2 to 
11-1/2 per cent. Growth of M-1+ (M-1 plus savings 
deposits at commercial banks and NOW accounts) in 
a range of 5 to 7-1/2 per cent was thought to be 
generally consistent with the ranges of growth 
for the foregoing aggregates. These ranges are 
subject to reconsideration at any time as con
ditions warrant.

- 4 -



12/19/78

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while 
giving due regard to the program for supporting 
the foreign exchange value of the dollar, to 
developing conditions in domestic financial 
markets, and to uncertainties associated with 
the introduction of ATS. Early in the period 
before the next regular meeting, System open 
market operations are to be directed at attaining 
a weekly average Federal funds rate slightly above 
the current level. Subsequently, operations 
shall be directed at maintaining the weekly 
average Federal funds rate within the range of 
9-3/4 to 10-1/2 per cent. In deciding on the 
specific objective for the Federal funds rate the 
Manager shall be guided mainly by the relation
ship between the latest estimates of annual rates 
of growth in the December-January period of M-1 
and M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: 
2 to 6 per cent for M-1 and 5 to 9 per cent for 
M-2. If, giving approximately equal weight to 
M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth appear to be 
significantly above the midpoints of the indicated 
ranges, the objective for the funds rate shall be 
raised in an orderly fashion within its range; 
if their rates of growth appear to be approaching 
the lower limits of the indicated ranges, the 
funds rate shall be lowered in an orderly fashion 
within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates 
appear to be falling outside the limits of the 
indicated ranges at a time when the objective for 
the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager 
will promptly notify the Chairman, who will then 
decide whether the situation calls for supple
mentary instructions from the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 

3 months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing 

January 5, 1979, through February 15, 1979, was authorized.

- 5 -



12/19/78

Renewals for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank 

maturing January 5, 1979, through February 15, 1979, were 

noted without objection.  

Pursuant to paragraph 1D of the Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations the Committee, by unanimous vote, 

expressly authorized an over-all open position in all foreign 

currencies of $8 billion, effective immediately.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee agreed to raise 

the amount of eligible foreign currencies that the Federal 

Reserve would be prepared to warehouse for the U. S. Treasury, 

or for the Exchange Stabilization Fund of the U. S. Treasury, 

to $5 billion and to be prepared to warehouse such currencies 

for periods of up to 12 months.  

Prior to the following action, Mr. Guenther entered 

the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives 

of the FOMC memoranda of discussion for 1973, on the basis 

described in a memorandum from the Secretariat dated 

December 6, 1978, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, February 6, 1979, beginning at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary

- 6 -


