














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

March 10, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held on Friday, March 10, 1978, at 11:30 a.m. This was a 

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in 

Washington, D. C., except as otherwise indicated in 

parentheses in the following list of those participating.  

PARTICIPATING: Mr. Burns 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn (Philadelphia) 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. Miller 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Willes (Minneapolis) 
Mr. Winn (Cleveland) 
Mr. Volcker 
Mr. Kimbrel, Alternate 

for Mr. Baughman (Atlanta) 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Kichline and Truman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for 
Foreign Operations (New York) 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations (New York)



3/10/78

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open 
Market Secretariat, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. J. Davis (Cleveland), Senior 
Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Brandt (Atlanta) and Kaminow 
(Philadelphia), Vice Presidents 
Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta and Philadelphia, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, (New York) Monetary Adviser, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, on nomination by Chairman 

Burns, the Committee elected G. William Miller to succeed 

Dr. Burns as Chairman for the period until the election of 

Committee officers at the organization meeting of the 

Committee to be held on March 21, 1978.  

By unanimous vote,the Committee modified the 

domestic policy directive adopted at its meeting of February 

28, 1978, to call for open market operations directed at 

maintaining the Federal funds rate at about the prevailing 

level of 6-3/4 per cent for the time being.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's note: Subsequent to the telephone 

meeting the Committee, with Messrs. Baughman and Gardner

- 2 -



3/10/78

absent and not voting (Mr. Kimbrel voted as alternate for 

Mr. Baughman), delegated authority to Chairman Miller to 

negotiate an increase in the System's swap arrangement with 

the German Federal Bank in an amount up to $2 billion if he 

determined that the detailed arrangements were satisfactory, 

and approved a concurrent amendment to paragraph 2 of the 

authorization for foreign currency operations to 

raise the amount specified there for the swap arrangement 

with the German Federal Bank correspondingly.  

Acting pursuant to authority delegated to him by 

the Federal Open Market Committee on March 10, 1978, Chairman 

Miller, after determining that the detailed arrangements 

were satisfactory, approved a $2 billion increase in the 

System's swap line with the German Federal Bank on March 11, 

1978. Accordingly, under the terms of the Committee's 

action on March 10, paragraph 2 of the authorization for 

foreign currency operations was amended, effective March 11, 

to raise the amount specified there for the swap arrangement 

with the German Federal Bank from $2 billion to $4 billion.  

Secretary

- 3 -


