














































Minutes of Actions


4/18/78

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 18, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 18, 1978, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Miller, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Gardner 1/ 
Jackson 
Partee 
Wallich 
Willes 
Winn

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and 
St. Louis, respectively

Broida, Secretary 
Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
O'Connell, General Counsel 
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs, Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, Kaminow, 
Keir, Kichline, Paulus, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists

1/ Entered meeting at the point indicated.



4/18/78

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of Inter

national Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, Parthemos, and Scheld, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Richmond, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, T. Davis, and Keran, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. McNees, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 21, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period March 21 through April 17, 1978, were

ratified.

- 2 -



4/18/78

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System drawings on 

the German Federal Bank and the Swiss National Bank maturing in the 

period May 2-22, 1978, was noted without objection.  

Prior to the following action Mr. Gardner entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted the following ranges 

for rates of growth in monetary aggregates for the period from the first 

quarter of 1978 to the first quarter of 1979: M-1, 4 to 6-1/2 per cent; 

M-2, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent; and M-3, 7-1/2 to 10 per cent. The associated 

range for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 per cent.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period March 21 through April 17, 1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real output of goods and services was 
small in the first quarter, owing in part to the unusually 
severe weather and the lengthy strike in coal mining, but 
that economic activity was rebounding in the latter part 
of the period. In March industrial production and non
farm payroll employment increased sharply further. The 
unemployment rate edged up from 6.1 to 6.2 per cent, as 
the civilian labor force expanded substantially. Retail 
sales recovered much more in February than had been reported 
earlier, and sales rose considerably further in March.

- 3 -



4/18/78

The pace of the rise in wholesale prices remained rapid, 
reflecting further large increases in farm products and 
processed foods. The index of average hourly earnings 
accelerated in the first quarter, largely because of the 
increase in minimum wages at the beginning of the year.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies declined sharply after the March 31 
announcement of a very large increase in the U. S. foreign 
trade deficit for February. But over the past week the 
dollar has recovered to about its level of 4 weeks ago.  

M-1, which had declined in February, rose moderately 
in March. Inflows to banks of time and savings deposits 
other than negotiable CD's and inflows to nonbank thrift 
institutions remained slow. Most market interest rates, 
especially longer-term rates, have increased somewhat on 
balance in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
bank reserve and other financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging continued 
moderate economic expansion and contributing to a sus
tainable pattern of international transactions.  

Growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 within ranges of 4 to 
6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 to 10 per 
cent, respectively, from the first quarter of 1978 to the 
first quarter of 1979 appears to be consistent with these 
objectives. The associated range for bank credit is 7-1/2 
to 10-1/2 per cent. These ranges are subject to recon
sideration at any time as conditions warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of 
growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably 
consistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggre
gates cited in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, at 
present, it expects the annual growth rates over the 
April-May period to be within ranges of 4 to 8-1/2 per cent 
for M-1 and 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 per cent for M-2. In the judg
ment of the Committee such growth rates are likely to be 
associated with a weekly-average Federal funds rate slightly 
above the current level. If, giving approximately equal 
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over

- 4 -



4/18/78 - 5 

the 2-month period will deviate significantly from the 
midpoints of the indicated ranges, the operational objec
tive for the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an 
orderly fashion within a range of 6-3/4 to 7-1/2 per cent.  
In the conduct of day-to-day operations, account shall be 
taken of emerging financial market conditions, including 
the conditions in foreign exchange markets.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the operating constraints specified above 
are proving to be significantly inconsistent, the 
Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman who will 
then decide whether the situation calls for supple
mentary instructions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 16, 1978, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


