














































Minutes of Actions


3/21/78

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 21, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 21, 

1978, beginning at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Miller, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Jackson 
Partee 
Wallich 
Willes 
Winn

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas 
City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Ettin, Keir, 

Kichline, Paulus, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists



3/21/78

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Smith,1/ Chief, Financial Markets 
Section, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Eisenmenger, 
Scheld, and Sims, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of St. Louis, Philadelphia, Boston, 
Chicago, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, T. Davis, and 
Fousek, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, 
Kansas City, and New York, respectively 

Ms. Clarkin, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported 

that advices of the election of the following members and 

alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for 

the year commencing March 1, 1978, had been received by the 

Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths 

of office.

1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.

- 2 -



3/21/78

The elected members and alternate members were 

as follows: 

David P. Eastburn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, with Robert P. Black, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate; 

Paul A. Volcker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland, with Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

Ernest T. Baughman, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Dallas, with Monroe Kimbrel, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate; 

Mark H. Willes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis, with John J. Balles, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the 

Federal Open Market Committee were elected to serve until 

the election of their successors at the first meeting of 

the Committee after February 28, 1979, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official 

connection with the Board of Governors or with a Federal 

Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they would cease to have 

any official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 

G. William Miller Chairman 
Paul A. Volcker Vice Chairman

- 3 -



3/21/78

Arthur L. Broida 
Murray Altmann 
Normand R. V. Bernard 
Thomas J. O'Connell 
Edward G. Guy 
Robert E. Mannion 
Stephen H. Axilrod 

Joseph Burns, John M. Davis, 
Richard G. Davis, Edward 
Ettin, Ira Kaminow, Peter M.  
Keir, James L. Kichline, 
John Paulus, John E. Reynolds, 
Edwin M. Truman, Joseph S.

Secretary 
Deputy Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Deputy General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Economist

Zeisel Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was selected to execute transactions for the System 

Open Market Account until the adjournment of the first 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after February 

28, 1979.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D.  

Sternlight, and Scott E. Pardee were selected to serve at 

the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of Manager 

of the System Open Market Account, Deputy Manager for 

Domestic Operations, and Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations, 

respectively, on the understanding that their selection was 

subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently 
received that the selections indicated above 
were satisfactory to the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York.

- 4 -



3/21/78

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken 

at the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

February 28 and March 10, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period February 28 through 

March 20, 1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1B of the Procedural 

Instructions was amended, effective immediately, to read as 

follows: 

B. Any transaction which would result in gross 
transactions (excluding swap drawings and repay
ments and purchases and sales of any currencies 
incidential to such repayments), in a single 
foreign currency exceeding $200 million on any 
day or $500 million since the most recent regular 
meeting of the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the paragraphs of the Procedural 

Instructions not affected by the preceding action were 

reaffirmed. Relecting the amendment to paragraph 1B the 

Instructions read as follows: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the 
authorization and direction of the Federal Open 
Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization 
for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign 
Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, through the Manager of the System Open 
Market Account, shall be guided by the following 
procedural understandings with respect to con
sultations and clearance with the Committee, the 
Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of 
the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant 
to such clearances shall be reported promptly to 
the Committee.

- 5 -



3/21/78

1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or 
with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that con
sultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the 
time available): 

A. Any transaction which would result in a 
change in the System's over-all open position 
in foreign currencies exceeding $100 million 
on any day or $300 million since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any transaction which would result in gross 
transactions (excluding swap drawings and repay
ments and purchases and sales of any currencies 
incidential to such repayments), in a single 
foreign currency exceeding $200 million on any 
day or $500 million since the most recent regular 
meeting of the Committee.  

C. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or 
(ii) 15 per cent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.  

2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with 
the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that 
consultation with the full Committee is not feasible 
in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the 
Chairman believes that consultation with the Sub
committee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any transaction which would result in a 
change in the System's over-all open position 
in foreign currencies exceeding $500 million 
since the most recent regular meeting of the 
Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign 
bank exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million 
or (ii) 15 per cent of the size of the swap 
arrangement.  

3. The Manager shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings 
by the System, and about any transactions that are 
not of a routine character.

- 6 -



3/21/78

Pursuant to paragraph 1D of the Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations, the Committee, by unanimous vote, 

expressly authorized an over-all open position in foreign 

currencies of $2.25 billion, effective immediately.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing in the period 

April 3 through June 30, 1978, and a drawing on the Swiss 

National Bank maturing on April 26, 1978, was authorized.  

Prior to the following action, Mr. Smith left the 

meeting.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period February 28 through March 20, 

1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that growth in real output of goods 
and services has been adversely affected in the 
current quarter by unusually severe weather and 
the lengthy strike in coal mining but that there 
has been little change in the underlying economic 
situation. In February industrial production

- 7 -



3/21/78

recovered much of the decline of the preceding 
month, and nonfarm payroll employment increased 
considerably further. The unemployment rate 
declined from 6.3 to 6.1 per cent. Retail 
sales picked up somewhat from the sharply reduced 
level of January. The pace of the rise in prices 
stepped up in February, reflecting large 
increases in farm products and processed foods.  
The index of average hourly earnings was unchanged, 
after having advanced sharply in January when 
higher minimum wages became effective.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies rose sharply 
in anticipation of the U.S.- German announce
ments on March 13. Subsequently, the dollar 
declined to about the level at the end of 
February. The U. S. trade statistics reported 
for January showed a continuing large deficit.  

M-1 declined and M-2 increased relatively 
little in February, apparently in part because 
of the economic effects of the coal strike and 
the severe weather. Inflows to banks of the 
interest-bearing deposits included in M-2 were 
about maintained, but the inflows were almost 
entirely into large-denomination time deposits 
exempt from ceilings on interest rates. In
flows to nonbank thrift institutions remained 
slow. Market interest rates have changed 
little in recent weeks.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it 
is the policy of the Federal Open Market 
Committee to foster bank reserve and other 
financial conditions that will encourage con
tinued economic expansion and help resist 
inflationary pressures, while contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  

At its meeting on February 28, 1978, the 
Committee agreed that growth of M-1, M-2, and

- 8 -



3/21/78

M-3 within ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 
6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 to 10 per cent, 
respectively, from the fourth quarter of 1977 
to the fourth quarter of 1978 appears to be 
consistent with these objectives. These ranges 
are subject to reconsideration at any time as 
conditions warrant.  

The Committee seeks to encourage near
term rates of growth in M-1 and M-2 on a path 
believed to be reasonably consistent with the 
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited 
in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, at 
present, it expects the annual growth rates over 
the March-April period to be within ranges of 4 
to 8 per cent for M-1 and 5-1/2 to 9 per cent 
for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such 
growth rates are likely to be associated with a 
weekly-average Federal funds rate of about 6-3/4 
per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight 
to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over 
the 2-month period will deviate significantly 
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the 
operational objective for the Federal funds rate 
shall be modified in an orderly fashion within 
a range of 6-1/2 to 7 per cent. In the conduct 
of day-to-day operations, account shall be taken 
of emerging financial market conditions, including 
the conditions in foreign exchange markets.  

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the operating constraints 
specified above are proving to be significantly 
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify 
the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing 

authorizations of the Committee, in accordance with the 

customary practice of reviewing such matters at the first

regular meeting in March of every year.

- 9 -



3/21/78

Secretary's note: On March 2, 1978, certain 
continuing authorizations of the Committee, 
listed below, had been distributed by the 
Secretary with the advice that, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the Committee, 
they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March organization meeting 
to give members an opportunity to raise any 
questions they had concerning them. Members 
were asked to so indicate if they wished to 
have any of the authorizations in question 
placed on the agenda for consideration at this 
meeting, and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities 
in the System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to 
whom weekly reports on open market opera
tions may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a 
Federal Reserve Bank as agent to operate 
the System Account in case the New York 
Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued opera
tion of the Committee and for certain 
actions by the Reserve Banks during an 
emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the 
System Open Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations 
in Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Opera
tions of Federal Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding 
Availability of Information, and Rules of 
Procedure.

- 10 -



3/21/78

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending 

of Government securities from the System Open Market Account, 

contained in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations, should be retained at this time, 

subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent 
domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of 
the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, 
including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, 
and securities that are direct obligations of, or 
fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, 
any agency of the United States in the open market, 
from or to securities dealers and foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or 
deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market 
Account at market prices and, for such Account, to 
exchange maturing U. S. Government and Federal 
agency securities with the Treasury or the individual 
agencies or to allow them to mature without replace
ment; provided that the aggregate amount of U. S.  
Government and Federal agency securities held in 
such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the 
Committee at which action is taken with respect to 
a domestic policy directive shall not be increased 
or decreased by more than $3.0 billion during the 
period commencing with the opening of business on 
the day following such meeting and ending with the 
close of business on the day of the next such meeting;

- 11 -



3/21/78

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open 
market, from or to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market 
discount rates, prime bankers' acceptances with maturities 
of up to nine months at the time of acceptance that 
(1) arise out of the current shipment of goods between 
countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under 
contract of sale or expected to move into the channels 
of trade within a reasonable time and that are secured 
throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided 
that the aggregate amount of bankers' acceptances held 
at any one time shall not exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers' acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, 
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of 
agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the 
event Government securities or agency issues covered by 
any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they 
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the System 
Open Market Account; and provided further that in the 
event bankers' acceptances covered by any such agreement 
are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue 
to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, under special 
circumstances, such as when the New York Reserve Bank is 
closed, any other Federal Reserve Bank, to purchase 
directly from the Treasury for its own account (with

- 12 -



3/21/78

discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue 
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) 
such amounts of special short-term certificates of 
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for 
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided 
that the rate charged on such certificates shall be a 
rate 1/4 of 1 per cent below the discount rate of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such 
purchases, and provided further that the total amount 
of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal 
Reserve Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U. S.  
Government securities held in the System Open Market 
Account to Government securities dealers and to banks 
participating in Government securities clearing arrange
ments conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under 
such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, while assisting in the provision of short
term investments for foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the 
Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, (a) for System Open 
Market Account, to sell U. S. Government securities to 
such foreign and international accounts on the bases set 
forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for 
the resale by such accounts of those securities within 
15 calendar days on terms comparable to those available 
on such transactions in the market; and (b) for New York 
Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with 
dealers, subject to the conditions imposed on purchases 
and sales of securities in paragraph 1(c), repurchase 
agreements in U. S. Government and agency securities, 
and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agree
ments between its own account and foreign and inter
national accounts maintained at the Bank. Transactions 
undertaken with such accounts under the provisions of 
this paragraph may provide for a service fee when 
appropriate.

- 13 -



3/21/78 - 14 -

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the Committee 

reaffirmed the agreement of January 17, 1977, to "warehouse" 

foreign currencies for the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign 
currency directive and express authorizations by 
the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the 
Committee may issue from time to time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following 
foreign currencies in the form of cable 
transfers through spot or forward trans
actions on the open market at home and 
abroad, including transactions with the U. S.  
Exchange Stabilization Fund established by 
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, 
with foreign monetary authorities, with 
the Bank for International Settlements, and 
with other international financial institu
tions: 

Austrian shillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs



- 15 -

B. To hold balances of, and to have out
standing forward contracts to receive or 
to deliver, the foreign currencies listed 
in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the 
reciprocal currency arrangements listed in 
paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings 
by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 
after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, 
because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an over-all open position 
in all foreign currencies not exceeding 
$1.0 billion, unless a larger position is 
expressly authorized by the Committee. For 
this purpose, the over-all open position 
in all foreign currencies is defined as the 
sum (disregarding signs) of open positions 
in each currency. The open position in a 
single foreign currency is defined as holdings 
of balances in that currency, plus outstanding 
contracts for future receipt, minus out
standing contracts for future delivery of 
that currency, i.e., as the sum of these 
elements with due regard to sign.1/2/ 

1/ Effective December 28, 1976, the Federal 
Open Market Committee authorized the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to main
tain an over-all open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding the figure of $1 
billion specified in this paragraph by an 
amount equal to the remaining forward 
commitment associated with the System's 
outstanding 1971 Swiss franc swap drawings.  

2/ Earlier in this meeting, the Federal Open 
Market Committee authorized the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain an 
over-all open position in foreign currencies 
of $2.25 billion (excluding the authoriza
tion relating to outstanding 1971 Swiss 
franc swap drawings cited in the preceding 
footnote).

3/21/78



3/21/78 - 16 -

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal 
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the 
System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum 
of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which 
are among those designated by the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, 
and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(Millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 4,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 2,000 
Bank of Mexico 360 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 1,400 
Bank for International 

Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 
European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, 
and the proposed terms of any new arrangements that 
may be authorized, shall be referred for review and 
approval to the Committee.



3/21/78 - 17 -

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System 
swap commitments may be purchased from the foreign 
central bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as 
that employed in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart 
from any such purchases at the rate of the drawing, 
all transactions in foreign currencies undertaken 
under paragraph 1(A) above shall, unless otherwise 
expressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing 
market rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with 
foreign central banks for the coordination of foreign 
currency transactions. In making operating arrange
ments with foreign central banks on System holdings 
of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York shall not commit itself to maintain any 
specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal 
Open Market Committee. Any agreements or under
standings concerning the administration of the 
accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the 
Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation 
N shall be referred for review and approval to the 
Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested in
sofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum 
working balances. Such investments shall be in 
accordance with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve 
Act.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the pre
ceding paragraphs shall be reported daily to the 
Foreign Currency Subcommittee. The Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the 
Board of Governors, and such other member of the 
Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence 
of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, 
other Board Members designated by the Chairman as 
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the 
Subcommittee shall be called at the request of any 
member, or at the request of the Manager, for the 
purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated opera
tions and of consulting with the Manager on other matters



3/21/78 - 18 -

relating to his responsibilities. At the request of 
any member of the Subcommittee, questions arising 
from such reviews and consultations shall be re
ferred for determination to the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to 
enter into any needed agreement or under
standing with the Secretary of the Treasury 
about the division of responsibility for 
foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury 
fully advised concerning System foreign 
currency operations, and to consult with 
the Secretary on policy matters relating to 
foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit approp
riate reports and information to the 
National Advisory Council on International 
Monetary and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized 
to transmit pertinent information on System foreign 
currency operations to appropriate officials of the 
Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in 
the foreign currency operations for System Account 
in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of 
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to 
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks 
dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive

shown below was reaffirmed:



3/21/78 - 19 -

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall 
generally be directed at countering disorderly market 
conditions, provided that market exchange rates for 
the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior con
sistent with the proposed IMF Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases 
and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") 
arrangements with selected foreign central 
banks and with the Bank for International 
Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with 
central banks of other countries and 
with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of 
probable future needs for currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System 
and Treasury commitments in particular 
currencies, and to facilitate operations 
of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be 
expressly authorized by the Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be 
conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and 
cooperation with the United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with 
foreign monetary authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations 
of the United States in the International 
Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements 
under the proposed IMF Article IV.



3/21/78 - 20 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, April 18, 1978, beginning at 

9:30 a.m..  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


