














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 20, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 20, 1978, at 9:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Miller, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Baughman 
Coldwell 
Eastburn 
Gardner 1/ 
Jackson 
Partee 
Wallich 
Willes 
Winn

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Broida, Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
O'Connell, General Counsel 
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, 
Keir, Kichline, Paulus, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 

Operations

1/ Entered the meeting at the point indicated.



6/20/78

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Smith, 2/ Chief, Financial Markets Section, 
Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, 
Scheld, and Sims, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Brandt and Broaddus, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Richmond, 
respectively 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 16, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period May 16 through June 19, 1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 3 months of 

System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing in the period July 3 

through July 26, 1978, was authorized.

2/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.



6/20/78

Pursuant to paragraph 1D of the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations, the Committee, by unanimous vote, expressly 

authorized an over-all open position in foreign currencies of $1.5 

billion, effective immediately.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee amended the Procedural 

Instructions governing foreign currency operations to read as follows: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization 
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set 
forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 
and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, through the Manager of the System Open 
Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural 
understandings with respect to consultations and clearance 
with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and 
the Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken 
pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to 
the Committee.  

1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with 
the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation 
with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation which would result in a change in 
the System's over-all open position in foreign cur
rencies exceeding $100 million on any day or $300 
million since the most recent regular meeting of 
the Committee.  

B. Any operation which would result in a change in 
the System's net position in a single foreign cur
rency exceeding $100 million on any day or $300 mil
lion since the most recent regular meeting of the 
Committee.  

C. Any operation which might generate a substantial 
volume of trading in a particular currency by the 
System, even though the change in the System's net 
position in that currency might be less than the 
limits specified in 1B.



6/20/78

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 
per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the 

Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation 
with the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, 

or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation 

with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation which would result in a change in 
the System's over-all open position in foreign cur
rencies exceeding $500 million since the most recent 
regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 
per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the 
Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and about 
any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee amended paragraph 1D of the 

Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations to read as follows: 

To maintain an over-all open position in all foreign 
currencies not exceeding $1.0 billion, unless a larger 
position is expressly authorized by the Committee. For 
this purpose, the over-all open position in all foreign 
currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of 
net positions in individual currencies. The net position 
in a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of 
balances in that currency, plus outstanding contracts for 
future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for future 
delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these ele
ments with due regard to sign. 3/ 4/ 

3/ Effective December 28, 1976, the Federal Open Market Committee 
authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain an over-all 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding the figure of $1 billion 
specified in this paragraph by an amount equal to the remaining forward 
commitment associated with the System's outstanding 1971 Swiss franc swap 
drawings.  
4/ Earlier in this meeting, the Committee authorized an over-all open 
position in foreign currencies of $1.5 billion (excluding the authoriza
tion relating to outstanding 1971 Swiss franc swap drawings cited in the 
preceding footnote).



6/20/78 -5

Following the preceding actions Mr. Smith left the meeting.  

Prior to the following actions Mr. Gardner entered the meeting.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers' acceptances during the 

period May 16 through June 19, 1978, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Willes and Winn dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services has grown rapidly 
on the average in the current quarter as activity rebounded 
from the effects of the unusually severe winter weather and 
the lengthy coal strike, but the rate of advance most recently 
appears to be slowing. Following substantial gains in March 
and April, increases in industrial production and nonfarm 
payroll employment moderated in May and retail sales changed 
little. The unemployment rate edged up from 6.0 to 6.1 per 
cent in association with a large increase in the civilian 
labor force. Average wholesale prices rose somewhat less 
rapidly in May than earlier in 1978, reflecting smaller 
reported increases in farm products and processed foods.  
So far this year prices have increased at a considerably 
faster rate than they had on average during 1977. The index 
of average hourly earnings also has increased at a somewhat 
faster pace so far in 1978 than during 1977.  

Since the end of May the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar against major foreign currencies has declined about 
2 per cent, but it remains above its early-April low. The 
trade deficit in April was down somewhat from its very high 
first-quarter rate.  

Growth in M-1 moderated in May from the extraordinarily 
rapid pace in April, and as a result growth in M-2 and M-3 
also slowed. Inflows of the interest-bearing deposits included 
in M-2 picked up somewhat as commercial banks increased 
their reliance on large-denomination time deposits to 
finance an unusually sharp increase in business loans.  
Market interest rates have risen somewhat further in 
recent weeks.



6/20/78

In light of the foregoing developments, it is the 
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will resist 
inflationary pressures while encouraging continued 
moderate economic expansion and contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  
At its meeting on April 18, 1978, the Committee agreed 
that these objectives would be furthered by growth of 
M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the first quarter of 1978 to 
the first quarter of 1979 at rates within ranges of 
4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 
to 10 per cent, respectively. The associated range 
for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 per cent. These 
ranges are subject to reconsideration at any time as 
conditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions that are 
broadly consistent with the longer-run ranges for 
monetary aggregates cited above, while giving due 
regard to developing conditions in financial markets 
more generally. During the period until the next 
regular meeting, System open market operations shall 
be directed initially at attaining a weekly-average 
Federal funds rate slightly above the current level.  
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at main
taining the weekly Federal funds rate within the range 
of 7-1/2 to 8 per cent. In deciding on his specific 
objective for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall 
be guided mainly by the relationship between the latest 
estimates of annual rates of growth in the June-July 
period of M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of 
tolerance: 5 to 10 per cent for M-1 and 6 to 10 per 
cent for M-2. If, giving approximately equal weight 
to M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth appear to be 
significantly above or below the midpoints of the 
indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate 
shall be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion 
within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear 
to be above the upper limit or below the lower limit 
of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective 
for the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary instruc
tions from the Committee.



6/20/78

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, July 18, 1978, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-7-


