














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 19, 1978 

MINUTES OF ACTION 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 19, 

1978, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Baughman 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. Gardner 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Willes 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, Mayo, and Timlen, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Ettin, Kaminow, 
Keir, Kichline, Paulus, and Truman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account



9/19/78

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, 
Parthemos, and Scheld, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Boston, 
Richmond, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Fousek, and Keran, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta, New York, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Ms. Clarkin, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

August 15, and September 8, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period August 15 through 

September 18, 1978, were ratified.

- 2 -



9/19/78

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 

3 months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing 

on October 5, 1978, was authorized.  

Renewal for a further period of 3 months of a System 

drawing on the Swiss National Bank maturing on October 5, 

1978, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System use of the "swap" line 

with the German Federal Bank beyond October 5, 1978, was 

authorized, the line with that Bank having been in continuous 

use since October 5, 1977.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period August 15 through September 18, 

1978, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the limit on System holdings of 

U. S. government and Federal agency securities specified in 

paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market 

Operations was raised from $3 billion to $4 billion, effective 

immediately, for the period ending with the close of business 

October 17, 1978.

- 3 -



9/19/78

With Messrs. Wallich and Willes dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
has grown moderately in the current quarter, 
although the pace is somewhat below the average for 
the first two quarters of the year. In August the 
dollar value of total retail sales rose, after having 
declined in July, but remained close to the level 
reached in April. Industrial production continued 
to expand at about the moderate pace of the preceding 
3 months, and nonfarm payroll employment rose some
what further. The unemployment rate declined from 
6.2 to 5.9 per cent, slightly below the average 
rate in the first 7 months of the year. Since mid
year average prices of goods and services have risen 
less rapidly than earlier, in large part because of 
declines in prices of foods. The advance in the 
index of average hourly earnings has been somewhat 
faster so far in 1978 than it had been on the average 
during 1977.  

After a sharp decline in early August, the trade
weighted value of the dollar against major foreign 
currencies has recovered against a background of 
uncertain conditions in exchange markets. In late 
August it was announced that the U. S. trade deficit 
had increased sharply in July.  

Growth in M-1 picked up in August to about the 
average rate in the first two quarters of the year.  
Inflows of the interest-bearing deposits included in 
M-2 and M-3 also accelerated somewhat, and expansion 
in the broader aggregates was relatively rapid.  
Short-term market interest rates have risen appreci
ably since mid-August, but longer-term rates

- 4 -



9/19/78

generally have edged down further. On August 18 
an increase in Federal Reserve discount rates from 
7-1/4 to 7-3/4 per cent was announced.  

In light of the foregoing developments, it is 
the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging 
continued moderate economic expansion and contri
buting to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. At its meeting on July 18, 1978, the 
Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the 
second quarter of 1978 to the second quarter of 1979 
at rates within ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 per cent, 6-1/2 
to 9 per cent, and 7-1/2 to 10 per cent, respectively.  
The associated range for bank credit is 8-1/2 to 
11-1/2 per cent. These ranges are subject to 
reconsideration at any time as conditions warrant.  

In the short-run, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions that are 
broadly consistent with the longer-run ranges for 
monetary aggregates cited above, while giving due 
regard to developing conditions in domestic and 
international financial markets more generally.  
Early in the period until the next regular meeting, 
System open market operations shall be directed at 
attaining a weekly-average Federal funds rate 
slightly above the current level. Subsequently, 
operations shall be directed at maintaining the 
weekly-average Federal funds rate within the range 
of 8-1/4 to 8-3/4 per cent. In deciding on the 
specific objective for the Federal funds rate the 
Manager shall be guided mainly by the relationship 
between the latest estimates of annual rates of 
growth in the September-October period of M-1 and 
M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: 5 to 9 
per cent for M-1 and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 per cent for 
M-2. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 
and M-2, their rates of growth appear to be signi
ficantly above or below the midpoints of the 
indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate 
shall be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion 
within its range.

- 5 -



9/19/78 - 6 

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear 
to be above the upper limit or below the lower limit 
of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective 
for the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, October 17, 1978, beginning at 

9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


