














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 6, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 6, 

1979, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Baughman 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Eastburn 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Willes 
Mr. Mayo, Alternate 

Messrs. Balles and Black, Alternate Members of 
Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas 
City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Guy, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, 
Keir, Kichline, Paulus, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account



2/6/79

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Ms. Belton, Secretary, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Fossum and MacDonald, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta and Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Brandt, T.  
Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, 
Parthemos, and Scheld, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Philadelphia, 
Kansas City, Atlanta, Boston, 
San Francisco, Richmond, and 
Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

December 19, 1978, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period December 19, 1978, 

through February 5, 1979, were ratified.

- 2 -



2/6/79

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period December 19, 1978, through 

February 5, 1979, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Wallich and Willes dissenting, the 

Committee adopted the following ranges for rates of growth 

in monetary aggregates for the period from the fourth quarter 

of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979: M-1, 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 

per cent; M-2, 5 to 8 per cent; and M-3, 6 to 9 per cent.  

The associated range for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 

per cent.  

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that in the fourth quarter of 1978 growth 
in real output of goods and services picked up 
sharply from the reduced rate in the third quarter.  
In December, as in the preceding 2 months, the 
dollar value of total retail sales expanded sub
stantially, and industrial production and nonfarm 
payroll employment rose considerably further.  
Employment continued to grow in January, and the 
unemployment rate, at 5.8 per cent, was virtually 
the same as in the final months of 1978. Over 
recent months, broad measures of prices and the 
index of average hourly earnings have continued 
to rise rapidly.

- 3 -



2/6/79

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has tended upward since 
the turn of the year, returning to about its level 
in mid-December prior to the OPEC announcement of 
increased oil prices. The U. S. trade deficit in 
the fourth quarter of 1978 was at about the same 
rate as in the second and third quarters.  

M-1 increased little in December and appears 
to have declined in January, in part because of the 
continuing effects of the introduction of the 
automatic transfer service (ATS) on November 1, 
and M-2 and M-3 grew at relatively slow rates.  
With market interest rates relatively high, in
flows to banks of the interest-bearing deposits 
included in M-2 slowed sharply, and inflows of 
deposits to nonbank thrift institutions slackened 
further. Over the year from the fourth quarter of 
1977 to the fourth quarter of 1978 M-1, M-2, and 
M-3 grew about 7-1/4, 8-1/2, and 9-1/2 per cent, 
respectively. Most market interest rates have 
declined on balance in recent weeks.  

Taking account of past and prospective develop
ments in employment, unemployment, production, 
investment, real income, productivity, international 
trade and payments, and prices, it is the policy of 
the Federal Open Market Committee to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will resist 
inflationary pressures while encouraging moderate 
economic expansion and contributing to a sustain
able pattern of international transactions. The 
Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the 
fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 
1979 within ranges of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 per cent, 
5 to 8 per cent, and 6 to 9 per cent, respectively.  
The associated range for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 
10-1/2 per cent. These ranges will be reconsidered 
in July or at any time as conditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while 
giving due regard to the program for supporting

- 4 -



2/6/79

the foreign exchange value of the dollar and to 
developing conditions in domestic financial 
markets. In the period before the next regular 
meeting, System open market operations are to be 
directed at maintaining the weekly average Federal 
funds rate at about the current level, provided 
that over the February-March period the annual 
rates of growth of M-1 and M-2, given approxim
ately equal weight, appear to be within ranges of 
3 to 7 per cent and 5 to 9 per cent, respectively.  
If growth of M-1 and M-2 for the 2-month period 
appears to be outside the indicated limits, the 
Manager will promptly notify the Chairman, who 
will then consult with the Committee to deter
mine whether the situation calls for supple
mentary instructions.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 

3 months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank 

maturing February 23, 1979, through March 30, 1979, was 

authorized.  

Renewal for further periods of 3 months of System 

drawings on the Swiss National Bank maturing February 23, 

1979, through March 30, 1979, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, the limit on changes in System 

holdings of U. S. government and Federal agency securities 

specified in paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was set at $5 billion, effective 

immediately, for the period ending with the close of business 

March 20, 1979.

- 5 -



2/6/79 - 6 -

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, March 20, 1979, beginning at 9:30 

a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


