














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

October 6, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Saturday, October 6, 

1979, beginning at 10:10 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Baughman and Eastburn, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Philadelphia, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Petersen, General Counsel 
Axilrod, Economist 
Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations

Messrs. Ettin, Kichline,and Truman, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Allison, Secretary of the Board of 
Governors



10/6/79

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secre
tariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Corrigan, Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

Taking account of past and prospective develop
ments in employment, unemployment, production, in
vestment, real income, productivity, international 
trade and payments, and prices, the Federal Open 
Market Committee seeks to foster monetary and 
financial conditions that will resist inflationary 
pressures while encouraging moderate economic 
expansion and contributing to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions. At its meeting on.  
July 11, 1979, the Committee agreed that these 
objectives would be furthered by growth of M-1, 
M-2, and M-3 from the fourth quarter of 1978 to 
the fourth quarter of 1979 within ranges of 1-1/2 
to 4-1/2 percent, 5 to 8 percent, and 6 to 9 per
cent respectively, the same ranges that had been 
established in February. The range for M-1 had 
been established on the basis of an assumption that 
expansion of ATS and NOW accounts would dampen growth 
by about 3 percentage points over the year. It now 
appears that expansion of such accounts will dampen 
growth by about 1-1/2 percentage points over the year; 
thus, the equivalent range for M-1 is now 3 to 6 
percent. The associated range for bank credit is 
7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. The Committee anticipates 
that for the period from the fourth quarter of 1979 
to the fourth quarter of 1980, growth may be within 
the same ranges, depending upon emerging economic 
conditions and appropriate adjustments that may be 
required by legislation or judicial developments 
affecting interest-bearing transactions accounts.  
These ranges will be reconsidered at any time as 
conditions warrant.

- 2 -



10/6/79

In the short run, the Committee seeks to restrain 
expansion of reserve aggregates to a pace consistent 
with deceleration in growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 in 
the fourth quarter of 1979 to rates that would hold 
growth of these monetary aggregates over the whole 
period from the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth 
quarter of 1979 within the Committee's longer-run 
ranges, provided that in the period before the next 
regular meeting the weekly average federal funds rate 
remains within a range of 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.  
The Committee will consider the need for supplementary 
instructions if it appears that operations to restrain 
expansion of reserve aggregates would maintain the 
federal funds rate near the upper limit of its range.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 3 -


