














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

September 18, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 18, 

1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.

Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr.Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, 
Alternate Members of the 
Committee

Timlen, and Winn, 
Federal Open Market

Messrs. Baughman and Eastburn, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran, Kichline, 
Parthemos, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

PRESENT:



9/18/79

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill and Kalchbrenner, Associate 
Directors, Division of International 
Finance and Division of Research and 
Statistics, respectively,Board of Governors 

Mr. Prell, Associate Research Division 
Officer, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secre
tariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Forrestal, Gainor and Moriarty, 
First Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, 
and St. Louis, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Burns, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, and Fousek, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis, Philadelphia, Dallas, Kansas 
City, Boston, and New York, respectively 

Messrs. Corrigan and Danforth, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 

14, 1979, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period August 14 through September 

17, 1979, were ratified.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing September 21 

through October 26, 1979, was noted without objection.

- 2 -



9/18/79

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period August 14 through September 17, 

1979, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Balles, Black, Coldwell and Rice 

dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that in the third quarter real output 
of goods and services remained near the reduced 
level of the preceding quarter and that prices on 
the average continued to rise rapidly. In August, 
as in July, the dollar value of retail sales 
expanded moderately, but sales in real terms 
changed little and were substantially below those 
of last December. Industrial production dropped 
from the May-July level, largely because of sharp 
curtailments in output of motor vehicles and parts.  
Nonfarm payroll employment was unchanged; the un
employment rate rose from 5.7 percent to 6.0 per
cent, thus moving above the narrow range in which it 
had fluctuated since the beginning of the year.  
Producer prices of finished goods continued to 
rise rapidly in August, led by further large 
increases in energy items and a substantial 
advance in consumer foods following a significant 
decline over the preceding four months. The rise 
in the index of average hourly earnings over the 
first eight months of this year was moderately 
below the pace during 1978, but the increase in 
total hourly compensation in the nonfarm business 
sector has been about as rapid this year as last.  

The dollar came under downward pressure in 
foreign exchange markets in the last days of August 
and the early days of September, but its trade
weighted value against major foreign currencies

- 3 -



9/18/79

has changed little on balance since mid-August.  
The U. S. trade deficit in July was sharply reduced 
from the average in the first half of the year.  

Growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 was relatively 
rapid in August and early September, although not 
so rapid as in June and July. Market interest 
rates have risen appreciably over recent weeks.  
An increase in Federal Reserve discount rates from 
10 to 10-1/2 percent was announced on August 16.  

Taking account of past and prospective develop
ments in employment, unemployment, production, in
vestment, real income, productivity, international 
trade and payments, and prices, the Federal Open Market 
Committee seeks to foster monetary and financial con
ditions that will resist inflationary pressures while 
encouraging moderate economic expansion and contri
buting to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. At its meeting on July 11, 1979, 
the Committee agreed that these objectives would 
be furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from 
the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter 
of 1979 within ranges of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, 
5 to 8 percent, and 6 to 9 percent respectively, 
the same ranges that had been established in 
February. Having established the range for M-1 in 
February on the assumption that expasnion of ATS 
and NOW accounts would dampen growth by about 3 
percentage points over the year, the Committee 
also agreed that actual growth in M-1 might vary 
in relation to its range to the extent of any 
deviation from that estimate. The associated 
range for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.  
The Committee anticipates that for the period from 
the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter 
of 1980, growth may be within the same ranges, 
depending upon emerging economic conditions and 
appropriate adjustments that may be required by 
legislation or judicial developments affecting 
interest-bearing transactions accounts. These 
ranges will be reconsidered at any time as con
ditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while 
giving due regard to developing conditions in

- 4 -



9/18/79

foreign exchange and domestic financial markets.  
Early in the period before the next regular meeting, 
System open market operations are to be directed 
at attaining a weekly average federal funds rate 
slightly above the current level. Subsequently, 
operations shall be directed at maintaining the 
weekly average federal funds rate within the 
range of 11-1/4 to 11-3/4 percent. In deciding 
on the specific objective for the federal funds 
rate the Manager for Domestic Operations shall be 
guided mainly by the relationship between the 
latest estimates of annual rates of growth in the 
September-October period of M-1 and M-2 and the 
following ranges of tolerance: 3 to 8 percent 
for M-1 and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent for M-2. If 
rates of growth of M-1 and M-2, given approximately 
equal weight, appear to be close to or beyond the 
upper or lower limits of the indicated ranges, the 
objective for the funds rate is to be raised or 
lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to 
be beyond the upper or lower limits of the indicated 
ranges at a time when the objective for the funds 
rate has already been moved to the corresponding 
limit of its range, the Manager shall promptly 
notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether 
the situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending 

of Government securities from the System Open Market Account, 

contained in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations, should be retained at this time, 

subject to review in six months.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, October 16, 1979, beginning at 9:30.  

a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


