














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 22, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 22, 1979, 

beginning at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, 
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Petersen, General Counsel 
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mannion, Assistant General Counsel

Mr. Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Brandt, Ettin, Keir, Keran, Kichline, 
Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors



5/22/79

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secre
tariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, Eisenmenger, and 
Fousek, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Cleveland, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burns, Danforth, T. Davis, Ms.  
Greene, and Mr. Mullineaux, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas, 
Minneapolis, Kansas City, New York,and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

April 17, 1979, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period April 17 through May 21, 

1979, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances 

during the period April 17 through May 21, 1979, were ratified.

- 2 -



5/22/79

With Messrs. Balles, Partee, and Wallich dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests a moderate pickup in growth of real 
output of goods and services in the current 
quarter from the sharply reduced pace in the 
first quarter, when public and private construc
tion activity was adversely affected by unusually 
severe weather. In April, however, industrial 
production declined and growth in nonfarm pay
roll employment slowed, in large part owing to 
effects of a work stoppage in the trucking 
industry early in the month. The unemployment 
rate, at 5.8 percent, remained at about the 
level prevailing earlier in the year. The 
dollar value of total retail sales rose some
what in April, although apparently by less than 
the increase in average prices. Over recent 
months, broad measures of prices have increased 
at a faster pace than during 1978, and the 
index of average hourly earnings has continued 
to rise rapidly.  

Demand for the dollar has continued strong 
in exchange markets over the past five weeks, 
and the trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies has risen 
further. The U. S. trade deficit declined 
further in March and was slightly lower in the 
first quarter as a whole than in the fourth 
quarter of 1978.  

M-1 expanded sharply in April, after having 
declined in the first quarter, and M-2 and M-3 
grew rapidly. The interest-bearing component 
of M-2 also grew rapidly, following several 
months of slow growth, as net flows into money 
market certificates at commercial banks increased 
while outflows of savings deposits slowed. At

- 3 -



5/22/79

nonbank thrift institutions, net flows into 
money market certificates moderated, and overall 
inflows of funds receded from the already reduced 
pace of the first quarter. Since mid-April, 
short-term market interest rates have changed 
little, on balance; most longer-term rates have 
increased.  

Taking account of past and prospective 
developments in employment, unemployment, 
production, investment, real income, produc
tivity, international trade and payments, and 
prices, it is the policy of the Federal Open 
Market Committee to foster monetary and financial 
conditions that will resist inflationary pres
sures while encouraging moderate economic 
expansion and contributing to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At 
its meeting on February 6, 1979, the Committee 
agreed that these objectives would be furthered 
by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth 
quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979 
within ranges of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, 5 to 
8 percent, and 6 to 9 percent respectively.  
The associated range for bank credit is 7-1/2 
to 10-1/2 percent. These ranges will be 
reconsidered in July or at any time as condi
tions warrant.  

In the short-run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market condi
tions that are broadly consistent with the 
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited 
above, while giving due regard to the program 
for supporting the foreign exchange value of 
the dollar and to developing conditions in 
domestic financial markets. Early in the period 
before the next regular meeting, System open 
market operations are to be directed at main
taining the weekly average federal funds rate 
at about the current level. Subsequently, 
operations shall be directed at maintaining the 
weekly average federal funds rate within the 
range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. In deciding 
on the specific objective for the federal funds

- 4 -



5/22/79

rate the Manager shall be guided mainly by the 
relationship between the latest estimates of 
annual rates of growth in the May-June period of 
M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: 
0 to 5 percent for M-1 and 4 to 8-1/2 percent for 
M-2. If, with approximately equal weight given 
to M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth appear to 
be close to or beyond the upper or lower limits 
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the 
funds rate is to be raised or lowered in an 
orderly fashion within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates 
appear to be above the upper limit or below the 
lower limit of the indicated ranges at a time 
when the objective for the funds rate has 
already been moved to the corresponding limit 
of its range, the Manager will promptly notify 
the Chairman, who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Wednesday, July 11, 1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


