














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 20, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 20, 

1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, and Eastburn, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Brandt, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran, 
Kichline, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations



3/20/79

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gainor and McIntosh, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Minneapolis and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, and Eisenmenger, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, 
and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burns, Danforth, T.  
Davis, Fousek, and Mullineaux, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond, Dallas, Minneapolis, 
Kansas City, New York, and Philadelphia, 
respectively 

Ms. Clarkin, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported 

that advices of the election of the following members and 

alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for 

the year commencing March 1, 1979, had been received by the 

Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths 

of office.

- 2 -



3/20/79

The elected members and alternate members were 

as follows: 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond, with Frank E. Morris, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate, 

Paul A. Volcker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, with Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, with Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

Monroe Kimbrel, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta, with Lawrence K. Roos, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate; 

John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, with Roger Guffey, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal 

Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the election 

of their successors at the first meeting of the Committee 

after February 29, 1980, with the understanding that in the 

event of the discontinuance of their official connection 

with the Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, 

as the case might be, they would cease to have any official 

connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 

G. William Miller Chairman 
Paul A. Volcker Vice Chairman 
Murray Altmann Secretary 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary

- 3 -



3/20/79

Neal L. Petersen General Counsel 
James H. Oltman Deputy General Counsel 
Robert E. Mannion Assistant General Counsel 
Stephen H. Axilrod Economist 

Harry Brandt,Richard G. Davis, 
Edward Ettin, George Henry, 
Peter M. Keir, Michael 
Keran, James L. Kichline, 
James Parthemos, Karl 
Scheld, Edwin M. Truman, 
Joseph S. Zeisel Associate Economists 

Secretary's note: On March 6, 1979, certain 
continuing authorizations of the Committee, 
listed below, had been distributed by the 
Secretary with the advice that, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the Committee, 
they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March organization meeting 
to give members an opportunity to raise any 
questions they had concerning them. Members 
were asked to so indicate if they wished to 
have any of the authorizations in question 
placed on the agenda for consideration at this 
meeting, and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities 
in the System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to 
whom weekly reports on open market opera
tions may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a 
Federal Reserve Bank as agent to operate 
the System Account in case the New York 
Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued opera
tion of the Committee and for certain 
actions by the Reserve Banks during an 
emergency.

- 4 -



3/20/79

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the 
System Open Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System opera
tions in Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Opera
tions of Federal Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding 
Availability of Information, and Rules of 
Procedure.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was selected to execute transactions for the System 

Open Market Account until the adjournment of the first 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after February 

29, 1980.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes, Peter D.  

Sternlight, and Scott E. Pardee were selected to serve at 

the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of Manager 

of the System Open Market Account, Deputy Manager for 

Domestic Operations, and Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations, 

respectively, on the understanding that their selection was 

subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently 
received that the selections indicated above 
were satisfactory to the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York.

- 5 -



3/20/79

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

February 6 and March 2, 1979, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period February 6 through 

March 19, 1979, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers' 

acceptances during the period February 6 through March 19, 

1979, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Coldwell, Kimbrel, Volcker, and 

Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that in the current quarter growth in 
real output of goods and services has moderated 
from the rapid rate in the last quarter of 1978, 
while the rise in prices has accelerated. In 
January and February the dollar value of total 
retail sales rose slightly further. Nonfarm 
payroll employment continued to expand over the 
two-month period, but in part because of severe 
weather, industrial production increased little.  
The unemployment rate in February, at 5.7 per
cent, was virtually unchanged from its level in 
January and in late 1978. Over recent months, 
on balance, the index of average hourly earnings 
has continued to rise rapidly.

- 6 -



3/20/79

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has shown no net change 
since early February. The U. S. trade deficit in 
January was larger than the monthly average in the 
fourth quarter of 1978, to some extent because of 
a bulge in imports of oil.  

M-1 declined in both January and February, in 
part because of the continuing effects of the growth 
of the automatic transfer service. With market 
interest rates continuing high, inflows of the 
interest-bearing deposits included in M-2 and M-3 
remained at reduced levels, despite substantial 
flows into money market certificates at both 
commercial banks and nonbank thrift institutions.  
Over the two months, consequently, M-2 changed 
little and M-3 grew at a relatively slow rate.  
The behavior of all three monetary aggregates was 
affected by shifts of funds from deposits to money 
market mutual funds and other liquid assets. Most 
market interest rates have risen in recent weeks, 
after having declined in January.  

Taking account of past and prospective develop
ments in employment, unemployment, production, in
vestment, real income, productivity, international 
trade and payments, and prices, it is the policy of 
the Federal Open Market Committee to foster monetary 
and financial conditions that will resist inflationary 
pressures while encouraging moderate economic expansion 
and contributing to a sustainable pattern of inter
national transactions. The Committee agreed that 
these objectives would be furthered by growth of M-1, 
M-2, and M-3 from the fourth quarter of 1978 to the 
fourth quarter of 1979 within ranges of 1-1/2 to 
4-1/2 percent, 5 to 8 percent, and 6 to 9 percent, 
respectively. The associated range for bank credit 
is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. These ranges will be 
reconsidered in July or at any time as conditions 
warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions that are 
broadly consistent with the longer-run ranges for 
monetary aggregates cited above, while giving due 
regard to the program for supporting the foreign 
exchange value of the dollar and to developing 
conditions in domestic financial markets. Early 
in the period before the next regular meeting,

- 7 -



3/20/79

System open market operations are to be directed at 
maintaining the weekly average federal funds rate at 
about the current level. Subsequently, operations 
shall be directed at maintaining the weekly average 
federal funds rate within the range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 
percent. In deciding on the specific objective for 
the federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided 
mainly by the relationship between the latest esti
mates of annual rates of growth in the March-April 
period of M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of 
tolerance: 4 to 8 percent for M-1 and and 3-1/2 to 
7-1/2 percent for M-2. If, with approximately equal 
weight given to M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth 
appear to be significantly above or below the mid
points of the indicated ranges, the objective for 
the funds rate is to be raised or lowered in an 
orderly fashion within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear 
to be above the upper limit or below the lower limit 
of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective 
for the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager will 
promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, renewal for further periods of 

3 months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing 

March 31, 1979, through April 27, 1979, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending 

of Government securities from the System Open Market Account, 

contained in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations, should be retained at this time, 

subject to review in six months.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic

Open Market Operations shown below was reaffirmed:

- 8 -



3/20/79

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary 
to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted 
at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, 
including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and 
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency 
of the Unites States in the open market, from or to 
securities dealers and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
System Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U. S. Government and 
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the 
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of U. S.  
Government and Federal agency securities held in such 
Account (including forward commitments) at the close of 
business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which 
action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive 
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $3.0 
billion during the period commencing with the opening of 
business on the day following such meeting and ending 
with the close of business on the day of the next such 
meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open 
market, from or to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a 
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the account 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up 
to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise 
out of the current shipment of goods between countries 
or within the United States, or (2) arise out of the 
storage within the United States of goods under contract 
of sale or expected to move into the channels of trade 
within a reasonable time and that are secured through
out their life by a warehouse receipt or similar document

- 9 -



3/20/79

conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that 
the aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at 
any one time shall not exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, 
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of 
agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the 
event Government securities or agency issues covered by 
any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they 
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the System 
Open Market Account; and provided further that in the 
event bankers acceptances covered by any such agreement 
are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue 
to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, under special cir
cumstances, such as when the New York Reserve Bank is closed, 
any other Federal Reserve Bank, to purchase directly from 
the Treasury for its own account (with discretion, in cases 
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or 
more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from 
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; 
provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 percent below the discount rate of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such pur
chases, and provided further that the total amount of such 
certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve 
Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.

- 10 -



3/20/79

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Govern
ment securities held in the System Open Market Account to 
Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted 
through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as 
the Committee may specify from time to time.  

4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term 
investments for foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open 
Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, (a) for System Open Market Account, to 
sell U. S. Government securities to such foreign and inter
national accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph 1(a) 
under agreements providing for the resale by such accounts 
of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the 
market; and (b) for New York Bank account, when appropriate, 
to undertake with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed 
on purchases and sales of securities in paragraph 1(c), 
repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency securities, 
and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such 
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may provide 
for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign

Currency Operations shown below was reaffirmed:

- 11 -



3/20/79

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System 
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry 
out the Committee's foreign currency directive and express 
authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in 
conformity with such procedural instructions as the 
Committee may issue from time to time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through 
spot or forward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the 
U. S. Treasury, with the U. S. Exchange Stabiliza
tion Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary 
authorities, with the Bank for International 
Settlements, and with other international 
financial institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding 
forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the 
foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.

- 12 -



3/20/79

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the 
reciprocal currency arrangements listed in 
paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings by 
either party to any such arrangement shall 
be fully liquidated within 12 months after 
any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because 
of exceptional circumstances, specifically 
authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position 
in all foreign currencies not exceeding 
$1.0 billion, unless a larger position is 
expressly authorized by the Committee. For 
this purpose, the overall open position in 
all foreign currencies is defined as the 
sum (disregarding signs) of net positions 
in individual currencies. The net position 
in a single foreign currency is defined as 
holdings of balances in that currency, 
plus outstanding contracts for future 
receipt, minu: outstanding contracts for future 
delivery of that currency, i.e., as the 
sum of these elements with due regard to 
sign. 1/2/ 

1/ Effective December 28, 1976, the Federal Open 
Market Committee authorized the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York to maintain an overall open 
position in foreign currencies exceeding the 
figure of $1 billion specified in this paragraph 
by an amount equal to the remaining forward 
commitment associated with the System's out
standing 1971 Swiss franc swap drawings. At 
this meeting, the Committee reaffirmed this 
special authorization.  

2/ On December 19, 1978, the Committee authorized 
all overall open position in foreign currencies 
of $8.0 billion (excluding the authorization 
relating to outstanding 1971 Swiss franc swap 
drawings cited in the preceding footnote).

- 13 -



3/20/70

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 
arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the System Open 
Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those 
designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements 
on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(Millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 360 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International 

Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 

European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and 
the proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be 
authorized, shall be referred for review and approval to the 
Committee.

- 14 -



3/20/79 - 15 -

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System swap 
commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 
purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions 
in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(A) 
above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, be at prevailing market rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency trans
actions. In making operating arrangements with foreign 
central banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or under
standings concerning the administration of the accounts 
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with 
the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 
review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as 
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances.  
Such investments shall be in accordance with Section 14(e) 
of the Federal Reserve Act.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding 
paragraphs shall be reported daily to the Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists 
of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the 
absence of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, 
other Board Members designated by the Chairman as alternates, 
and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, 
his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called 
at the request of any member, or at the request of the Manager, 
for the purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated operations 
and of consulting with the Manager on other matters relating 
to his responsibilities. At the request of any member of the 
Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and con
sultations shall be referred for determination to the 
Federal Open Market Committee.



3/20/79

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to 
enter into any needed agreement or under
standing with the Secretary of the Treasury 
about the division of responsibility for foreign 
currency operations between the System and 
the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency 
operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory 
Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to trans
mit pertinent information on System foreign currency opera
tions to appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in accordance 
with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement 
of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships of 
Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive

was amended to read as follows:

- 16 -



3/20/79 - 17 -

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally 
be directed at countering disorderly market conditions, 
provided that market exchange rates for the U. S. dollar 
reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF Article 
IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases 
and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") 
arrangements with selected foreign central 
banks and with the Bank for International 
Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central 
banks of other countries and with Inter
national monetary institutions.  

3.. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of 
probable future needs for currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System 
and Treasury commitments in particular 
currencies, and to facilitate operations 
of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be 
expressly authorized by the Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and 
cooperation with the United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with 
foreign monetary authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations 
of the United States in the International 
Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements 
under the IMF Article IV.



3/20/79 - 18 -

With Mr. Coldwell dissenting,the Procedural Instruc

tions with respect to Foreign Currency Operations were amended 

to read as follows: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authoriza
tion and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as 
set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 
and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, through the Manager of the System Open Market 
Account, shall be guided by the following procedural under
standings with respect to consultations and clearance with 
the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the 
Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant 
to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with 
the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation 
with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation which would result in a change 
in the System's overall open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $300 million or any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting 
of the Committee.  

B. Any operation which would result in a change 
or any day in the System's net position in a 
single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated 
with repayment of swap drawings.  

C. Any operation which might generate a substantial 
volume of trading in a particular currency by the 
System, even though the change in the System's net 
position in that currency might be less than the 
limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 
per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.



3/20/79

2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the 
Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consulation 
with the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, 
or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consulta
tion with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time 
available); 

A. Any operation which would result in a change in 
the System's overall open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 
15 per cent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or 
the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, April 17, 1979, beginning at 9:30 

a.m.

Secretary

- 19 -


