














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

April 17, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 17, 

1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Roos, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Baughman and Willes, Presidents of the 

Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Brandt, R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, 
Keir, Keran, Kichline, Parthemos, 
Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations



4/17/79

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, 
Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. McIntosh and Smoot, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston and Philadelphia, 
respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, J. Davis, 
and Eisenmenger, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, and T. Davis, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and 
Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Levin, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. John Morton, Economist, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on

March 20, 1979, were approved.

- 2 -



4/17/79

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period March 20 through 

April 16, 1979, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period March 20 through April 16, 

1979, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Coldwell, Volcker, and Wallich dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute trans

actions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that in the first quarter of 1979 
growth in real output of goods and services 
slowed substantially from the rapid rate in 
the last quarter of 1978, while the rise in 
prices accelerated. In March the dollar 
value of total retail sales, industrial pro
duction, and nonfarm payroll employment 
expanded considerably, but part of the 
strength was attributable to recovery from 
the effects of severe weather in the pre
ceding two months. For the first quarter 
as a whole, retail sales in real terms dec
lined somewhat, following a sharp increase in 
the fourth quarter of 1978, and the advance 
in industrial output slowed appreciably.  
Growth in employment remained strong in the 
quarter, however, and the unemployment rate 
in March, at 5.7 percent, was virtually

- 3 -



4/17/79

unchanged from its level in late 1978 and the 
first two months of 1979. Over recent months, 
broad measures of prices have increased at a 
faster pace than during 1978, and the index 
of average hourly earnings has continued to 
rise rapidly.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies has risen 
over the past four weeks, with the dollar 
showing particular strength against the yen, 
the Swiss franc, and the mark. The U. S.  
trade deficit in February was about half the 
size of the large deficit in January, but the 
average for the two months was above the 
monthly average in the fourth quarter of 
1978.  

M-1 increased slightly in March after 
having declined in both January and February.  
With market interest rates continuing high, 
inflows of the interest-bearing deposits 
included in M-2 and M-3 remained at reduced 
levels, despite substantial flows into money 
market certificates at both commercial banks 
and nonbank thrift institutions, and the 
broader monetary aggregates continued to grow 
at relatively slow rates. From the fourth 
quarter of 1978 to the first quarter of 1979, 
M-1 declined at an annual rate of about 2-1/2 
percent, in part because of the effects of 
the growth of the automatic transfer service, 
and M-2 and M-3 grew at rates of about 1-1/2 
percent and 4-1/2 percent, respectively. The 
behavior of all three monetary aggregates was 
affected by shifts of funds from deposits to 
money market mutual funds and other liquid 
assets. Since mid-March, market interest 
rates generally have risen somewhat, on 
balance.  

Taking account of past and propective [prospective] 
developments in employment, unemployment, 
production, investment, real income, pro
ductivity, international trade, and payments, 
and prices, it is the policy of the Federal

- 4 -



4/17/79

Open Market Committee to foster monetary and 
financial conditions that will resist inflationary 
pressures while encouraging moderate economic 
expansion and contributing to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions. The Committee 
agreed that these objectives would be furthered 
by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth 
quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979 
within ranges of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, 5 to 8 
percent, and 6 to 9 percent, respectively. The 
associated range for bank credit is 7-1/2 to 
10-1/2 percent. These ranges will be reconsidered 
in July or at any time as conditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while 
giving due regard to the program for supporting the 
foreign exchange value of the dollar and to 
developing conditions in domestic financial markets.  
Early in the period before the next regular meeting, 
System open market operations are to be directed at 
maintaining the weekly average federal funds rate 
at about the current level. Subsequently, operations 
shall be directed at maintaining the weekly average 
federal funds rate within the range of 9-3/4 to 
10-1/2 percent. In deciding on the specific 
objective for the federal funds rate the Manager 
shall be guided mainly by the relationship between 
the latest estimates of annual rates of growth in 
the April-May period of M-1 and M-2 and the following 
ranges of tolerance: 4 to 8 percent for M-1 and 
4 to 8-1/2 percent for M-2. If, with approximately 
equal weight given to M-1 and M-2, their rates of 
growth appear to be close to or beyond the upper or 
lower limits of the indicated ranges, the objective 
for the funds rate is to be raised or lowered in an 
orderly fashion within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear 
to be above the upper limit or below the lower limit 
of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective

- 5 -



4/17/79

for the funds rate has already been moved to 
the corresponding limit of its range, the 
Manager will promptly notify the Chairman, 
who will then decide whether the situation 
calls for supplementary instructions from the 
Committee.  

By unanimous vote, System renewal for further periods 

of 3 months of System drawings on the German Federal Bank 

maturing in the period May 7-9, 1979, was noted without 

objection.  

Following the preceding action, Mr. Morton entered 

the meeting.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, May 22, 1979, beginning a 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 6 -


