














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

July 11, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C,, on Wednesday, July 11, 1979, 

beginning at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, 
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Brandt, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran, 
Kichline, Parthemos, Scheld, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors



7/11/79

Messrs. Kalchbrenner and Siegman, Associate 
Directors, Divisions of Research and 
Statistics and International Finance, 
respectively, Board of Governors 

Mr. Prell 1/, Associate Research Division 
Officer, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, J. Davis, Eisen
menger, and Fousek, Senior Vice Presi
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of St.  
Louis, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Boston, 
and New York, respectively 

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, and T. Davis, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas, Minneapolis, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

Ms. Clarkin, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 22, 

1979, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period May 22 through July 10, 

1979, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances 

during the period May 22 through July 10, 1978, were ratified.  

1/ Mr. Prell entered the meeting following the votes to ratify 
System open market transactions and left following the vote to 
adopt the domestic policy directive.

- 2 -



7/11/79 - 3 

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Committee adopted 

the following ranges for rates of growth in monetary aggregates 

for the period from the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth 

quarter of 1979: M-1, 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent; M-2, 5 to 8 per

cent; and M-3, 6 to 9 percent. The associated range for bank 

credit is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee agreed that for 

the period from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth 

quarter of 1980, growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3, and of commercial 

bank credit, might be within the ranges adopted for 1979, 

depending upon emerging economic conditions and appropriate 

adjustments that may be required by legislation or judicial 

developments affecting interest-bearing transactions accounts.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
declined somewhat in the second quarter, as slacken
ing in demands was intensified by reduced: supplies 
and sharply higher prices of motor fuels. During 
the quarter, the dollar value of retail sales declined, 
and in real terms, sales in June were substantially 
below last December. Growth in nonfarm payroll 
employment slowed during the quarter to a pace 
considerably below the preceding six months, but 
the unemployment rate in June, at 5.6 percent, was 
somewhat lower than earlier in the year. Industrial 
production recovered in May, after having declined 
in April in large part because of a work stoppage.



7/11/79

Over the first half of this year, broad measures 
of prices increased at a much faster pace than during 
1978, although producer prices of foods declined in 
the second quarter. The rise in the index of average 
hourly earnings has slowed in recent months.  

Downward pressure on the dollar in foreign 
exchange markets emerged in mid-June after several 
months of strength, and since then the trade-weighted 
value of the dollar against major foreign currencies 
has declined about 3 percent. The U.S. trade deficit 
for April and May combined widened somewhat from the 
first-quarter rate.  

M-1 expanded sharply in June, after having increased 
little in May, and M-2 and M-3 also grew rapidly. Inflows 
of interest-bearing deposits included in M-2 grew rapidly 
in June, as net flows into money market certificates at 
commercial banks expanded further and savings deposits 
increased for the first time since last September. At 
nonbank thrift institutions, inflows of deposits picked 
up from the sharply reduced pace in May. On a quarterly 
average basis, M-1 grew at an annual rate of about 7-1/2 
percent in the second quarter, compared with a decline 
at a rate of about 2 percent in the first quarter; M-2 
and M-3 grew at rates of about 8-1/2 percent and 7-3/4 
percent respectively in the second quarter, compared 
with rates of about 1-3/4 percent and 4-3/4 percent 
in the first quarter. Market interest rates in general 
have declined substantially over the past several weeks, 
but mortgage interest rates have risen further.  

Taking account of past and prospective developments 
in employment, unemployment, production, investment, 
real income, productivity, international trade and 
payments, and prices, it is the policy of the Federal 
Open Market Committee to foster monetary and financial 
conditions that will resist inflationary pressures 
while encouraging moderate economic expansion and 
contributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. The Committee agreed that these objectives 
would be furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from 
the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979 
within ranges of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, 5 to 8 percent, 
and 6 to 9 percent respectively, the same ranges that had 
been established in February. Having established the 
range for M-1 in February on the assumption that 
expansion of ATS and NOW accounts would dampen growth 
by about 3 percentage points over the year, the

- 4 -



7/11/79

Committee also agreed that actual growth in M-1 might 
vary in relation to its range to the extent of any 
deviation from that estimate. The associated range for 
bank credit is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. The Committee 
anticipates that for the period from the fourth quarter 
of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980, growth may be 
within the same ranges, depending upon emerging economic 
conditions and appropriate adjustments that may be 
required by legislation or judicial developments affecting 
interest-bearing transactions accounts. These ranges will 
be reconsidered at any time as conditions warrant.  

In the short-run, the Committee seeks to achieve 
bank reserve and money market conditions that are 
broadly consistent with the longer-run ranges for 
monetary aggregates cited above, while giving due 
regard to the program for supporting the foreign 
exchange value of the dollar and to developing 
conditions in domestic financial markets. Early in 
the period before the next regular meeting, System open 
market operations are to be directed at maintaining the 
weekly average federal funds rate at about the current 
level. Subsequently, operations shall be directed at 
maintaining the weekly average federal funds rate within 
the range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. In deciding on the 
specific objective for the federal funds rate the Manager 
shall be guided mainly by the relationship between the 
latest estimates of annual rates of growth in the July
August period of M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of 
tolerance: 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M-1 and 6-1/2 
to 10-1/2 percent for M-2. If, with approximately 
equal weight given to M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth 
appear to be close to or beyond the upper or lower limits 
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds 
rate is to be raised or loweredin an orderly fashion 
within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear 
to be above the upper limit or below the lower limit 
of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective 
for the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager will 
promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.

- 5 -



7/11/79 - 6 -

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, August 14, 1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


