














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 14, 1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 14, 

1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, 
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard 1/, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Oltman 1/, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion 1/, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod 1/, Economist 
Mr. Holmes 1/, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Brandt 1/, R. Davis 1/, Keir 1/, 
Scheld 1/, Truman 1/, and Zeisel 1/, 
Associate Economists 

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the vote to approve the Minutes 
of Actions.



8/14/79

Mr. Sternlight 1/, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee 1/, Manager for Foreign Opera
tions, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne 1/, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Farnsworth 1/2/ and Siegman 1/, 
Associate Directors, Division of 
Federal Reserve Bank Examinations and 
Budgets and Division of International 

Finance,respectively, Board of Governors 
Mr. Prell 1/, Associate Research Division 

Officer, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Robinson 1/2/, Manager, Financial 
Examinations, Division of Federal 
Reserve Bank Examinations and Budgets, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar 1/, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck 1/, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Smoot 1/, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Burns 1/ and J. Davis 1/, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Dallas and Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus 1/, Danforth 1/, T. Davis 1/, 
and Fieleke 1/, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, 
Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Burger 1/, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Levin 1/, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the vote to approve the Minutes 
of Actions.  

2/ Left the meeting following the vote to accept the Report of 
Examinations of System Open Market Account.

- 2 -



8/14/79

By unanimous vote, the Committee elected Paul A. Volcker 

to serve as Chairman for the period until the election of a suc

cessor at the first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 

1980, with the understanding that in the event of the discon

tinuance of his offical connection with the Board of Governors 

of the Federal Reserve System,, he would cease to have any 

official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, Alan R. Holmes was elected Adviser 

for Market Operations for the period until the election of a 

successor at the first meeting of the Committee after February 

29, 1980, with the understanding that in the event of the dis

continuance of his official connection with the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York, he would cease to have any official connection 

with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight, and Scott E.  

Pardee were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee 

in the capacities of Manager for Domestic Operations, System 

Open Market Account, and Manager for Foreign Operations, System 

Open Market Account, respectively, on the understanding that 

their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note; Advice was subsequently 
received that the selection of the Managers 
indicated above were satisfactory to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

By unanimous vote, Sections 4 and 5 of the Rules of 

Organization were amended to read as follows:

- 3 -



8/14/79

RULES OF ORGANIZATION 

SECTION 4--STAFF: 

(a) Selection of staff officers.--At its first 
meeting on or after March 1 of each year, the 
Committee selects, from among the officers and 
employees of the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks, 
the following staff officers to serve until the first 
meeting on or after March 1 of the next following 
year: Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and one or more 
Assistant Secretaries; General Counsel, Deputy General 
Counsel, and one or more Assistant General Counsels; 
Economists, one or more of whom may be designated as 
Senior or Associate Economists or given titles 
reflecting their areas of particular specialization; 
and such other officers as the Committee might wish 
from time to time.  

SECTION 5--MANAGERS 

The Committee selects a Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account; and a 
Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market 
Account. The foregoing shall be satisfactory to 
the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee 
to execute open market transactions for such 
Account and shall serve at the pleasure of 
the Committee. The Managers keep the Committee 
informed on market conditions and on transactions 
they have made and render such reports as the 
Committee may specify.  

By unanimous vote, subsections (d) and (e) of Section 

272.3 of the Rules of Procedure were amended to read as follows: 

RULES OF PROCEDURE 

SECTION 272.3--MEETINGS 

(d) Attendance at meetings.--Attendance at 
Committee meetings is restricted to members and 
alternate members of the Committee, the Presidents 
of Federal Reserve Banks who are not at the time 
members or alternates, staff officers of the 
Committee, the Managers, and such other advisers 
as the Committee may invite from time to time.

- 4 -



8/14/79

(e) Meeting agendas.--The Secretary, in con
sultation with the Chairman, prepares an agenda of 
matters to be discussed at each meeting and the 
Secretary transmits the agenda to the members of the 
Committee within a reasonable time in advance of 
such meeting. In general, the agendas include 
approval of minutes of actions; reports by the 
Managers on open market operations since the pre
vious meeting, and ratification by the Committee 
of such operations; reports by Economists on, and 
Committee discussion of, the economic and financial 
situation and outlook; Committee discussion of 
monetary policy and action with respect thereto; 
and such other matters as may be considered 
necessary.  

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with 

Respect to Foreign Currency Operations were amended to read as 

follows: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the 
authorization and direction of the Federal Open 
Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization 
for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign 
Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, through the Manager for Foreign Opera
tions, System Open Market Account, shall be guided 
by the following procedural understandings with 
respect to consultations and clearance with the 
Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and 
the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be 
reported promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear 
with the Subcommittee (or with the Chairman, if 
the Chairman believes that consultation with the 
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation which would result in a 
change in the System's overall open position 
in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million 
on any day or $600 million since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.

- 5 -



8/14/79

B. Any operation which would result in a change 
on any day in the System's net position in a 
single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated 
with repayment of swap drawings.  

C. Any operation which might generate a sub
stantial volume of trading in a particular 
currency by the System, even though the change 
in the System's net position in that currency 
might be less than the limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign 
bank not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 
million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the 
swap arrangement.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear 
with the Committee (or with the Subcommittee, if 
the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time 
available, or with the Chairman, if the Chairman 
believes that consultation with the Subcommittee 
is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation which would result in a 
change in the System's overall open position 
in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion 
since the most recent regular meeting of the 
Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign 
bank exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million 
or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap 
arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also 
consult with the Subcommittee or the Chairman about 
proposed swap drawings by the System, and about any 
operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 11, 

1979, were approved.  

The report of examination of the System Open. Market 

Account, made by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank

- 6 -



8/14/79

Examinations and Budgets as of the close of business April 20, 

1979, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

foreign currencies during the period July 11 through August 13, 

1979, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the amount of the reciprocal 

currency arrangement with the Bank of Mexico specified in 

paragraph 2 of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

was raised to $700 million, effective August 17, 1979.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period July 11 through August 13, 1979, 

were ratified.  

With Messrs. Black and Rice dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services is 
continuing to decline in the current quarter, while 
prices on the average are continuing to rise rapidly.  
In July the dollar value of retail sales edged up; in 
real terms, sales were still substantially below 
those of last December. Growth in nonfarm payroll 
employment slowed considerably further, but the 
unemployment rate, at 5.7 percent, remained within 
the narrow range prevailing since the beginning of 

the year. Industrial production declined in June, 
and it apparently slackened further in July to

- 7 -



8/14/79

about the level of last December. So far this 
year, broad measures of prices have increased at 
a much faster pace than during 1978, although 
producer prices of foods have declined since 
March. The rise in the index of average hourly 
earnings, which had slowed in May and June, picked 
up in July.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies declined some
what further in the second half of July, and 
although it subsequently recovered, it remained 
below its level of early June. The U. S. trade 
deficit in the second quarter was larger than 
in the previous quarter, reflecting largely the 
significant rise in the price and value of oil 
imports.  

Growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 remained rapid 
in July. Inflows of interest-bearing deposits 
included in M-2 were slightly stronger than in 
June. At nonbank thrift institutions, inflows 
of deposits declined somewhat. Short-term market 
interest rates have risen over recent weeks, 
while long-term rates have changed little on 
balance. An increase in Federal Reserve discount 
rates from 9-1/2 to 10 percent was announced on 
July 20.  

Taking account of past and prospective 
developments in employment, unemployment, pro
duction, investment, real income, productivity, 
international trade and payments, and prices, 
the Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will resist 
inflationary pressures while encouraging moderate 
economic expansion and contributing to a sustain
able pattern of international transactions. At 
its meeting on July 11, 1979, the Committee agreed 
that these objectives would be furthered by growth 
of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth quarter of 
1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979 within ranges 
of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, 5 to 8 percent, and 6 
to 9 percent respectively, the same ranges that 
had been established in February. Having estab
lished the range for M-1 in February on the assump
tion that expansion of ATS and NOW accounts would

- 8 -



8/14/79

dampen growth by about 3 percentage points over 
the year, the Committee also agreed that actual 
growth in M-1 might vary in relation to its 
range to the extent of any deviation from that 
estimate. The associated range for bank credit 
is 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. The Committee antic
ipates that for the period from the fourth.  
quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980, 
growth may be within the same ranges, depending 
upon emerging economic conditions and appropriate 
adjustments that may be required by legislation 
or judicial developments affecting interest
bearing transactions accounts. These ranges will 
be reconsidered at any time as conditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to 
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions 
that are broadly consistent with the longer-run 
ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while 
giving due regard to developing conditions in 
foreign exchange and domestic financial markets.  
Early in the period before the next regular 
meeting, System open market operations are to be 
directed at attaining a weekly average federal 
funds rate slightly above the current level.  
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at 
maintaining the weekly average federal funds 
rate within the range of 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 per
cent. In deciding on the specific objective for 
the federal funds rate the Manager for Domestic 
Operations shall be guided mainly by the relation
ship between the latest estimates of annual rates 
of growth in the August-September period of M-1 
and M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: 
4 to 8 percent for M-1 and 7 to 11 percent for 
M-2. If rates of growth of M-1 and M-2, given 
approximately equal weight, appear to be close 
to or beyond the upper or lower limits of the 
indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate 
is to be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion 
within its range.  

If the rates of growth in the aggregates 
appear to be beyond the upper or lower limits of 
the indicated ranges at a time when the objective 
for the funds rate has already been moved to the 
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager shall 
promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.

- 9 -



8/14/79 - 10 -

By unanimous vote, paragraph 2 of the Authorization 

for Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to read as 

follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
(or, under special circumstances, such as when the 
New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal 
Reserve Bank) (a) to lend to the Treasury such 
amounts of securities held in the System Open 
Market Account as may be necessary from time to 
time for the temporary accommodation of the 
.Treasury, under such conditions as the Committee 
may specify; and (b) to purchase directly from 
the Treasury for renewable periods not to exceed 
thirty days, when authorized by the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant 
to an affirmative vote of not less than five 
members, for its own account (with discretion, 
in cases where it seems desirable, to issue 
participations to one or more Federal Reserve 
Banks) such amounts of special short-term certi
ficates of indebtedness as may be necessary from 
time to time for the temporary accommodation of 
the Treasury, provided that the rate charged on such 
certificates shall be a rate of 1/4 of 1 percent 
below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York at the time of such purchases and 
provided that the total amount of such certificates 
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks 
shall not exceed $2 billion.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the guidelines 

for lending securities from the System Open Market Account to 

the Treasury recommended by FOMC staff in a memorandum dated 

August 8, 1979, except that the Committee approved a charge for 

borrowed securities at a rate of 1/8 of 1 percent per annum.



8/14/79 - 11 -

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, September .18, 1979, beginning at 9:30 

a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


