














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 12, 1980 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday, 

December 12, 1980, at 12:40 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was a 

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., 

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those 

participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 

Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 

Mr. Gramley 

Mr. Guffey 

Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 

Mr. Roos 

Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 

Mr. Winn

(New York) 

(Kansas City) 

(Boston) 

(St. Louis) 
(Atlanta) 

(Cleveland)

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Baughman (Dallas), and Mayo 

(Chicago), Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Black (Richmond), Corrigan, and Ford (Atlanta), 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Holmes (New York), Adviser for Market Operations 

Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis (Cleveland), T. Davis (Kansas City), 

Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, 

Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 

System Open Market Account



11/18/80

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Allison, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. McIntosh (Boston), and Smoot (Philadelphia), First 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Brandt (Atlanta), Burns, 
(Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis), Fousek (New York), 
Keran (San Francisco), Parthemos (Richmond), and 
Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, Dallas, Minneapolis, 
New York, San Francisco, Richmond, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Mrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Mr. Burger (St. Louis), Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Mr. Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

With Mrs. Teeters dissenting, the Committee modified the domestic 

policy directive issued on November 18, 1980, and subsequently modified on 

November 26 and December 5, to extend through the period before the next 

regular meeting leeway for pursuit of the Committee's short-run objectives for 

the behavior of reserve aggregates without operations being precisely con

strained by the 18 percent upper limit of the intermeeting range for the 

federal funds rate.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 2 -


