














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

December 5, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday, 

December 5, 1980, at 2:10 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was a 

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., 

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those 

participating.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman (New York) 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey (Kansas City) 
Mr. Morris (Boston) 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos (St. Louis) 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn (Cleveland) 

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn 
(Philadelphia), Mayo (Chicago), and Timlen (New York), 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Mr. Corrigan (Minneapolis), President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland), 
R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City), 
Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir, 
Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account



11/18/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Burns (Dallas), Fousek 
(New York), Keran (San Francisco), and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Dallas, New York, San Francisco, and 
Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Meek (New York), Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Mr. Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

With Mrs. Teeters and Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Committee modified 

the domestic policy directive adopted at its meeting on November 18, 1980, and 

subsequently modified in a telephone meeting on November 26, to take account 

of the action of the Board of Governors on December 4 to raise discount rates 

by providing leeway for pursuit of the Committee's short-run objectives for 

the behavior of reserve aggregates without operations being precisely con

strained in the current statement week by the 18 percent upper limit of the 

intermeeting range for the federal funds rate.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 2 -


