














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 6, 1980 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held on Tuesday, May 6, 1980. This was a telephone conference 

meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., except 

as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list 

of those participating.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Guffey (Kansas City) 
Mr. Morris (Boston) 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos (St. Louis) 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon (New York) 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn (Philadelphia), 
Mayo (Chicago), and Willes (Minneapolis), 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), and Black 
(Richmond), Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of San Francisco and Richmond 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis 
(Cleveland), T. Davis (Kansas City), 
Eisenmenger (Boston), Kichline, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for 
Domestic Operations, System Open 
Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors



5/6/80

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat 

Messrs. Forrestal (Atlanta), and MacDonald 
(Cleveland), First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 
Cleveland 

Messrs. Brandt (Atlanta), Boehne (Philadelphia), 
Burns (Dallas), and Scheld (Chicago), 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, Dallas, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Bisignano (San Francisco), Broaddus 
(Richmond), Cacy (Kansas City), and 
Danforth (Minneapolis), Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, 
Richmond, Kansas City, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

With Messrs. Guffey, Solomon, and Wallich dissenting 

the Committee reduced the lower limit of the intermeeting range 

for the federal funds rate specified in the outstanding domestic 

policy directive to 10-1/2 percent, thereby, establishing a 

range of 10-1/2 to 19 percent.

Secretary

- 2 -


