














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 18-19, 1980

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 

D. C., starting on Thursday, December 18, 1980, at 3:30 p.m. and continuing 

on Friday, December 19, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs, Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, and Mayo, Alternate 
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta, 
respectively

Altmann, Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Petersen, General Counsel 
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mannnion, Assistant General Counsel 
Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger 1/, 
Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account

1/ Attended Friday session only.

Members of



12/18-19/80

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman 2/, Associate Directors, 

Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Smith 2/, Assistant Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board 

of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Keran, and Scheld, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, 
Dallas, San Francisco, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Mullineaux, Mrs. Nichols, and Mr. Rolnick, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Burger, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Ms. Clarkin, Sr. Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 18, November 26, December 5, 

and December 12, 1980, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 18 through December 18, 1980 were 

ratified.

2/ Attended Thursday session only.

- 2 -



12/18-19/80

The following actions took place on December 19, 1980.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

November 18 through December 18, 1980, were ratified.  

With Mrs. Teeters and Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP expanded more in the fourth quarter than in the 
third, and prices on the average continued to rise rapidly.  
In November retail sales, industrial production, and nonfarm 
payroll employment expanded substantially further, and the 
unemployment rate was essentially unchanged at 7 percent.  
Housing starts remained at their September-October level.  
The rise in the index of average hourly earnings has been 
somewhat more rapid this year than in 1979.  

The weighted average value of the dollar in exchange 
markets has risen considerably further over the past month.  
The U.S. trade deficit was unchanged in October, remaining 
well below the rate in the first half.  

Growth in M-1A and M-1B continued to moderate in 
November but was still relatively rapid; growth in M-2 
continued to accelerate, reflecting a further pickup in 
expansion of its nontransaction component. In early 
December, growth of M-1A and M-1B slowed substantially 
further. From the fourth quarter of 1979 to November, 
growth of M-1A was in the upper part of the range set by 
the Committee for growth over the year ending in the 
fourth quarter of 1980; M-1B and M-2 grew at rates some
what above the upper limits of their respective ranges.  
Expansion in commercial bank credit was about as rapid in 
November as on the average in the preceding three months.  
Short-term market interest rates have risen sharply further 
in recent weeks. Long-term market yields have also risen, 
although considerably less, and average rates on new home

- 3 -



-4-

mortgage commitments have continued upward. On December 4 
the Board of Governors announced an increase in Federal 
Reserve discount rates from 12 to 13 percent and an increase 
in the surcharge from 2 to 3 percentage points on frequent 
borrowing of large institutions.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce 
inflation, encourage economic recovery, and contribute to 
a sustainable pattern of international transactions. At 
its meeting in July, the Committee agreed that these ob
jectives would be furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, 
and M-3 from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth 
quarter of 1980 within ranges of 3½ to 6 percent, 4 to 6½ 
percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6½ to 9½ percent respectively.  
The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  
For the period from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the 
fourth quarter of 1981, the Committee looked toward a re
duction in the ranges for growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 
on the order of ½ percentage point from the ranges adopted 
for 1980, abstracting from institutional influences affecting 
the behavior of the aggregates.  

In the short-run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates associated with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 over 
the first quarter along a path consistent with the ranges for 
growth in 1981 contemplated earlier, which will be reviewed 
in February 1981. Those ranges, abstracting from the effects 
of deposit shifts connected with the introduction of NOW 
accounts on a nationwide basis, imply growth in these aggre
gates centered on 4-1/4 percent, 4-3/4 percent, and 7 percent 
respectively. It is recognized that the introduction of NOW 
and ATS accounts nationwide at the beginning of 1981 is likely 
to widen the discrepancy between growth in M-1A and M-1B to 
an extent that cannot now be accurately estimated, and oper
ational reserve paths will be developed in the light of eval
uation of those differences as they emerge. In the light 
of the rapid growth of monetary and credit aggregates in 
recent months, some shortfall in growth would be acceptable 
in the near term if that developed in the context of reduced 
pressures in the money market. If it appears during the 
period before the next meeting that fluctuations in the 
federal funds rate, taken over a period of time, within a 
range of 15 to 20 percent are likely to be inconsistent with 
the monetary and related reserve paths, the Manager for 
Domestic Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman, who 
will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.

12/18-19/80



12/18-19/80

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of the FOMC 

memoranda of.discussion for 1975, on the basis described in a memorandum 

from the Secretariat dated December 3, 1980, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, February 3, 1981, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


