














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

April 22, 1980 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 22, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Mayo, and Willes, 
Alternative Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco 
and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T.Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



4/22/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, Keran, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, 
Dallas, New York, San Francisco, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus and Danforth, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions take at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 18, 1980, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period March 18 through April 21, 1980, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

March 18 through April 21, 1980, were ratified.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



4/22/80

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity turned down in the latter part 
of the first quarter of 1980, although for the quarter 
as a whole real GNP expanded somewhat further and the 
rise in prices accelerated. Retail sales in real terms 
declined sharply in February and March, after having 
increased in January. In March industrial production 
and nonfarm payroll employment declined, and the un
employment rate edged up to 6.2 percent. Private 
housing starts declined throughout the first quarter, 
to a rate in March about two-fifths below that in the 
third quarter of last year. The rise in producer 
prices of finished goods and in consumer prices was 
considerably more rapid during the first three months 
of 1980 than in 1979. Over the first quarter, the 
rise in the index of average hourly earnings was 
somewhat above the rapid pace recorded in 1979.  

The strong demand for the dollar in exchange 
markets that began in mid-February persisted through 
early April. Some selling pressure developed in the 
second week of April as market participants reacted 
to indications that U.S. interest rates might have 
peaked, but the trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies remained well above 
its level of early February. The U.S. foreign trade 
deficit rose further in February.  

M-1A and M-1B, which had expanded sharply in 
February, contracted in March and early April; M-2 
increased relatively little in March. From December 
to March, M-1A and M-1B grew at annual rates of about 
4 percent and 4-1/2 percent respectively, and M-2 
grew at a rate of 7 percent. Expansion of commercial 
bank credit slowed substantially in March from the 
accelerated pace earlier in the year. Since mid
March, most market interest rates on balance have 
declined considerably.  

Taking account of past and prospective economic 
developments, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
to foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging moder
ate economic expansion and contributing to a sustain
able pattern of international transactions. At its

-3-



4/22/80

meeting on February 4-5, 1980, the Committee agreed 
that these objectives would be furthered by growth 
of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth quarter 
of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980 within ranges 
of 3-1/2 to 6, 4 to 6-1/2, 6 to 9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 
percent respectively. The associated range for bank 
credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth over 
the first half of 1980 at an annual rate of 4-1/2 
percent for M-1A and 5 percent for M-1B, or somewhat 
less, provided that in the period before the next 
regular meeting the weekly average federal funds 
rate remains within a range of 13 to 19 percent.  
The Committee believes that, to be consistent with 
this short-run policy, M-2 should grow at an annual 
rate of about 6-3/4 percent over the first half and 
that bank credit should grow in the months ahead at 
a pace compatible with growth over the year as a 
whole within the range agreed upon.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate 
is inconsistent with the objective for the expansion 
of reserves, the Manager for Domestic Operations is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary instruc
tions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 20, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


