














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 9, 1980 

Minutes of Actions

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, July 9, 

1980, at 9:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Mr. Black, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
Keir, Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



7/9/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Scanlon, Economist, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 1/ 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Czerwinski, Forrestal, Gainor, 
and Monhollon, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas 
City, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and 
Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, Danforth, 
Fousek, Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 

Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, New York, 
Minneapolis, New York, San Francisco, 
Richmond, and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. McNees, Mullineaux, and Ms. Nichols, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

1/ Entered the meeting following the ratification of System 
open market transactions in Government securities, agency 
obligations and bankers acceptances.

- 2 -



7/9/80

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

May 20, 1980, were approved.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank maturing July 21 through 

August 18, 1980, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period May 20 through July 8, 

1980, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the limit on changes in System 

holdings of U. S. government and federal agency securities 

specified in paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was set at $4 billion, effective 

immediately, for the period ending with the close of business 

August 12, 1980.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period May 20 through July 8, 1980, 

were ratified.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Committee adopted 

the following ranges for rates of growth in monetary aggregates 

for the period from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth 

quarter of 1980: M-1A, 3-1/2 to 6 percent; M-1B, 4 to 6-1/2 

percent; M-2, 6 to 9; and M-3, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. The 

associated range for bank credit is 6 to 9 percent.

- 3 -



7/9/80

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
indicates a marked contraction in real GNP in 
the second quarter. In May total retail sales 
declined substantially for the fourth consecu
tive month, and housing starts, industrial 
production, and nonfarm payroll employment 
continued to decline. Employment fell sharply 
further in June; however, the unemployment rate 
edged down from 7.8 to 7.7 percent, following 
large increases in April and May. The overall 
rise in prices of goods and services has moderated 
in recent months, in large part owing to a less
ening of the rapid rise in energy items. Over 
the first six months of the year, the rise in the 
index of average hourly earnings was moderately 
faster than the pace recorded in 1979.  

The downward pressure on the dollar in 
exchange markets that emerged in early April 
abated in mid-June, and then was resumed in 
early July. The average U.S. foreign trade 
deficit for April and May was well below the 
average for the first quarter, reflecting re
duced oil and non-oil imports.  

Monetary expansion was rapid in June, 
following weakness earlier in the spring. Over 
the first half of the year growth of M-1A and 
M-1B fell short of the rates consistent with 
the Committee's ranges for the year from the 
fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter 
of 1980; the rate of growth for M-2 was just 
above the lower bound of its range. Outstand
ing bank loans to business declined substan
tially during the second quarter following a 
large increase in the first quarter. Market 
interest rates declined considerably further 
in late May and the first half of June, but

- 4 -



7/9/80 - 5 

since then most rates have retraced part of the 
decline. Reductions in Federal Reserve discount 
rates from 13 to 11 percent in equal steps were 
announced on May 28 and June 12.  

Taking account of past and prospective economic 
developments, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
to foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging 
moderate economic expansion and contributing to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  
The Committee agrees that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 
from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter 
of 1980 within ranges of 3-1/2 to 6 percent, 4 to 6-1/2 
percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent re
spectively. The associated range for bank credit 
is 6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, 
M-1B, and M-2 over the third quarter of 1980 at annual 
rates of about 7 percent, 8 percent, and 8 percent re
spectively, provided that in the period before the next 
regular meeting the weekly average federal funds rate 
remains within a range of 8-1/2 to 14 percent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate 
is inconsistent with the objective for the expansion 
of reserves, the Manager for Domestic Operations is 
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary in
structions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, August 12, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


