














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

February 4-5 1980 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 4, 1980, at 4:50 p.m.  

and continuing on Tuesday, February 5, 1980, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Baughman and Willes, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Brandt, R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, Keir, 
Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman, 
Associate Economists



2/4-5/80

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, Associate Directors, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Balbach, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis, and 
Eisenmenger, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Cleveland, 
Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Danforth, Mullineaux, and Sandberg, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and New York, respectively 

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period January 9 through February 3, 1980, were 

ratified.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of System drawings 

on the German Federal Bank maturing March 5 through March 28, 1980, was

noted without objection.

-2-



2/4-5/80 -3

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 8-9, 1980, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the 

period January 9 through February 3, 1980, were ratified.  

The following actions were taken on Tuesday, February 5, 1980.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted the following ranges 

for rates of growth in monetary aggregates for the period from the fourth 

quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980: M-1A, 3½ to 6 percent; 

M-1B, 4 to 6½ percent; M-2, 6 to 9 percent; and M-3, 6½ to 9½ percent.  

The associated range for bank credit is 6 to 9 percent.  

With Messrs. Coldwell and Wallich dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services expanded some
what in the final quarter of 1979 and that prices on 
the average continued to rise rapidly. In December 
retail sales strengthened, industrial production edged 
up, and nonfarm payroll employment continued to rise, 
while private housing starts remained at the reduced 
level of November. Nonfarm payroll employment rose 
substantially further in January, but the unemployment 
rate rose from 5.9 to 6.2 percent. Producer prices of 
finished goods and consumer prices continued to rise 
rapidly toward the end of 1979, in part because of 
the spreading effects of earlier increases in energy 
costs. Over the past several months the rise in the 
index of average hourly earnings has remained close 
to the rapid pace recorded earlier in 1979.



2/4-5/80

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies changed little in January, 
and exchange market pressures were relatively slight 
in spite of increased international political tensions.  
The U.S. foreign trade deficit rose in December, in 
large part because of an increase in imports of 
petroleum.  

Growth of the major monetary aggregates, which 
had subsided in the final months of 1979, remained at 
reduced rates in January. Most market interest rates, 
especially long-term rates, have risen since the 
Committee's meeting in early January.  

Taking account of past and prospective economic 
developments, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
to foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
resist inflationary pressures while encouraging moder
ate economic expansion and contributing to a sustain
able pattern of international transactions. The 
Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from 
the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 
1980 within ranges of 3½ to 6, 4 to 6½, 6 to 9, and 
6½ to 9½ percent respectively. The associated range 
for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth over 
the first quarter of 1980 at an annual rate of about 
4 percent for M-1A and 5 percent for M-1B, provided 
that in the period before the next regular meeting 
the weekly average federal funds rate remains within 
a range of 11½ to 15 percent. The Committee believes 
that, consistent with this short-run policy, M-2 
as newly defined should grow at an annual rate of 
about 6 percent over the first quarter.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds 
rate is inconsistent with the objective for the 
expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic 
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who 
will then decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, March 18, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-4-


