














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 12, 1980 

Minutes of Actions

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 12, 

1980, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, 
Henry, Keir, Kichline, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account



8/12/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate 
Directors, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Czerwinski and Doyle, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Kansas City and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Eisenmenger, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Atlanta, Dallas, Boston, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, Cacy, Danforth, 
and Ms. Nichols, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, 
Richmond, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and 
Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

March 7, 1980, May 6, 1980, and July 9, 1980, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period July 9 through August

11, 1980, were ratified.

- 2 -



8/12/80

Renewal for further periods of three months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank and the Bank of France 

maturing August 25 through September 18, 1980, was noted with

out objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period July 9 through August 11, 1980, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that the decline in economic activity, 
which was marked in the second quarter as a 
whole, has been moderating. While industrial 
production and nonfarm payroll employment con
tinued to decline sharply in June, total retail 
sales advanced after four months of substantial 
decreases, and housing starts rose from a de
pressed level. In July retail sales advanced 
further; nonfarm payroll employment declined, 
but not so sharply as during the second quarter, 
and the unemployment rate edged up from 7.7 to 
7.8 percent. The overall rise in prices of 
goods and services moderated in the second 
quarter, in large part owing to a lessening 
of the rapid rise in energy items. Over the 
first seven months of the year, the rise in 
the index of average hourly earnings was some
what faster than the pace recorded in 1979.

- 3 -



8/12/80

The weighted average value of the dollar 
in exchange markets has risen somewhat since 
late July, after having fluctuated in a narrow 
range earlier in the month. A reduced U.S.  
foreign trade deficit in June brought the 
average for the second quarter well below the 
average for the first quarter.  

Monetary expansion remained rapid in July, 
although not so rapid as in June. The recent 
resurgence brought growth of M-1A closer to and 
that of M-1B about to the lower bounds of the 
Committee's ranges for the year from the fourth 
quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980.  
However, the rate of growth for M-2 was near 
the upper bound of its range. Market interest 
rates have risen considerably further in recent 
weeks.  

Taking account of past and prospective 
economic developments, the Federal Open Market 
Committee seeks to foster monetary and financial 
conditions that will help to reduce inflation, 
encourage economic recovery, and contribute to 
a sustainable pattern of international trans
actions. At its meeting in July, the Committee 
agreed that these objectives would be furthered 
by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from the 
fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter 
of 1980 within ranges of 3½ to 6 percent, 4 to 
6½ percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6½ to 9½ percent 
respectively. The associated range for bank 
credit was 6 to 9 percent. For the period 
from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth 
quarter of 1981, the Committee looked toward a 
reduction in the ranges for growth of M-1A, 
M-1B, and M-2 on the order of ½ percentage 
point from the ranges adopted for 1980, ab
stracting from institutional influences affect
ing the behavior of the aggregates. These 
ranges will be reconsidered as conditions 
warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks ex
pansion of reserve aggregates consistent with 
growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 over the third 
quarter of 1980 at annual rates of about 6½ 
percent, 9 percent, and 12 percent respectively,

- 4 -



8/12/80

provided that in the period before the next 
regular meeting the weekly average federal 
funds rate remains within a range of 8 to 
14 percent.  

If it appears during the period before 
the next meeting that the constraint on the 
federal funds rate is inconsistent with the 
objective for the expansion of reserves, the 
Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly 
to notify the Chairman who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary 
instructions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, September 16, 1980, beginning at 9:30 

a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


