














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 21, 1980 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 21, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Mayo, and Timlen, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Balbach, J, Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



10/21/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Smith 1/, Assistant Director, Division of Inter

national Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Morton 1/, Economist, Financial Markets Section, 

Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Danforth, Parthemos, and 
Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, Minneapolis, Richmond, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Bisignano, Mullineaux and Sloan, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San 
Francisco, Philadelphia, and Chicago, respec
tively 

Mr. Levin, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 16, 1980, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period September 16 through October 20, 1980, 

were ratified.  

1/ Left the meeting prior to the action to amend paragraph 1(a) of the 
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.

- 2 -



10/21/80

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the 

period September 16 through October 20, 1980, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to raise to $4 billion the 

dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U. S.  

Government and Federal agency securities, effective immediately, for the 

period through the close of business on November 18, 1980.  

With Messrs. Morris, Roos, Wallich,and Winn dissenting, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP increased somewhat in the third quarter 
following the sharp contraction in the second quarter, 
while prices on the average continued to rise rapidly.  
The recovery in retail sales and housing starts that 

began in June continued during the third quarter.  
Industrial production and nonfarm payroll employment 
expanded in September for the second consecutive month, 

and the unemployment rate edged down from 7.6 to 7.5 

percent. The rise in the index of average hourly 
earnings moderated in the third quarter, but the rise 
over the first nine months of the year was about as 
rapid as in 1979.  

The weighted average value of the dollar in ex
change markets on balance has risen somewhat over the 

past month. The U.S. trade deficit in August remained 
well below the monthly average in the second quarter.  

M-1A and M-1B continued to grow rapidly in September, 

although not so rapidly as in August, while growth in 

M-2 moderated further. From the fourth quarter of 1979 
to September, growth of M-1A was slightly above the 

midpoint of the range set by the Committee for growth 

over the year ending in the fourth quarter of 1980, 

while growth of M-1B and M-2 was somewhat above the 

upper limits of their ranges. Expansion in commercial 

bank credit was relatively rapid in both August and

- 3 -



10/21/80

September. On balance short-term market interest 
rates have risen considerably further since mid
September while long-term rates have changed little; 
average rates on new home mortgage commitments have 
continued upward. An increase in Federal Reserve 
discount rates from 10 to 11 percent was announced 
on September 25.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
help to reduce inflation, encourage economic re
covery, and contribute to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions. At its meeting in July, 
the Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from 
the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 
1980 within ranges of 3 to 6 percent, 4 to 6 per
cent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6 to 9 percent respectively.  
The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  
For the period from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the 
fourth quarter of 1981, the Committee looked toward a 
reduction in the ranges for growth of M-1A, M-1B, and 
M-2 on the order of percentage point from the ranges 
adopted for 1980, abstracting from institutional in
fluences affecting the behavior of the aggregates.  
These ranges will be reconsidered as conditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, 
M-1B, and M-2 over the September to December period 
at annual rates of about 2 percent, 5 percent, and 
7 1/4 percent respectively, or somewhat less, provided 
that in the period before the next regular meeting 
the weekly average federal funds rate remains within 
a range of 9 to 15 percent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate 
is inconsistent with the objective for the expansion 
of reserves, the Manager for Domestic Operations is 
promptly to notify the Chairman, who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary instruc
tions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, November 18, 1980, beginning at 9;30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 4 -


