














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 18, 1980 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 18, 1980, 

at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Mayo, Timlen, and 
Willes, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco 
and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, 
Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



3/18/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell 1/, 
Associate Directors, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking 
Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, 
Fousek, Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, 
Dallas, New York, New York, San 
Francisco, Richmond, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Mr. Danforth, Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Ms. Clarkin, Securities Trading Officer, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that 

advices of the election of the following members and alternate 

members of the Federal Open Market Committee for the year 

commencing March 1, 1980, had been received by the Secretary 

and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System 
open market transactions in foreign currencies.

- 2 -



3/18/80

The elected members and alternate members were as 

follows: 

Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston, with David P. Eastburn, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate; 

Anthony M. Solomon*, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, with Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate; 

Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland, with Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate; 

Lawrence K. Roos, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis, with Ernest T. Baughman, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate; 

Roger Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, with Mark H. Willes, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate.  

*Election effective April 1, 1980, when he is scheduled to 
become President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
and to execute the oath of office as member of the Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the 

Federal Open Market Committee were elected to serve until the 

election of their successors at the first meeting of the 

Committee after February 28, 1981, with the understanding that 

in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection 

with the Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as 

the case might be, they would cease to have any official 

connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 

Paul A. Volcker Chairman 
Anthony M. Solomon* Vice Chairman 

*Effective upon execution of the oath of office as member of 
the Committee.

- 3 -



3/18/80

Murray Altmann Secretary 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Neal L. Petersen General Counsel 
James H. Oltman Deputy General Counsel 
Robert E. Mannion Assistant General Counsel 
Stephen H. Axilrod Economist 
Alan R. Holmes Adviser for Market Operations 

Anatol Balbach, John M. Davis, 
Richard G. Davis, Thomas 
Davis, Robert Eisenmenger, 
Edward Ettin, George Henry, 
Peter M. Keir, James L.  
Kichline, Edwin M. Truman, 
Joseph S. Zeisel Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was selected to execute transactions for the System Open 

Market Account until the adjournment of the first meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee after February 28, 1981.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Scott E, 

Pardee were selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee 

in the capacities of Manager for Domestic Operations, System 

Open Market Account, and Manager for Foreign Operations, System 

Open Market Account, respectively, on the understanding that 

their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently 
received that the selections indicated above 
were satisfactory to the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

February 4-5, 1980, were approved.

- 4 -



3/18/80

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period February 4 through 

March 17, 1980, were ratified.  

Pursuant to paragraph 3 of the Authorization for 

Foreign Currency Operations, the Committee, by unanimous vote, 

expressly authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for 

System Open Market Account, to enter into contracts to purchase 

foreign exchange at specified rates that reflected market rates 

of late February and early March and to transfer the foreign 

exchange so acquired directly to the Exchange Stabilization 

Fund at those same rates.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances 

during the period February 4 through March 17, 1980, were 

ratified.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests that real output of goods and services 
continued to grow in the first quarter of 1980 
and that the rise in prices accelerated. In 
February retail sales declined moderately, but 
the decrease followed an exceptionally large 
increase in January. Industrial production 
expanded somewhat in both months, after a 
period of little change, and nonfarm payroll 
employment continued to rise. The unemployment

- 5 -



3/18/80

rate edged down in February to 6.0 percent.  
Private housing starts declined further in 
January and were more than one-fifth below 
the rate in the third quarter of last year.  
The rise in producer prices of finished 
goods and in consumer prices was more 
rapid in the first month or two of 1980 
than in 1979, despite some easing in prices 
of foods. Over the first two months of 1980 
the rise in the index of average hourly 
earnings was somewhat below the rapid pace 
recorded in 1979.  

The dollar has been in strong demand in 
exchange markets since mid-February, largely 
in response to rising U. S. interest rates; 
by early March the trade-weighted value of 
the dollar against major foreign currencies 
had returned to about the level reached at 
the end of last October, and since then, it 
has risen further. Intervention by foreign 
monetary authorities to support their 
currencies was very heavy in February and the 
first half of March. The U. S. foreign trade 
deficit rose sharply in January,although the 
volume and value of imports of petroleum were 
somewhat reduced.  

Growth of M-1A and M-1B, which had re
mained moderate in January, accelerated 
sharply in February, and growth of M-2 also 
quickened. In recent weeks, however, monetary 
growth has subsided. Expansion of commercial 
bank credit picked up in the first two months 
of this year from the reduced pace in the 
fourth quarter of 1979. Market interest 
rates have risen substantially in recent 
weeks. An increase in Federal Reserve discount 
rates from 12 to 13 percent was announced 
early on February 15, effectively immediately.  

On March 14 the President announced a 
broad program of fiscal, energy, credit, and 
other measures designed to moderate and 
reduce inflationary forces in a manner that 
can also lay the groundwork for a return to 
stable economic growth. Consistent with that 
objective and with the continuing intent of 
the Federal Reserve System to restrain growth 
in money and credit during 1980, the Board

- 6 -



3/18/80

of Governors took the following actions to rein
force the effectiveness of the measures announced 
in October 1979: 1. A special credit restraint 
program; 2. A special deposit requirement for 
all lenders on increases in certain types of 
consumer credit; 3. An increase in the mar
ginal reserve requirement on managed liabilities 
of large member banks; 4. A special deposit 
requirement on increases in managed liabilities 
of large nonmember banks; 5. A special deposit 
requirement on increases in total assets of 
money market mutual funds; 6. A surcharge of 
3 percentage points on frequent borrowings of 
large member banks from Federal Reserve Banks.  

Taking account of past and prospective 
economic developments, the Federal Open Market 
Committee seeks to foster monetary and financial 
conditions that will resist inflationary 
pressures while encouraging moderate economic 
expansion and contributing to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At 
its meeting on February 4-5, 1980, the Com
mittee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and 
M-3 from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the 
fourth quarter of 1980 within ranges of 3-1/2 
to 6, 4 to 6-1/2, 6 to 9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 
percent respectively. The associated range 
for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks 
expansion of reserve aggregates consistent 
with growth over the first half of 1980 at an 
annual rate of 4-1/2 percent for M-1A and 5 
percent for M-1B, or somewhat less, provided 
that in the period before the next regular 
meeting the weekly average federal funds rate 
remains within a range of 13 to 20 percent.  
The Committee believes that, consistent with 
this short-run policy, M-2 should grow at an 
annual rate of about 7-3/4 percent over the 
first half and expansion of bank credit should 
slow in the months ahead to a pace compatible 
with growth over the year as a whole within 
the range agreed upon.  

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the constraint on the federal 
funds rate is inconsistent with the objective for 
the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic 
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who 
will then decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee.

- 7 -



3/18/80

Consideration was then given to the continuing 

authorizations of the Committee, in accordance with the 

customary practice of reviewing such matters at the first 

regular meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On March 5, 1980, certain 
continuing authorizations of the Committee 
listed below, had been distributed by the 
Secretary with the advice that, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the Committee, 
they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March organization 
meeting to give members an opportunity to 
raise any questions they had concerning them.  
Members were asked to so indicate if they wished 
to have any of the authorizations in question 
placed on the agenda for consideration at this 
meeting, and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in 
the System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to 
whom weekly reports on open market opera
tions may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a 
Federal Reserve Bank as agent to operate 
the System Account in case the New York 
Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued opera
tion of the Committee and for certain 
actions by the Reserve Banks during an 
emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the 
System Open Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System opera
tions in Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Opera
tions of Federal Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding 
Availability of Information, and Rules of 
Procedure.

- 8 -



3/18/80

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary 
to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted 
at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, 
including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and 
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency 
of the United States in the open market, from or to 
securities dealers and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on 
a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
System Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U. S. Government and 
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the in
dividual agencies or to allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of U. S.  
Government and Federal agency securities held in such 
Account (including forward commitments) at the close of 
business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which 
action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive 
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $3.0 
billion during the period commencing with the opening of 
business on the day following such meeting and ending 
with the close of business on the day of the next such 
meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open 
market, from or to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts 
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a 
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the account 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up 
to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise 
out of the current shipment of goods between countries 
or within the United States, or (2) arise out of the 
storage within the United States of goods under contract 
of sale or expected to move into the channels of trade 
within a reasonable time and that are secured through
out their life by a warehouse receipt or similar document 
conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that 
the aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any 
one time shall not exceed $100 million;

- 9 -



3/18/80 - 10 -

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as 
to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, 
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, 
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of 
agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the 
event Government securities or agency issues covered by 
any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they 
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the System 
Open Market Account; and provided further that in the 
event bankers acceptances covered by any such agreement 
are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue 
to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (or, under special circum
stances, such as when the New York Reserve Bank is closed, any 
other Federal Reserve Bank) (a) to lend to the Treasury such 
amounts of securities held in the System Open Market Account 
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommo
dation of the Treasury, under such conditions as the Committee 
may specify; and (b) to purchase directly from the Treasury for 
renewable periods not to exceed thirty days, when authorized 
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant 
to an affirmative vote of not less than five members, for its 
own account (with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, 
to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) 
such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness 
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommo
dation of the Treasury, provided that the rate charged on such 
certificates shall be a rate 1/4 of 1 percent below the discount 
rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time of such 
purchases and provided that the total amount of such certificates 
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not 
exceed $2 billion.  

3. In order to insure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and 
directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government 
securities held in the System Open Market Account to



3/18/80

Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted 
through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as 
the Committee may specify from time to time.  

4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market 
operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term 
investments for foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open 
Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, (a) for System Open Market Account, to 
sell U. S. Government securities to such foreign and inter
national accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph 1(a) 
under agreements providing for the resale by such accounts 
of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the 
market; and (b) for New York Bank account, when appropriate, 
to undertake with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed 
on purchases and sales of securities in paragraph 1(c), 
repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency securities, 
and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts 
maintained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such 
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may provide 
for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations shown below was reaffirmed with an amendment 

to paragraph 6 substituting the title "Manager for Foreign 

Operations" for "Manager" the first time the latter appeared.  

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market 
Account, to the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's 
foreign currency directive and express authorizations by the 
Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity with such pro
cedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign 
currencies in the form of cable transfers through 
spot or forward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the 
U. S. Treasury, with the U. S. Exchange Stabiliza
tion Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary 
authorities, with the Bank for International 
Settlements, and with other international 
financial institutions:

- 11 -



3/18/80 - 12 -

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
.French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding 
forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the 
foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit 
foreign banks to draw dollars under the 
reciprocal currency arrangements listed in 
paragraph 2 below, provided that drawings by 
either party to any such arrangement shall 
be fully liquidated within 12 months after 
any amount outstanding at that time was 
first drawn, unless the Committee, because 
of exceptional circumstances, specifically 
authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position 
in all foreign currencies not exceeding 
$1.0 billion, unless a larger position is 
expressly authorized by the Committee. For 
this purpose, the overall open position in 
all foreign currencies is defined as the 
sum (disregarding signs) of net positions 
in individual currencies. The net position 
in a single foreign currency is defined as 
holdings of balances in that currency, 
plus outstanding contracts for future 
receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as 
the sum of these elements with due regard 
to sign.1/ 

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency 
arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the System Open 
Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks,.. which are among those 
designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal 

1/ On December 19, 1978, the Committee authorized an overall 
open position in foreign currencies of $8.0 billion.



3/18/80 - 13 -

Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, 
Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the 
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements 
on maturity: 

Amount of 
arrangement 
(Millions of 

Foreign bank dollars equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International 

Settlements: 
Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized 

European currencies other 
than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and 
the proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be 
authorized, shall be referred for review and approval to the 
Committee.  

3. Currencies to be used for liquidation of System swap 
commitments may be purchased from the foreign central 
bank drawn on, at the same exchange rate as that employed 
in the drawing to be liquidated. Apart from any such 
purchases at the rate of the drawing, all transactions 
in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1(a) 
above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by 
the Committee, be at prevailing market rates.



3/18/80

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign 
central banks for the coordination of foreign currency trans
actions. In making operating arrangements with foreign 
central banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or under
standings concerning the administration of the accounts 
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with 
the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 
review and approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as 
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances.  
When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S.  
Government securities may be purchased from foreign central 
banks under agreements for repurchase of such securities 
within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding 
paragraphs shall be reported daily to the Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists 
of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the 
absence of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, 
other Board Members designated by the Chairman as alternates, 
and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his 
alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at 
the request of any member, or at the request of the Manager 
for Foreign Operations for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on 
other matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request 
of any member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such 
reviews and consultations shall be referred for determination 
to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to 
enter into any needed agreement or under
standing with the Secretary of the Treasury 
about the division of responsibility for 
foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury;

- 14 -



3/18/80

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully 
advised concerning System foreign currency 
operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency 
operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate 
reports and information to the National Advisory 
Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to trans
mit pertinent information on System foreign currency opera
tions to appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in accordance 
with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement 
of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships of 
Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally 
be directed at countering disorderly market conditions, 
provided that market exchange rates for the U. S. dollar 
reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF Article 
IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases 
and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") 
arrangements with selected foreign central 
banks and with the Bank for International 
Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central 
banks of other countries and with inter
national monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of 
probable future needs for currencies.

- 15 -



3/18/80

B. To provide means for meeting System 
and Treasury commitments in particular 
currencies, and to facilitate operations 
of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be 
expressly authorized by the Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and 
cooperation with the United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with 
foreign monetary authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations 
of the United States in the International 
Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements 
under the IMF Article IV.  

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with 

respect to Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed.  

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authoriza
tion and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as 
set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 
and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural 
understandings with respect to consultations and clearance with 
the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the 
Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant 
to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the 
Subcommittee (or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes 
that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the 
time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change 
in the System's overall open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting 
of the Committee.

- 16 -



3/18/80 - 17 -

B. Any operation that would result in a change 
on any day in the System's net position in a 
single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated 
with repayment of swap drawings.  

C. Any operation which might generate a substantial 
volume of trading in a particular currency by the 
System, even though the change in the System's net 
position in that currency might be less than the 
limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 
percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the 
Committee (or with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee 
believes that consultation with the full Committee is not 
feasible in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the 
Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 

not feasible in the time available); 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in 
the System's overall open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 
15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with 
the Subcommittee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings 
by the System, and about any operations that are not of a 
routine character.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending 

of Government securities from the System Open Market Account, 

contained in paragraph 3 of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations, should be retained at this time,

subject to annual review.



3/18/80

By unanimous vote the Committee reaffirmed, subject 

to annual review, its agreement that the Federal Reserve 

would be prepared to warehouse up to $5 billion of eligible 

foreign currencies for the U. S. Treasury or the Exchange 

Stabilization Fund of the U. S. Treasury and agreed to 

eliminate the 12-month limitation previously imposed on the 

period such currencies could be warehoused.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, April 22, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 18 -


