














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

November 26, 1980 

Minutes of Actions

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Wednesday, 

November 26, 1980, at 12:20 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was a 

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., 

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those 

participating.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman (New York) 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey (Kansas City) 
Mr. Morris (Boston) 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Baughman (Dallas), and Eastburn (Philadelphia), 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black (Richmond), Corrigan (New York), and Ford 
(Atlanta), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City), 
Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir, 
Kichline, and Truman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account



-2-

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Brandt (Atlanta), Burns 

(Dallas), Fousek (New York), and Parthemos (Richmond), 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Philadelphia, Atlanta, Dallas, New York, and 

Richmond, respectively 

With Mrs. Teeters dissenting, the Committee modified the domestic 

policy directive adopted at its meeting on November 18, 1980, by increasing 

the upper limit of the 13 to 17 percent range specified for the federal funds 

rate to 18 percent.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


