














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 8-9, 1980 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, January 8, 1980, at 3:30 p.m.  

and continuing on Wednesday, January 9, 1980, at 9:15 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, 
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Brandt, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran, 
Kichline, Parthemos, Scheld, and Truman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic 
policy directive.



1/8-9/80

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, Associate 

Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beck and Simpson, 1/ Senior Economists, 
Banking Section, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. McIntosh, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, and Fousek, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, New 
York, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 

Messrs. Danforth and Mullineaux, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 20, 1979, were 

approved.  

The following actions were taken on Wednesday, January 9, 1980.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Govern

ment securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the 

period November 20, 1979 through January 8, 1980, were ratified.

2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



1/8-9/80

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 20, 1979 through January 8, 1980, 

were ratified.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of System drawings 

on the German Federal Bank maturing January 21 through February 14, 1980, 

was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the follow

ing domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real output of goods and services expanded somewhat 
further in the final quarter of 1979 and that prices on 
the average continued to rise rapidly. In November retail 
sales strengthened and nonfarm payroll employment rose con
siderably further, but industrial production declined some
what and private housing starts fell. The unemployment 
rate edged down from 6.0 to 5.8 percent. Producer prices 
of finished goods and consumer prices continued to rise 
rapidly, in part because of the spreading effects of earlier 
increases in energy costs. Over recent months the rise in 
the index of average hourly earnings has remained close to 
the rapid pace during 1978.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has depreciated about 3 percent since 
mid-November, reflecting in large part the mid-East situa
tion as well as a firming of monetary conditions in a 
number of foreign countries. The U.S. foreign trade deficit 
in October and November on the average was slightly below 
the rate for the third quarter.  

Growth of the major monetary aggregates, which had 
slowed in October, remained at reduced rates in the final 
months of 1979. From the fourth quarter of 1978 to the 
fourth quarter of 1979 M-1 grew 5-1/2 percent, M-2 about 
8-1/4 percent, and M-3 about 8 percent. Most market 
interest rates have declined somewhat on balance since 
the Committee's meeting in late November.



1/8-9/80

Taking account of past and prospective developments 
in employment, unemployment, production, investment, real 
income, productivity, international trade and payments, 
and prices, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will resist 
inflationary pressures while encouraging moderate economic 
expansion and contributing to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions. At its meeting on July 11, 
1979, the Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth 
quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979 within ranges 
of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, 5 to 8 percent, and 6 to 9 per
cent respectively. It appeared that expansion of ATS and 
NOW accounts would dampen growth of M-1 by about 1-1/2 per
centage points over the year, half as much as assumed early 
in the year; thus after allowance for the deviation from 
the earlier estimate, the equivalent range for M-1 was 3 to 
6 percent. The associated range for bank credit was 7-1/2 
to 10-1/2 percent. The Committee anticipated that for the 
period from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter 
of 1980, growth may be within the same ranges, depending 
upon emerging economic conditions and appropriate adjustments 
that may be required by legislation or judicial developments 
affecting interest-bearing transactions accounts. Ranges for 
1980 will be reconsidered at the meeting of the Committee 
scheduled for early February.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of 
reserve aggregates consistent with growth over the first 
quarter of 1980 at an annual rate between 4 and 5 percent 
for M-1 and on the order of 7 percent for M-2, provided 
that in the period before the next regular meeting the 
weekly average federal funds rate remains within a range 
of 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate 
is inconsistent with the objective for the expansion of 
reserves, the Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly 
to notify the Chairman who will then decide whether the 
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the 
Committee.  

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of the 

FOMC memoranda of discussion for 1974, on the basis described in a 

memorandum from the Secretariat dated December 5, 1979, was authorized.



1/8-9/80 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, February 5, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


