














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 20, 1980 

Minutes of Actions

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1980, 

at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market 
Committee 

Messrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and 
Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin, 
Henry, Keir, Kichline, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account



5/20/80

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Forrestal, Gainor, and McIntosh, 
First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, and 
Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Fousek, Keran, and 
Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, New 
York, San Francisco, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Danforth, and Mullineaux, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond, Minneapolis, and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Levin, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

April 22, 1980, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period April 22 through May 19, 

1980, were ratified.

- 2 -



5/20/80

By unanimous vote, the amount of the reciprocal 

currency arrangement with the Bank of Sweden specified in 

paragraph 2 of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

was raised to $500 million, effective May 23, 1980, for a period 

of one year, after which it will revert to its current level 

of $300 million.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank and the Banque de France 

maturing July 14 through 18, 1980, was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period April 22 through May 19, 1980, 

were ratified.  

With Messrs. Partee and Roos dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
suggests a marked contraction in real GNP in the 
current quarter. In April the dollar value of 
total retail sales declined substantially for the 
third consecutive month. Industrial production 
and nonfarm payroll employment were curtailed 
sharply, and theunemployment rate rose from 6.2 
to 7.0 percent. Private housing starts, which 
had declined throughout the first quarter to a 
relatively low rate, edged down further in April.  
The overall rise in prices of goods and services 
has remained rapid in recent months, although in

- 3 -



5/20/80

April the rise in producer prices of finished goods 
was slowed by a large decrease in foods and by a 
lessening of the rapid rise in energy items. Over 
the first four months of the year, the rise in the 
index of average hourly earnings was somewhat less 
than the rapid pace recorded in 1979.  

The downward pressure on the dollar in exchange 
markets that emerged in early April has continued 
over most of the past four weeks, in response 
primarily to the sharp decline in U. S. interest 
rates relative to foreign interest rates; the trade
weighted value of the dollar against major foreign 
currencies has declined about 3-1/2 percent. The 
U. S. foreign trade deficit was substantially larger 
in the first quarter of 1980 than in the preceding 
quarter, despite a considerable decline in March 
from the average in the preceding two months.  

M-1A and M-1B contracted sharply further in 
April, and M-2 also declined. Commercial bank 
credit, both loans and investments, contracted in 
April after having slowed substantially in March.  
Over recent weeks, market interest rates have 
declined sharply further.  

Taking account of past and prospective economic 
developments, the Federal Open Market Committee 
seeks to foster monetary and financial conditions 
that will resist inflationary pressures while en
couraging moderate economic expansion and con
tributing to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. At its meeting on February 4-5, 1980, 
the Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 
from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth 
quarter of 1980 within ranges of 3-1/2 to 6, 4 to 
6-1/2, 6 to 9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent respec
tively. The associated range for bank credit was 
6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, 
M-1B, and M-2 at rates high enough to promote achieve
ment of the Committee's objectives for monetary 
growth over the year, provided that in the period 
before the next regular meeting the weekly average 
federal funds rate remains within a range of 8-1/2 
to 14 percent.

- 4 -



5/20/80

If it appears during the period before the 
next meeting that the constraint on the federal 
funds rate is inconsistent with the objective for 
the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic 
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who 
will then decide whether the situation calls for 
supplementary instructions from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Wednesday, July 9, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


