














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

September 16, 1980 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 16, 

1980, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mr. Solomon 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Kichline, 
and Truman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account



9/16/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, 
Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne,Brandt, Burns, Fousek, 
Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, 
Dallas, New York, San Francisco, 
Richmond, and Chicago, respectively 

Ms. Nichols and Mr. Sandberg, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Chicago and New York, respectively 

Mr. Miller, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at 

the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on 

August 12, 1980, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in foreign currencies during the period August 12 through 

September 15, 1980, were ratified.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of System 

drawings on the German Federal Bank and the Bank of France 

maturing September 30 through October 28, 1980, was noted 

without objection,

- 2 -



9/16/80

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions 

in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 

acceptances during the period August 12 through September 15, 

1980, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Guffey, Roos, Wallich, and Winn dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the decline in economic activity has moderated in 
the third quarter following a sharp contraction in the 
second quarter. Industrial production and nonfarm pay
roll employment expanded in August after several months 
of decline; the unemployment rate edged down from 7.8 
to 7.6 percent; and total retail sales advanced con
siderably further. In July housing starts rose slightly, 
following a substantial rebound in June, and were well 
above the depressed levels of the preceding three months.  
Producer prices of finished goods rose rapidly in July 
and August, after increasing at a sharply reduced pace 
in the second quarter; the recent advance reflected 
mainly a surge in food prices. Over the first eight 
months of the year, the rise in the index of average 
hourly earnings was somewhat faster than the pace 
recorded in 1979.  

The weighted average value of the dollar in exchange 
markets has declined somewhat over the past five weeks.  
The U.S. trade deficit in July was significantly lower 
than the monthly average in the second quarter, reflec
ting a sharp decline in petroleum imports.  

M-1A and M-1B grew at record rates in August, while 
growth in M-2 moderated from an exceptionally rapid pace 
in June and July. For the year through August growth of 
M-1A was in the lower half and growth of M-1B in the 
upper half of their respective ranges set by the Committee 
for the year from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth

- 3 -



9/16/80

quarter of 1980, while growth in M-2 was somewhat 
above the upper limit of its range. Market interest 
rates have fluctuated widely since mid-August and on 
balance short-term rates have risen considerably 
while long-term rates have increased moderately.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to 
foster monetary and financial conditions that will 
help to reduce inflation, encourage economic re
covery, and contribute to a sustainable pattern of 
international transactions. At its meeting in July, 
the Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 
from the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter 
of 1980 within ranges of 3½ to 6 percent, 4 to 6½ 
percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6½ to 9½ percent re
spectively. The associated range for bank credit 
was 6 to 9 percent. For the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981, the 
Committee looked toward a reduction in the ranges 
for growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 on the order of 
½ percentage point from the ranges adopted for 1980, 
abstracting from institutional influences affecting 
the behavior of the aggregates. These ranges will 
be reconsidered as conditions warrant.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, 
M-1B, and M-2 over the August to December period at 
annual rates of about 4 percent, 6½ percent, and 8½ 
percent respectively, provided that in the period 
before the next regular meeting the weekly average 
federal funds rate remains within a range of 8 to 14 
percent.  

If it appears during the period before the next 
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate 
is inconsistent with the objective for the expansion 
of reserves, the Manager for Domestic Operations is 
promptly to notify the Chairman, who will then decide 
whether the situation calls for supplementary instruc
tions from the Committee.

- 4 -



9/16/80

By unanimous vote, responsibility for making deter

,minations with respect to appeals of denial of access to 

Committee records under the provisions of 271.4(d) of the 

Committee's Rules Regarding Availability of Information was 

delegated, in the absence of Mr. Schultz, to Mr. Partee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 

would be held on Tuesday, October 21, 1980, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


