














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 18, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 

D. C., on Monday, May 18, 1981 at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker 1/, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford and Winn, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

1/ Left the meeting following the action to approve the minutes and returned 
prior to the action to ratify System open market transactions in Govern
ment securities, agency obligations,and bankers acceptances.



5/18/81

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Doyle, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, Fousek, Koch, and Parthemos 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of St. Louis, Cleveland, New York, Atlanta, 
and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Bisignano, Cacy, Fieleke, Sandberg, and Syron, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San 
Francisco, Kansas City, Boston, New York, and 
Boston, respectively 

Mr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 31, 1981 and May 6, 1981, 

were approved.  

The report of examination of the System Open Market Account, made 

by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as of the close of 

business November 21, 1980, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

March 31 through May 17, 1981, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:

- 2 -



5/18/81

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP will grow much less rapidly in the current quarter, 
following the substantial expansion in the first quarter; 
prices on the average have continued to rise rapidly, although 
somewhat less so most recently than earlier in the year. The 
dollar value of total retail sales increased slightly further 
in March, but it declined appreciably in April when sales of 
new cars fell in response to the ending of price concessions.  
Industrial production rose moderately in both months, while 
nonfarm payroll employment changed little, after adjustment 
for strikes, and the unemployment rate was stable at 7.3 
percent. In March housing starts remained at a reduced pace.  
Over the first four months of 1981, the rise in the index of 
average hourly earnings was slightly less rapid than during 
1980.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has risen steadily since the end of March 
to its highest level in three and a half years. The U.S.  
trade deficit declined sharply in March, bringing the first
quarter deficit to a level well below the 1980 average.  

Growth in M-1B, adjusted for the estimated effects of 
shifts into NOW accounts, accelerated sharply in April and 
growth in M-2 remained rapid. Since March, both short-term 
and long-term market interest rates have risen substantially.  
On May 4 the Board of Governors announced an increase in 
Federal Reserve discount rates from 13 to 14 percent and an 
increase in the surcharge from 3 to 4 percentage points on 
frequent borrowings of large institutions.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary 
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, 
promote economic growth, and contribute to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At its meeting in early 
February, the Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from the 
fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 within 
ranges of 3 to 5 percent, 31 to 6 percent, 6 to 9 percent, 
and 6½ to 9½ percent respectively, abstracting from the impact 
of introduction of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis. The 
associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. These 
ranges will be reconsidered as conditions warrant.  

In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with a substantial deceleration of growth 
in M-1B from April to June to an annual rate of 3 percent or 
lower, after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts, 
and with growth in M-2 at an annual rate of about 6 percent.

- 3 -



5/18/81

The shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two-month rate speci
fied above would be acceptable, in light of the rapid growth 
in April and the objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 

for growth from March to June at an annual rate of 5 percent 
or somewhat less. It is recognized that shifts into NOW accounts 
will continue to distort measured growth in M-1B to an unpre
dictable extent, and operational reserve paths will be developed 
in the light of evaluation of those distortions. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager 
for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives 
and related reserve paths during the period before the next 
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 16 to 22 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, July 7, 1981, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 4 -


