














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 31, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 

D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1981 at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir, 

Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Smith 1/, Assistant Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to amend the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and left following the action to reaffirm 
the agreement to "warehouse" foreign currencies.



3/31/81

Mr. Doyle, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 

Chicago 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, 
Koch, and Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, 
Kansas City, Boston, San Francisco, Atlanta, and 

Richmond, respectively 

Ms. Greene and Mr. Syron, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York and Boston, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1981, had been received by 

the Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate membes were as follows: 

Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, with 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as 
alternate; 

Anthony M. Solomon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Mayo, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with Willis 
J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate; 

Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with 
William F. Ford, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as 
alternate; 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
with John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 1982, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the

- 2 -



3/31/81

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they 

would cease to have any official connection with the Federal Open Market 

Committee:

Paul A. Vocker 
Anthony M. Solomon

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Stephen H. Axilrod 
Murray A. Altmann 
Normand R. V. Bernard 
Nancy M. Steele 
Neal L. Petersen 
James H. Oltman 
Robert E. Mannion 
James L. Kichline 
Alan R. Holmes 

Joseph E. Burns, John P. Danforth, 
Richard G. Davis, Edward E. Ettin, 
George B. Henry, Peter M. Keir, 
Donald J. Mullineaux, Michael J.  
Prell, Karl A. Scheld, Edwin M.  
Truman, Joseph S. Zeisel

Staff Director 
Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Deputy Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Deputy General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Economist 
Adviser for Market Operations 

Associate Economists

Secretary's note: On March 4, 1981, certain continuing 
authorizations of the Committee listed below, had been 
distributed by the Secretary with the advice that, in 
accordance with procedures approved by the Committee, 
they were being called to the Committee's attention 
before the March organization meeting to give members 
an opportunity to raise any questions they had concerning 
them. Members were asked to so indicate if they wished 
to have any of the authorizations in question placed on 
the agenda for consideration at this meeting, and no 
such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to whom weekly 
reports on open market operations may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.

- 3 -



3/31/81

4. Resolutions providing for continued operations of the 

Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 

during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after 

February 28, 1982.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Scott E. Pardee were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Opem Market Account, and Manager for 

F reign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the under

standing that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently received that 
the selections indicated above were satisfactory to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 2-3, 1981, and 

February 24, 1981, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 2 through March 30, 1981, were ratified.

- 4 -



3/31/81

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

was amended to read as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or foward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with the 
U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other international financial 
institutions.  

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $8.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all

- 5 -



3/31/81

foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi

tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 500 1/ 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

1/ Pursuant to an action taken by the Committee on May 20, 1980, the amount 
of the reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of Sweden was 
raised to $500 million, effective May 23, 1980, for a period of one 
year, after which it will revert to its former level of $300 million.

- 6 -



3/31/81

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 

1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 

be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment 

return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 

adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 

transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 

exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 

for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 

arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 

currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 

to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 

Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 

administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 

Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 

the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 

considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 

in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 

maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 

investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 

securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 

be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  

The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 

of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 

members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 

designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 

Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 

Manager for Foreign Operations for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 

of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 

agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 

policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;

-7-



3/31/81

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 

of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 

operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 

countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 
for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 
Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 
States Treasury;

- 8 -



3/31/81

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 
and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 
IMF Article IV.  

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 

Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 
net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair
man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available):

- 9 -



3/31/81 - 10 -

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 

recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 

of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub

committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the agreement of 

January 17, 1977, to "warehouse" foreign currencies for the Exchange Stabili

zation Fund and for the Treasury on the terms agreed upon by the Committee at 

its meeting on March 18, 1980, with the understanding that the agreement would 

be subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

February 2 through March 30, 1981, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taen with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $3.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting;



3/31/81 - 11 -

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of 
goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 

aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable 
limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York (or, under special circumstances, such as when the 
New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal Reserve Bank) (a) to 
lend to the Treasury such amounts of securities held in the System Open 
Market Account as may be necesary from time to time for the temporary 
accommodation of the Treasury, under such conditions as the Committee may 
specify; and (b) to purchase directly from the Treasury for renewable 
periods not to exceed thirty days, when authorized by the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant to an affirmative vote of 
not less than five members, for its own account (with discretion, in cases 
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more Federal 
Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation 
of the Treasury, provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate 1/4 of 1 percent below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York at the time of such purchases and provided that the total 
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve 
Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.



3/31/81 - 12 -

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 

the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 

Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 

Market Account to Government securites dealers and to banks participating 

in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 

Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 

time to time.  

4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 

international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 

the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern

ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 

set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 

such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com

parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 

for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, 

subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in 
paragraph 1(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 

securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 

at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro

visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of Government 

securities from the System Open Market Account, contained in paragraph 3 of 

the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, should be retained at 

this time, subject to annual review.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP,expanded substantially in the first quarter of 1981, 

but there were signs of a slowing of the expansion in economic 
activity during the quarter; prices on the average continued 
to rise rapidly. While retail sales advanced appreciably 

over the first two months of the year, industrial production 

declined in February after three months of diminishing gains 

and housing starts dropped from the moderate pace that had 

prevailed during the preceding six months. Nonfarm payroll 
employment changed little in February following a large in

crease in January; the unemployment rate, at 7.3 percent, 
was essentially unchanged. Over the first two months of 1981, 

the rise in the index of average hourly earnings was little 

changed from the rapid pace recorded during 1980.



3/31/81

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies rose further following the Committee's 
meeting in early February to a peak at midmonth but subse
quently declined somewhat on balance. Short-term interest 
rates in continental European countries have risen appreciably 
since mid-February, absolutely and in relation to interest 
rates on dollar-denominated assets. The U.S. trade deficit in 
January and February was at about the average monthly rate of 
the final quarter of 1980.  

M-1A and M-1B, adjusted for the estimated effects of 
shifts into NOW accounts, changed little over the first two 
months of the year but expanded substantially in the first 
half of March. Growth in M-2 accelerated in the course.of 
the quarter and partial data suggest considerable strength 
in March, in part because of large flows into money market 
mutual funds. On balance since early February, short-term 
market interest rates have fallen substantially while longer
term market rates have risen somewhat.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary 
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, 
encourage economic recovery, and contribute to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At its meeting in early 
February, the Committee agreed that these objectives would be 
furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth 
quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 within ranges of 
3 to 5-1/2 percent, 3-1/2 to 6 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent respectively, abstracting from the im
pact of introduction of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis.  
The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. These 
ranges will be reconsidered as conditions warrant.  

In the short-run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with growth in M-1B from March to June 
at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less, after 
allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts, and growth 
in M-2 at an annual rate of about 10-1/2 percent. It is 
recognized that shifts into NOW accounts will continue to 
distort measured growth in M-1B to an unpredictable extent, 
and operational reserve paths will be developed in the 
light of evaluation of those distortions. If it appears 
during the period before the next meeting that fluctuations 
in the federal funds rate, taken over a period of time, 
within a range of 13 to 18 percent are likely to be incon
sistent with the monetary and related reserve paths, the 
Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly to notify the 
Chairman, who will then decide whether the situation calls 
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.

- 13 -



3/31/81 - 14 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 19, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


