














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 5-6, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, October 5, 1981, at 4:30 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, October 6, 1981, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Ford, Timlen, and Winn, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris and Roos, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 1/ 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 1/ 
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir, Mullineaux, Prell, 
Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



10/5-6/81

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of Inter

national Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey 2/, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Simpson, Chief, Banking Section, Division of Research 

And Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck 1/, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Keran, Koch, and 
Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, 
San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Fieleke and Syron 1/, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 18, 1981, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

August 18 through October 5, 1981, were ratified.  

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended Monday session only.

- 2 -



10/5-6/81

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute 

transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP declined slightly further in the third quarter and 
that prices on the average continued to rise at the somewhat 
lower rate that emerged in the second quarter. In July and 
August the nominal value of total retail sales was essentially 
unchanged from the June level, and unit sales of domestic 
automobiles weakened in September. Industrial production 
declined slightly in August and apparently slackened further 
in September, while nonfarm payroll employment changed little 
in both months. The unemployment rate rose to 7.5 percent in 
September, about equal to its average in the first half of 
1981. Housing starts fell in August to the lowest rate in 

several years. Over the first nine months of the year, the 
rise in the index of average hourly earnings was somewhat 
less rapid than during 1980.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies declined sharply through mid-September from 
its peak in early August and on balance has changed little 
since then. In August the U.S. foreign trade deficit widened 
substantially from the low rate in July; for July and August 
combined, the deficit was considerably larger than the second
quarter rate.  

M1-B, adjusted for the estimated effects of shifts into NOW 
accounts, increased little over the period from June to September, 
while M2 grew at a relatively strong pace. The level of adjusted 
M1-B in September was well below the lower end of the Committee's 
range for growth over the year from the fourth quarter of 1980 to 
the fourth quarter of 1981; the level of M2 was at the upper end 
of its range for the year. In frequently volatile markets, short
term interest rates have declined on balance since mid-August while 
long-term rates have risen considerably further. On September 21 

the Board of Governors announced a reduction in the surcharge from 
4 to 3 percentage points on frequent borrowings of large depository 
institutions.

- 3 -



10/5-6/81

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary and 
financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, promote 
sustained economic growth, and contribute to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions. At its meeting in early July, the 
Committee agreed that these objectives would be furthered by re
affirming the monetary growth ranges for the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 that it had set at 
the February meeting. These ranges included growth of 3-1/2 to 6 
percent for M-B, abstracting from the impact of flows into NOW 
accounts on a nationwide basis, and growth of 6 to 9 percent and 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and M3, respectively. The Committee 
recognized that the shortfall in M1-B growth in the first half of 

the year partly reflected a shift in public preferences toward 
other highly liquid assets and that growth in the broader aggre
gates had been running at about or somewhat above the upper ends 
of their ranges. In light of its desire to maintain moderate 
growth in money over the balance of the year, the Committee 
expected that growth in M1-B for the year would be near the lower 
end of its range. At the same time, growth in the broader aggre
gates might be high in their ranges. The associated range for 
bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. The Committee also tentatively 
agreed that for the period from the fourth quarter of 1981 to 
the fourth quarter of 1982 growth of M1, M2, and M3 within ranges 
of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 
percent would be appropriate. These ranges will be reconsidered 
as warranted to take account of developing experience with public 
preferences for NOW and similar accounts as well as changing 
economic and financial conditions.  

In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with growth of M1-B from September to 
December at an annual rate of 7 percent after allowance for 
the impact of flows into NOW accounts and with growth in M2 at 
an annual rate around 10 percent or slightly higher, recognizing 
that the behavior of M2 will be affected by recent regulatory 
and legislative changes, particularly the public's response to 
the availability of the all savers certificate. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager 
for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives 
and related reserve paths during the period before the next 
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 12 to 17 percent.

-4-



10/5-6/81 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, November 17, 1981, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


