














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 18, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Winn, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Morris and Roos, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel

Messrs. Burns, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld, 
Associate Economists

and Zeisel,

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 

Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 

System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors, 

Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors



8/18/81

Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Czerwinski, Forrestal, McIntosh, and Smoot, First 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas 

City, Atlanta, Boston, and Philadelphia, respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Fousek, and Koch, Senior 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 

Kansas City, New York, and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, and Syron, Vice Presidents, 

Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, 

and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis 

Mr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 

Philadelphia 

Mr. Levin, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 6-7,and August 7, 1981, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

July 7 through August 17, 1981, were ratified.  

With Mr. Partee dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:

- 2 -



8/18/81

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests little 

change in real GNP in the current quarter, following a small 

decline in the second quarter; prices on the average appeared 

to be continuing to rise less rapidly than earlier in the 

year. The dollar value of total retail sales increased 

appreciably further in July, reflecting some recovery in 

sales at automotive dealers. Industrial production rose 

slightly in July, while nonfarm payroll employment advanced 

substantially; the unemployment rate declined to 7.0 percent, 

somewhat below its average level in earlier months of 1981.  

In June housing starts declined sharply further. Over the 

first seven months of the year, the rise in the index of 

average hourly earnings was somewhat less rapid than during 

1980.  

The weighted average value of the dollar rose further 

against major foreign currencies in July and early August, 

registering gains against all major currencies. In June 

the U.S. foreign trade deficit declined slightly from the 

May level, but for the second quarter the deficit was up 

substantially over the first-quarter rate.  

In July M1-B, adjusted for the estimated effects of 

shifts into NOW accounts, expanded somewhat following a 

substantial decline in May and June, and growth in M2 

accelerated from a relatively sluggish pace in the 

previous two months. The level of adjusted M1-B in 

July was well below the lower end of the Committee's 

range for growth over the year from the fourth quarter 

of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 while the level 

of M2 was slightly below the upper end of its range for 

the year. Available data for early August suggested 

further acceleration in growth of M1-B and M2, with 

acceleration in M2 apparently influenced in part by 

initial responses of the public to the availability 

of more attractive deposit instruments, pointing up 
the necessity of evaluating the behavior of M2 in the 

light of the impact of regulatory and legislative 
changes. Since early July most market interest rates 

have risen considerably on balance.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 

monetary and financial conditions that will help to 

reduce inflation, promote sustained economic growth, 
and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international 

transactions. At its meeting in early July, the Committee 

agreed that these objectives would be furthered by re

affirming the monetary gowth ranges for the period 

from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter 

of 1981 that it had set at the February meeting. These 

ranges included growth of 3½ to 6 percent for M1-B,

- 3 -



8/18/81

abstracting from the impact of flows into NOW accounts 
on a nationwide basis, and growth of 6 to 9 percent 
and 6½ to 9½ percent for M2 and M3, respectively. The 
Committee recognized that the shortfall in M1-B growth 
in the first half of the year partly reflected a shift 
in public preferences toward other highly liquid assets 
and that growth in the broader aggregates had been 
running at about or somewhat above the upper ends of 
their ranges. In light of its desire to maintain 
moderate growth in money over the balance of the year, 
the Committee expected that growth in M1-B for the 
year would be near the lower end of its range. At 
the same time, growth in the broader aggregates might 
be high in their ranges. The associated range for bank 
credit was 6 to 9 percent. The Committee also tenta
tively agreed that for the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 growth 
of M1, M2, and M3 within ranges of 2½ to 5½ percent, 

6 to 9 percent, and 6½ to 9½ percent would be appropriate.  
These ranges will be reconsidered as warranted to take 
account of developing experience with public preferences 
for NOW and similar accounts as well as changing economic 
and financial conditions.  

In the short run the Committee continues to seek 
behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with growth 
of M1-B from June to September at an annual rate of 7 
percent after allowance for the impact of flows into 
NOW accounts (resulting in growth at an annual rate of 
about 2 percent from the average in the second quarter 
to the average in the third quarter), provided that 
growth of M2 remains around the upper limit of, or 
moves within, its range for the year. It is recognized 
that shifts into NOW accounts will continue to distort 
measured growth in M1-B to an unpredictable extent, and 
operational reserve paths will be developed in the light 
of evaluation of those distortions. The Chairman may 
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during 
the period before the next meeting is likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 15 to 21 percent.

- 4 -



8/18/81 - 5 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, October 6, 1981, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


