














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 21-22, 1981

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, December 21, 1981, at 3:30 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, December 22, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 1/ 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate 
the Federal Open Market Committee

Members of

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 2/ 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. R. Davis, Duprey, Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans
actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.

2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/21-22/81

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Wallace, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, Koch, 
and Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, 
San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Burger and Syron 1/, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 17, 1981, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

November 17 through December 21, 1981, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise to $4 billion the dollar limit on

- 2 -



12/21-22/81

intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S. Government and Federal 

agency securities, effective immediately, for the period through the close of 

business on February 2, 1982.  

With Messrs. Solomon and Boykin dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accor

dance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP declined appreciably in the fourth quarter and that 
prices on the average rose less rapidly than over the first 
three quarters of the year. In November industrial production 
fell more than in preceding months; nonfarm payroll employment, 
especially in manufacturing, declined sharply further; and the 
unemployment rate rose an additional 0.4 percentage points 
to 8.4 percent. The nominal value of retail sales increased, 
but the level was still well below the average for the third 
quarter. Housing starts remained at a depressed level. The 
rise in the index of average hourly earnings has been somewhat 
less rapid this year than during 1980.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has changed little on balance since mid
November. The U.S. foreign trade deficit in October widened 
substantially from the unusually low rate in September, and 
the average for the two months was about the same as that for 
July and August.  

M-B (adjusted for estimated shifts into NOW accounts) 
expanded substantially in November and early December, but 
its level in November was still well below the lower end of 
the Committee's range for growth over the year from the 
fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981. Growth 
of M2 accelerated sharply in November, raising its level 
above the upper end of its range for the year. Short-term 
market interest rates and bond yields continued to decline 
in the latter part of November, but since then they have 
risen to levels generally higher than those of mid-November; 
over the period since mid-November, mortgage interest rates 
have declined further. On December 3 the Board of Governors 
announced a reduction in Federal Reserve basic discount 
rates from 13 to 12 .percent.



12/21-22/81

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary 
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, 
promote a resumption of growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international 
transactions. At its meeting in early July, the Committee 

agreed that its objectives would be furthered by reaffirming 
the monetary growth ranges for the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 that it had set 

at the February meeting. These ranges included growth of 3-1/2 
to 6 percent for M1-B, abstracting from the impact of flows 
into NOW accounts on a nationwide basis, and growth of 6 to 9 

percent and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and M3 respectively.  
The Committee recognized that the shortfall in M1-B growth in 
the first half of the year partly reflected a shift in public 
preferences toward other highly liquid assets and that growth 
in the broader aggregates had been running at about or somewhat 
above the upper end of their ranges. In light of its desire 

to maintain moderate growth in money over the balance of the 
year, the Committee expected that growth in M1-B for the year 
would be near the lower end of its range. At the same time, 
growth in the broader aggregates might be high in their ranges.  
The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. The 
Committee also tentatively agreed that for the period from the 

fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 growth 
of M1, M2, and M3 within ranges of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 
6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent respectively would 
be appropriate.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 

aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from November 
1981 to March at annual rates of around 4 to 5 percent and 
9 to 10 percent respectively. The target for M1 no longer 
reflects the "shift-adjustment" for conversion of outstanding 
interest-bearing assets into new NOW accounts, formerly 
estimated in the "shift-adjusted" M1-B series. In setting 
the M1 target the Committee took account of the relatively 
rapid growth that had already taken place through the first 
part of December; it also recognized that interpretation of 
actual money growth may need to take account of the signifi
cance of fluctuations in NOW accounts, which have recently 
been growing relatively rapidly. The Chairman may call for 

Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for 
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives 
and related reserve paths during the period before the next 

meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 10 to 14 percent.



12/21-22/81

By unanimous vote, transfer to the National Archives of the FOMC 

unofficial memoranda of discussion for the first three meetings of 1976, 

on the basis described in a memorandum from the Secretary dated December 3, 

1981, was authorized.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, February 2, 1982, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


