














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 6, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Wednesday, 

May 6, 1981, at 2:30 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was a 

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., 

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those 

participating.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman (New York) 
Mr. Boehne (Philadelphia) 
Mr. Boykin (Dallas) 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Black (Richmond), Ford 
(Atlanta), Timlen (New York), and Winn (Philadelphia), 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey (Kansas City), Morris (Boston), and Roos 
(St. Louis), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis), Ettin, 
Keir, Mullineaux (Philadelphia), Prell, Scheld 
(Chicago), Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



5/6/81

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Doyle (Chicago), First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago 

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland), 
Eisenmenger (Boston), Fousek (New York), Keran 
(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), and Parthemos 
(Richmond), Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Boston, 
New York, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, 
respectively 

Mr. Gambs (Kansas City), Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 

By unanimous vote the Committee agreed that through the period before 

the next regular meeting the reserve path should continue to be set on the 

basis of the short-run objectives for monetary growth established at its 

meeting on March 31, recognizing that the federal funds rate might continue 

to exceed the upper end of the range indicated for consultation at the 

March 31 meeting.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 2 -


