














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 6-7, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 

D. C., beginning on Monday, July 6, 1981, at 2:30 p.m. and continuing on 

Tuesday, July 7, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Boehne 

Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 

Mr. Gramley 

Mr. Keehn 

Mr. Partee 

Mr. Rice 

Mr. Schultz 

Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen,and Winn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Axilrod, Staff Director 

Altmann, Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 

Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Keir, Mullineaux, 
Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 

Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 

Open Market Account



7/6-7/81

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Johnson 1/, and Ms. Scanlon 1/, Economists, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, and 

Koch, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 

of Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, San Francisco, 

and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burger, and Syron, Vice Presidents, 

Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, and 

Boston, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York 

Ms. Meulendyke, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, Michael Bradfield was elected General Counsel of 

the Federal Open Market Committee to serve until the election of a successor 

at the first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 1982, with the 

understanding that in the event of the discontinuance of his official 

connection with the Board of Governors, he would cease to have any official 

connection with the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 18, 1981, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

May 18 through July 6, 1981, were ratified.  

1/ Mr. Johnson and Ms. Scanlon entered the meeting following the action to 
ratify system open market transactions in Government securities, agency 
obligations,and bankers acceptances and left the meeting prior to the 

adoption of the domestic policy directive.

- 2 -



7/6-7/81

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the ranges for growth 

in the monetary aggregates for the period from the fourth quarter of 1980 

to the fourth quarter of 1981 that it had adopted at its meeting in early 

February 1981. These ranges, abstracting from the impact of NOW accounts 

on a nationwide basis, were 3 to 5-1/2 percent for M1-A, 3-1/2 to 6 percent 

for M1-B, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The 

associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. The Committee 

recognized that a shortfall in M1-B growth in the first half of the year 

partly reflected a shift in public preferences toward other highly liquid 

assets and that growth in the broader aggregates had been running somewhat 

above the upper ends of the ranges. In light of its desire to maintain 

moderate growth in money over the balance of the year, the Committee 

expected that growth in M1-B for the year would be near the lower end of 

its range. At the same time, growth in the broader monetary aggregates 

might be high in their ranges.  

With Mrs. Teeters dissenting, the Committee tentatively agreed 

that for the period from the fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter 

of 1982 growth of M1, M2, and M3 within ranges of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 

6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, respectively would be 

appropriate.  

With Mr. Partee dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:

- 3 -



7/6-7/81

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 

real GNP changed little in the second quarter, following the 

substantial expansion in the first quarter; prices on the 

average rose less rapidly than in the first quarter. The 

dollar value of total retail sales was virtually unchanged 

in May after having declined appreciably in April, and sales 

of new cars remained weak in June. Industrial production 

rose slightly on the average in April and May, while non

farm payroll employment continued to advance, after adjust

ment for strikes. In June strike-adjusted nonfarm employment 

declined appreciably; the unemployment rate was 7.3 percent, 

somewhat lower than in May but unchanged from earlier months 

of 1981. In May housing starts declined sharply. Over the 

first six months of 1981, the rise in the index of average 

hourly earnings was slightly less rapid than during 1980.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 

foreign currencies continued to rise through May and early 

June and then leveled off. In April-May the U.S. foreign 

trade deficit was somewhat above the first-quarter rate.  

M1-B, adjusted for the estimated effects of shifts 

into NOW accounts, declined substantially in May and June 

following the sharp expansion in April, and growth in M2 

slowed. The level of adjusted M1-B in the second quarter 
on the average was below the lower end of the Committee's 
range for growth over the year from the fourth quarter of 

1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981; the level of M2 in 

the second quarter was slightly above the upper end of 

its range for the year. Since mid-May, on balance, 
short-term market interest rates have declined somewhat 

while long-term yields generally have changed little.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 

monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce 
inflation, promote sustained economic growth, and contribute 

to a sustainable pattern of international transactions. At 
its meeting in early February, the Committee agreed that 

these objectives would be furthered by growth of M1-A, M1-B, 
M2, and M3 from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth 
quarter of 1981 within ranges of 3 to 5½ percent, 3½ to 6 
percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6½ to 9½ percent respectively, 
abstracting from the impact of introduction of NOW accounts 
on a nationwide basis. The Committee recognized that the 
shortfall in M1-B growth in the first half of the year 

partly reflected a shift in public preferences toward 
other highly liquid assets and that growth in the broader 

aggregates has been running somewhat above the upper ends 
of the ranges. The Committee reaffirmed its ranges for 1981, 
but in light of its desire to maintain moderate growth in 
money over the balance of the year, the Committee expected

- 4 -



7/6-7/81

that growth in M1-B for the year would be near the lower 
end of its range. At the same time, growth in the broader 
aggregates may be high in their ranges. The associated 
range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. The Committee 
also tentatively agreed that for the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 growth of 
M1, M2, and M3 within ranges of 2½ to 5½ percent, 6 to 9 
percent, and 6½ to 9½ percent would be appropriate. These 
ranges will be reconsidered as warranted to take account 
of developing experience with public preferences for NOW 
and similar accounts as well as changing economic and 
financial conditions.  

In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with growth of M1-B from June to September 
at an annual rate of 7 percent after allowance for the impact 

of flows into NOW accounts (resulting in growth at an annual 

rate of about 2 percent from the average in the second quarter 
to the average in the third quarter), provided that growth 
of M2 remains around the upper limit of, or moves within, 

its range for the year. It is recognized that shifts into 

NOW accounts will continue to distort measured growth in 

M1-B to an unpredictable extent, and operational reserve 

paths will be developed in the light of evaluation of those 
distortions. The Chairman may call for Committee consulta

tion if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 

that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely to 
be associated wth a federal funds rate persistently outside 
a range of 15 to 21 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, August 18, 1981, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 5 -


