














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 24, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Tuesday, 

February 24, 1981, at 12:00 noon, at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was 

a telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., 

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those 

participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon 1/, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Winn

(New York) 

(Kansas City) 
(Boston) 

(St Louis) 

(Cleveland)

Messrs. Boykin (Dallas), and Mayo (Chicago), Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black (Richmond), and Corrigan (Minneapolis), 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond 
and Minneapolis, respectively

Altmann, Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel 
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland), 
R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City), 
Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline, 

Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

1/ Left the meeting prior to the vote to adopt a modification of the domestic 

policy directive.



2/24/81

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic 
Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board 

of Governors 

Mr. Smoot (Philadelphia), First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis) Keran 
(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), Parthemos (Richmond), 
Scheld and Syron, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, San Francisco, 
Atlanta, Richmond, Chicago, and Boston, respectively 

Mrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago 

Mr. Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

With Mr. Roos dissenting, the Committee adopted the following 

modification of policy directive adopted on February 3, 1981: 

"In light of the relatively strong growth of M-2 and 
M-3 and the substantial easing recently in money market 
conditions, as well as uncertainties about the interpretation 
of the behavior of M-1, the Committee on February 24 agreed 
to accept some shortfall in growth of M-1A and M-1B from 
the specified rates in the domestic policy directive adopted 
on February 3 as consistent with developments in the 
aggregates generally and the objectives for the year." 

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 2 -


