














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 2-3, 1981 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 

D. C., starting on Monday, February 2, 1981, at 10:00 a.m. and continuing 

on Tuesday, February 3, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roos 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Boehne, Boykin, Mayo, and Timlen, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta, 
respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary 

Bernard, Assistant Secretary 

Petersen, General Counsel 

Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 

Mannion 1/, Assistant General Counsel 

Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis 2/, T. Davis, 
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended Monday session only.



2/2-3/81

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 

Open Market Account 

Mr. Allison 3/, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Enzler 3/, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lindsey 3/, Assistant Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beck and Simpson 3/, Senior Economists, Banking 
Section, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Johnson 3/, Economist, Govenment Finance Section, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board 

of Governors 

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, Fousek, Keran, Koch, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Dallas, Minneapolis, New York, San Francisco, 
Atlanta, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Mullineaux, Mrs. Nichols, and Mr. Siren, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Philadelphia, Chicago, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 18-19, 1980, were approved.  

The following actions took place on Tuesday, February 3, 1981.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period December 19, 1980, through February 2, 1981, were 

ratified.

3/ Attended part of Monday session.

- 2 -



2/2-3/81

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

December 19, 1980, through February 2, 1981, were ratified.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Committee adopted the following 

ranges for rates of growth in the monetary aggregates for the period from the 

fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981, abstracting from the 

impact of introduction of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis: M-1A, 3 to 

5-1/2 percent; M-1B, 3-1/2 to 6 percent; M-2, 6 to 9 percent; and M-3, 

6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 

percent.  

With Mrs. Teeters and Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that real GNP expanded substantially in the fourth quarter 

of 1980 and that prices on the average continued to rise 

rapidly. In December industrial production and nonfarm 

payroll employment expanded further, and the unemploy
ment rate was essentially unchanged at about 7-1/2 per

cent. Retail sales declined, however, following a 

sizable gain over the preceding six months. Housing 

starts were about unchanged for the third month. Over 

the last few months of 1980, the rise in the index of 
average hourly earnings was at about the rapid pace 

recorded earlier in the year.  

The weighted average value of the dollar in exchange 

markets has risen further over the past six weeks. The 

U.S. trade deficit in the final quarter of 1980 widened 

from the exceptionally low rate in the third quarter but 

remained substantially less than the rate in the first 

half.  

M-1A and M-1B declined sharply in December; in 

January, after adjustment of the actual figures for the 

estimated effects of shifts into NOW accounts, these 

aggregates recovered in part. Growth in M-2 slowed 

markedly in December but accelerated in January. Some

- 3 -



2/2-3/81

moderation of the expansion in commercial bank credit 
in December and early January was accompanied by stepped
up financing of nonfinancial businesses through issuance 
of commercial paper and longer-term debt instruments.  
Market interest rates have declined on balance from 
their highs of mid-December.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation, encourage economic recovery, and con
tribute to a sustainable pattern of international trans
actions. The Committee agreed that these objectives 
would be furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2,and M-3 
from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 
1981 within ranges of 3 to 5-1/2 percent, 3-1/2 to 6 
percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent 
respectively, abstracting from the impact of introduction 
of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis. The associated 
range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. These ranges 
will be reconsidered as conditions warrant.  

In the short-run the Committee seeks behavior of 
reserve aggregates consistent with growth in M-1A and 
M-1B from December to March at annual rates of 5 to 6 per
cent and in M-2 at a rate of about 8 percent, abstracting 

from the impact of flows into NOW accounts. These rates 
are associated with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 from 
the fourth quarter of 1980 to the first quarter of 1981 
at annual rates of about 2 percent, 2-3/4 percent, and 
7 percent respectively. It is recognized that shifts 
into NOW accounts will continue to distort measured 
growth in M-1A and M-1B to an unpredictable extent, and 
operational reserve paths will be developed in the light 
of evaluation of those distortions. If it appears 
during the period before the next meeting that fluc
tuations in the federal funds rate, taken over a period 
of time, within a range of 15 to 20 percent are likely 
to be inconsistent with the monetary and related reserve 
paths, the Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly 
to notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether 
the situation calls for supplementary instructions 
from the Committee.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, March 31, 1981, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-4-


