














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 24, 1982 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 24, 1982, at 9:45 a.m.

Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of 
Open Market Committee

Messrs. Boykin and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Parthemos, Prell, Truman, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered the meeting following the action to ratify System open market 

transactions in foreign currencies.

PRESENT:

the Federal



Messrs. Czerwinski and Smoot, First Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Philadelphia, 
respectively 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Fousek, Scheld, and Stern, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, New York, Chicago, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Burger, Cacy, and Soss, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, 
and New York, respectively 

Mr. Pearce, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meetings of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 30 - July 1, 1982, and 

July 15, 1982, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period July 1 through August 23, 1982, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, a special reciprocal currency arrangement with 

the Bank of Mexico of $325 million in addition to the regular $700 million 

arrangement specified in paragraph 2 of the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations was approved, effective August 28, 1982, for the period 

through August 23, 1983.

8/24/82 - 2 -



8/24/82

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

July 1 through August 23, 1982, were ratified.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
only a little further advance in real GNP in the current 
quarter, following a relatively small increase in the 
second quarter, while prices on the average are continuing 
to rise more slowly than in 1981. In July the nominal 
value of retail sales rose somewhat from a sharply reduced 

June level; housing starts increased substantially, though 
from a relatively low rate; and industrial production and 
nonfarm payroll employment were essentially unchanged.  
The unemployment raterose 0.3 percentage point to 9.8 
percent. Over the first seven months of the year the 
advance in the index of average hourly earnings was 

considerably less rapid than during 1981.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies, while fluctuating over a wide 
range, has changed little on balance since late June 
despite a sharp decline in U.S. interest rates relative 
to foreign rates. Demand for dollars appeared to reflect 
concern about economic and financial difficulties abroad.  
The U.S. foreign trade deficit in the second quarter was 
somewhat below the first-quarter deficit, with petroleum 
imports down substantially.  

Ml declined slightly in June and July, while growth of 
M2 moderated somewhat from its average pace earlier in the 
year. Business demands for credit, especially short-term 
credit, remained generally strong. Market interest rates 
have declined sharply since around midyear, reflecting 
a shift in market sentiment about the outlook for interest 
rates against the background of strains in financial 
markets, relatively weak economic indicators, and legis
lative action on the federal budget. The Federal Reserve 
discount rate was reduced in three steps from 12 percent 
to 10-1/2 percent during the period.

- 3 -



The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce 
inflation, promote a resumption of growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions. At its meeting in early 
February, the Committee had agreed that its objectives would 
be furthered by growth of M1, M2, and M3 from the fourth 
quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 within ranges 
of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 
9-1/2 percent respectively. The associated range for bank 
credit was 6 to 9 percent. The Committee began a review 
of these ranges at its meeting on June 30 - July 1, and 
at a meeting on July 15, it reaffirmed the targets for the 
year set in February. At the same time the Committee 
agreed that growth in the monetary and credit aggregates 
around the top of the indicated ranges would be acceptable 
in the light of the relatively low base period for the 
M1 target and other factors, and that it would tolerate 
for some period of time growth somewhat above the target 
range should unusual precautionary demands for money and 
liquidity be evident in the light of current economic un
certainties. The Committee also indicated that it was 
tentatively planning to continue the current ranges for 
1983 but that it would review that decision carefully 
in the light of developments over the remainder of 1982.  

In the short run, the Committee continues to seek behavior 
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from 
June to September at annual rates of about 5 percent and about 
9 percent respectively. Somewhat more rapid growth would be 
acceptable depending on evidence that economic and financial 
uncertainties are leading to exceptional liquidity demands 
and changes in financial asset holdings. The Chairman may 
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager 
for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives 
and related reserve paths during the period before the next 
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 7 to 11 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 5, 1982, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Assistant Secretary

8/24/82 -4-


