














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 29-30, 1982 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., beginning on Monday, March 29, 1982, at 4:00 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, March 30, 1982, at 9:45 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn

Chairman 
1/ Vice Chairman

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Mr. Martin, 2/ Vice Chairman designate, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 

Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, 3/ Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist

1/ Entered the meeting following the approval of the minutes of actions taken 
at the meeting on February 1-2, 1982.  

2/ Entered the meeting on Tuesday prior to the action to adopt the domestic 
policy directive.

3/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/29-30/82

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, Keran, Koch, 
Parthemos, Prell, Siegman, Truman, and Ziesel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Mullineaux, 
Scheld, and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, Kansas City, 
Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Sandberg, and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1982, had been received by 

the Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, with 
Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as 
alternate; 

Anthony M. Solomon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate;

- 2 -



3/29-30/82

Willis J. Winn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with 
Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as 
alternate; 

William F. Ford, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with 
Lawrence K. Roos, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 
as alternate; 

John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, with 
Roger Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 1983, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the 

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they 

would cease to have any official connection with the Federal Open Market 

Committee:

Paul A. Volcker 
Anthony M. Solomon 

Stephen H. Axilrod 
Murray Altmann 
Normand R. V. Bernard 
Nancy M. Steele 
Michael Bradfield 
James H. Oltman 
Robert E. Mannion 
James L. Kichline

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Staff Director 
Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Deputy Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Deputy General Counsel 
Assistant General Counsel 
Economist

John M. Davis, Richard G. Davis, 
Edward C. Ettin, Michael W. Keran, 
Donald L. Koch, James Parthemos, 
Michael J. Prell, Charles J. Siegman, 
Edwin M. Truman, Joseph S. Zeisel Associate Economists

- 3 -



3/29-30/82 - 4 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after 

February 28, 1983.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were selected 

to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of Manager for 

Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for Foreign 

Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the understanding 

that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently received that 
the selections indicated above were satisfactory to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations of the 

Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of reviewing such matters 

at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On February 17, 1982, certain continuing 
authorizations of the Committee listed below, had been dis
tributed by the Secretary with the advice that, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the Committee, they were being 
called to the Committee's attention before the March organi
zation meeting to give members an opportunity to raise any 
questions they had concerning them. Members were asked to 
so indicate if they wished to have any of the authorizations 
in question placed on the agenda for consideration at this 
meeting, and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to whom weekly 
reports on open market operations may be sent.



3/29-30/82

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolutions providing for continued operations of the 
Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 
during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

It was agreed that the authorization for the lending of Government 

securities from the System Open Market Account, contained in paragraph 3 of 

the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, should be retained.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be

- 5 -



3/29-30/82

increased or decreased by more than $3.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of 
goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 
aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable 
limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York (or, under special circumstances, such as when the 
New York Reserve Bank is closed, any other Federal Reserve Bank) (a) to 
lend to the Treasury such amounts of securities held in the System Open 
Market Account as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary 
accommodation of the Treasury, under such conditions as the Committee may 
specify; and (b) to purchase directly from the Treasury for renewable 
periods not to exceed thirty days, when authorized by the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant to an affirmative vote of 
not less than five members, for its own account (with discretion, in cases 
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more Federal

- 6 -



3/29-30/82

Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation 
of the Treasury, provided that the rate charged on such certificates shall 
be a rate of 1/4 of 1 percent below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York at the time of such purchases and provided that the total 
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve 
Banks shall not exceed $2 billion.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern
ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 
set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 
such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 
for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, 
subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in 
paragraph 1(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro
visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time:

- 7 -



3/29-30/82

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or foward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with the 

U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other international financial 
institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $8.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all 
foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi
tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:

- 8 -



3/29-30/82

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment 
return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 
adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 
transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 
exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 
arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 
the Committee.

- 9 -



3/29-30/82

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 
in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 
maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 
securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 
members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 
Manager for Foreign Operations for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 
of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 
of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

- 10 -



3/29-30/82

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 
countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 
for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 
Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 
States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 
and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 
IMF Article IV.

- 11 -



3/29-30/82 - 12 -

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 
net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair
man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.



3/29-30/82

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the agreement of 

January 17, 1977, to "warehouse" foreign currencies for the Exchange Stabi

lization Fund and for the Treasury on the terms agreed upon by the Committee 

at its meeting on March 18, 1980, with the understanding that the agreement 

would be subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 1-2, 1982, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

February 2 through March 29, 1982, were ratified.  

Secretary's note: All of the preceding actions were taken 
on Monday, March 29, 1982.  

With Messrs. Black and Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP declined appreciably further in the first quarter 
of 1982 but that final purchases were sustained and the 
contraction in activity moderated during the quarter; prices 
on the average rose much less rapidly than in the preceding 
quarter. In January weakness in activity was accentuated by

- 13 -



3/29-30/82 - 14 -

unusually severe weather, and in February the nominal value 
of retail sales rebounded while industrial production and 
nonfarm payroll employment recovered part of their January 
declines. The unemployment rate in February, at 8.8 percent, 
was unchanged from December. Although housing starts rose 
further in the first two months of the year, they remained 
at a depressed level. The rise in both the consumer price 
index and the producer price index for finished goods moderated 
substantially, and the advance in the index of average hourly 
earnings on the average remained at a reduced pace.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies continued to rise strongly in February 
and March; foreign monetary authorities intervened on a sub
stantial scale to resist the depreciation of their currencies.  
The U.S. foreign trade deficit in January and February on the 
average was somewhat less than the fourth-quarter rate.  

M1 declined in February, after three months of rapid growth, 
and then increased moderately in early March. Growth of M2 slowed 
appreciably in February, owing to a slackening of the expansion 
in the nontransaction component as well as to the decline in M1.  
Short-term market interest rates and bond yields on balance have 
declined since early February, and mortgage interest rates have 
edged down.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary 
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, 
promote a resumption of growth in output on a sustainable basis, 
and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international trans
actions. At its meeting in early February, the Committee agreed 
that its objectives would be furthered by growth of M1, M2, and 
M3 from the fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 
within ranges of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent respectively. The associated range for 
bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from March to 
June at annual rates of about 3 percent and 8 percent respectively.  
The Committee also noted that deviations from these targets should 
be evaluated in light of the probability that M2 would be less 
affected over the period than M1 by deposit shifts related to the 
tax date and by changes in the relative importance of NOW accounts 
as a savings vehicle. Some shortfall in growth of M1, consistent



3/29-30/82 - 15 -

with progress toward the upper part of the range for the year as 
a whole, would be acceptable in the context of appreciably reduced 
pressures in the money market and relative strength of other 
aggregates. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation 
if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit 
of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the 
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a 
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 12 to 16 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 18, 1982, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's Note: On April 13-14, 1982, by unanimous vote, 
(with Mr. Roos voting as alternate for Mr. Ford), Committee 
members voted to increase from $3 billion to $5 billion the 
limit on changes between Committee meetings in System Account 
holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities 
specified in paragraph 1(a) of the authorization for domestic 
open market operations, effective immediately, for the period 
ending with the close of business on May 18, 1982.  

Secretary's Note: On April 26-27, 1982, by unanimous vote, 
(with Messrs. Roos and Guffey voting as alternates for 
Messrs. Ford and Balles, respectively, and Mr. Gramley 
absent), Committee members voted to approve an additional 
increase of $1 billion, to $6 billion, in the intermeeting 
limit on changes in holding of U.S. government and federal 
agency securities.

Secretary


