














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 1-2, 1982 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 1, 1982, at 2:30 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, February 2, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen, and Winn, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, 1/ and Roos, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 

Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns, Ettin, 2/ Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans
actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.

2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



2/1-2/82

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. McIntosh, 1/ First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, 3/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Lindsey and Slifman, 3/ Assistant Directors, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Johnson, 3/ Economist, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Fousek, Keran, 1/ Koch, 
and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, New York, San 
Francisco, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Soss, and Syron, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 21-22, 1981, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

December 22, 1981, through February 1, 1982, were ratified.  

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans
actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.  

3/ Left the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policy directive 
and returned prior to the action to establish longer-run ranges.

- 2 -



2/1-2/82

With Mrs. Teeters dissenting, the Committee adopted the following 

ranges for rates of growth in the monetary aggregates for the period from the 

fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982: M1, 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 

percent; M2, 6 to 9 percent; and M3, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. The associated 

range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates that 
real GNP declined appreciably in the fourth quarter of 1981 
and that prices on the average rose much less rapidly than 
over the first three quarters of the year. In December 
industrial production and nonfarm payroll employment declined 
sharply for the third consecutive month, and the unemployment 
rate rose an additional 0.5 percentage point to 8.9 percent.  
The nominal value of retail sales increased somewhat further, 
but the level was still below the average for the third 
quarter. Although housing starts expanded, they remained 
at a depressed level. The rise in the index of average 
hourly earnings was considerably less rapid over the fourth 
quarter of 1981 than on the average earlier in the year.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies rose substantially during January; foreign 
monetary authorities intervened considerably to resist the 
depreciation of their currencies. In the fourth quarter the 
U.S. foreign trade deficit increased from the rate in the 
previous two quarters.  

Ml grew rapidly in December and January, reflecting 
in part rapid expansion in checkable deposits other than 
demand accounts. Growth of M2 also was substantial, owing 
to strength in the more liquid of the nontransaction com
ponents as well as in M1. Short-term market interest rates 
and bond yields on balance have risen further in recent 
weeks, and mortgage interest rates have also increased.



2/1-2/82

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce 
inflation, promote a resumption of growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions. The Committee agreed that 
its objectives would be furthered by growth of M1, M2, and 
M3 from the fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter 
of 1982 within ranges of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 
percent, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent respectively. The 
associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

The Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregates 
over the balance of the quarter consistent with bringing 
M1 and M2 over time into their longer-run target ranges 
for the year. Taking account of the recent surge in 
growth of M1, the Committee seeks no further growth in 
M1 for the January-to-March period and growth in M2 at 
an annual rate of around 8 percent. Some decline in M1 
would be associated with more rapid attainment of the 
longer-run range and would be acceptable in the context 
of reduced pressure in the money market. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the 
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 12 to 16 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, March 30, 1982, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


