














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

June 30 - July 1, 1982 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Wednesday, June 30, 1982, at 3:10 p.m., 

and continuing on Thursday, July 1, 1982, at 9:15 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Keehn, Alternate for Mrs. Horn 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion,1/ Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. R. Davis, Keran, Koch, Siegman, Truman 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/ Attended Thursday session only.



6/30 - 7/1/82

Mr. O'Brien, Deputy Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Lindsey and Slifman, Assistant Directors, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Johnson, Economist, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, 
Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, 
Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, and Mr. Soss, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, 
and New York, respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Erceg, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Ms. Meulendyke, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 18, 1982, were approved.  

With Messrs. Black and Ford, Mrs. Teeters, and Mr. Wallich dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until other

wise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:

- 2 -



6/30 - 7/1/82

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP changed little in the second quarter, after 
the appreciable further decline in the first quarter, as 
business inventory liquidation moderated from an extra
ordinary rate. In May the nominal value of retail sales 
continued to pick up, while industrial production declined 
only a little further and nonfarm payroll employment was 
essentially unchanged. The unemployment rate edged up 
0.1 percentage point to 9.5 percent. Housing starts rose 
appreciably from a depressed level.  

The price index for gross domestic business product 
appears to have risen at a relatively slow rate in the 
second quarter. Over the first five months of this year 
the producer price index for finished goods was virtually 
stable, and the advance in the index of average hourly 
earnings remained at a reduced pace. The consumer price 
index rose sharply in May, after a small net increase over 
the preceding four months.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has risen sharply over the past month, 
reaching its highest level since early 1971, in response 
to a rise in U.S. interest rates relative to foreign rates 
as well as to hostilities in the Middle East. The U.S.  
foreign trade deficit in the first five months of 1982 was 
at a rate substantially less than in the fourth quarter of 
last year, as imports declined more than exports.  

M1 declined somewhat in May, after its sharp rise in 
April, while growth of M2 remained substantial. Business 
demands for credit, especially short-term credit, were 
exceptionally strong. Short-term market interest rates 
and bond yields generally have risen since late May, and 
mortgage interest rates have increased.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce 
inflation, promote a resumption of growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable pattern 
of international transactions. At its meeting in early 
February, the Committee agreed that its objectives would 
be furthered by growth of M1, M2, and M3 from the fourth 
quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 within ranges 
of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 
9-1/2 percent respectively. The associated range for bank 
credit was 6 to 9 percent. These ranges were under review 
at this meeting.

- 3 -



6/30 - 7/1/82

In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from June to 
September at annual rates of about 5 percent and about 9 per
cent respectively. Somewhat more rapid growth would be 
acceptable depending on evidence that economic and financial 
uncertainties are leading to exceptional liquidity demands 
and changes in financial asset holdings. It was also noted 
that seasonal uncertainties, together with increased social 
security payments and the initial impact of the tax cut on 
cash balances, might lead to a temporary bulge in the monetary 
aggregates, particularly M1. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for 
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives 
and related reserve paths during the period before the next 
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 10 to 15 percent.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies and transactions in Government securities, agency obligations, 

and bankers acceptances during the period May 18 through June 30, 1982, 

were ratified.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 24, 1982, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-4-


