














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 5, 1982 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 5, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 

Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 1/ 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. Ettin, J. Davis, R. Davis, Koch, Prell, Siegman, 
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Entered the meeting following approval of minutes.



10/5/82

Mr. James McIntosh, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Mullineaux, Scheld, 
and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of St. Louis, Dallas, Kansas City, Philadelphia, 
Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Bisignano, and Soss, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, San Francisco, 
and New York, respectively 

Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer and Senior Economist, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 24, 1982, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period August 24, through October 4, 1982, were 

ratified.  

Renewal for a further period of three months of a drawing on the 

System by the Bank of Mexico maturing on November 4, 1982, was noted without 

objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

August 24, through October 4, 1982, were ratified.

- 2 -



10/5/82

With Messrs. Black and Ford and Mrs. Horn dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account 

in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP changed little in the third quarter, 
following a small increase in the second quarter, 
while prices on the average continued to rise more 
slowly than in 1981. In August the nominal value of 
retail sales fell back to the sharply reduced June 
level, while industrial production and nonfarm payroll 
employment also declined. Housing starts fell, re
versing much of the substantial July increase. The 
unemployment rate was unchanged at 9.8 percent in 
August, but claims for unemployment insurance have 
risen further in recent weeks and there are indica
tions of some further decline in production. In 
recent months the advance in the index of average 
hourly earnings has remained considerably less rapid 
than during 1981.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has risen strongly further 
over the past month, reflecting in part a continuing 
concern in the market about economic and financial 
difficulties abroad and also some firming of U.S.  
interest rates relative to foreign rates after a 
considerable drop earlier. The U.S. merchandise 
trade deficit rose sharply in August and on average 
in July and August the deficit rate was well above 
that for the first half.  

After three months of weakness, M1 grew rapidly in 
August and September; growth in M2 accelerated in August 
from an already rapid pace but appears to have slowed 
markedly in September. Following large declines over 
the preceding two months, short-term market interest 
rates have risen somewhat on balance since late August, 
while bond yields and mortgage rates have continued to 
decline. The Federal Reserve discount rate was reduced

- 3 -



10/5/82

from 10-1/2 percent to 10 percent in late August. Mean
while, reflecting some well-publicized problems in recent 
months of a few banks here and abroad and the financing 
difficulties of Mexico, a more cautious atmosphere in 
private credit markets has been reflected in wider spreads 
between U.S. government and some private credit instruments.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation, promote a resumption of growth in 
output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions. In 
July, the Committee agreed that these objectives would 
be furthered by reaffirming the monetary growth ranges 
for the period from the fourth quarter of 1981 to the 
fourth quarter of 1982 that it had set at the February 
meeting. These ranges were 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for 
M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent 
for M3. The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 
9 percent. The Committee agreed that growth in the 
monetary and credit aggregates around the top of the 
indicated ranges would be acceptable in the light of 
the relatively low base period for the M1 target and 
other factors, and that it would tolerate for some 
period of time growth somewhat above the target range 
should unusual precautionary demands for money and 
liquidity be evident in the light of current economic 
uncertainties. The Committee also indicated that it was 
tentatively planning to continue the current ranges for 
1983 but that it would review that decision carefully 
in the light of developments over the remainder of 1982.  

Specification of the behavior of M1 over the balance 
of the year is subject to unusually great uncertainties 
because it will be substantially affected by special 
circumstances -- in the very near term by reinvestment 
of funds from maturing all savers certificates and later 
by the public's response to the new account directly 
competitive with money market funds mandated by recent 
legislation. The probable difficulties in interpretation 
of M1 during the period suggest much less than usual weight 
be placed on movements in that aggregate during the current 
quarter. These developments are expected to affect M2 and 
other broader aggregates to a much smaller extent.

-4-



10/5/82

In all the circumstances, the Committee seeks to maintain 
expansion in bank reserves needed for an orderly and sustained 
flow of money and credit, consistent with growth of M2 (and M3) 
in a range of around 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent at an annual rate 
from September to December, and taking account of the desir
ability of somewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets 
in the light of current economic conditions. Somewhat slower 
growth, bringing those aggregates around the upper part of the 
ranges set for the year, would be acceptable and desirable 
in a context of declining interest rates. Should economic 
and financial uncertainties lead to exceptional liquidity 
demands, somewhat more rapid growth in the broader aggregates 
would be tolerated. The Chairman may call for Committee con
sultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely to 
be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside 
a range of 7 to 10-1/2 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, November 16, 1982, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-5-


