














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 18, 1982 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 18, 1982, at 9:15 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 1/ Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Mr. Timlen, Alternate for Mr. Solomon 

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, and Boykin, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, Ettin, Keran, Koch, Prell, 
Siegman, and Ziesel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, 2/ Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Left the meeting prior to the approval of the minutes of actions and returned 
prior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions in Government 
securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances.  

2/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System open market 
transactions in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankers 
acceptances.



5/18/82

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Robinson,3/ Assistant Director, Division of Federal 

Reserve Bank Operations, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Fousek, 
Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, and Mr. Soss, 4/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, 
and New York, respectively 

Ms. Meulendyke, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Secretary's Note: Advices had been received of the 

election by the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland 
and Chicago of Mrs. Karen N. Horn, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as member of the 
Federal Open Market Committee to represent those 
Federal Reserve Banks for the balance of the one-year 
term expiring February 28, 1983; and it appeared that 

Mrs. Horn was legally qualified to serve. Mrs. Horn 
had executed her oath of office prior to this meeting.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 29-30, 1982, were approved.  

3/ Left the meeting following the acceptance of the report of examination 
of the System open market account.  

4/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policy 
directive.

- 2 -



5/18/82

The report of examination of the System open market account, made 

by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as of the close 

of business May 29, 1981, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

March 30 through May 17, 1982, were ratified.  

With Mrs. Teeters dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that 
real GNP will change little in the current quarter after the 
appreciable further decline in the first quarter, as business 
inventory liquidation moderates from last quarter's extra
ordinary rate. In April the nominal value of retail sales 
expanded, while industrial production and nonfarm payroll 
employment continued to decline. The unemployment rate rose 
0.4 percentage point to 9.4 percent. Although housing starts 
edged up in March for the fifth consecutive month, they remained 
at a depressed level. The rate of increase in prices on the 
average appears to be slowing somewhat further in the current 
quarter; so far this year both the consumer price index and 
the producer price index for finished goods have risen little 
on balance, and the advance in the index of average hourly 
earnings has remained at a reduced pace.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies, after rising somewhat further in early 
April, has fallen sharply over the past month, reflecting 
in part a decline in U.S. interest rates relative to foreign 
rates and market expectations of further declines. The U.S.  
foreign trade deficit in the first quarter was one-third less 
than in the preceding quarter.

- 3 -



5/18/82

M1 increased sharply in April, but the expansion was 
concentrated in the first half of the month and was largely 
retraced later. Growth of M2 moderated somewhat, owing to a 
slackening of the expansion in the nontransaction component.  
Short-term market interest rates and bond yields on balance 
have declined since the end of March, and mortgage interest 
rates have edged down further.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary 
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, 
promote a resumption of growth in output on a sustainable basis, 
and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international trans
actions. At its meeting in early February, the Committee agreed 
that its objectives would be furthered by growth of M1, M2, and 
M3 from the fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 
within ranges of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent respectively. The associated range for 
bank credit was 6 to 9 percent.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve 
aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from March to 
June at annual rates of about 3 percent and 8 percent respectively.  
The Committee also noted that deviations from these targets should 
be evaluated in light of changes in the relative importance of NOW 
accounts as a savings vehicle. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths 
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 10 to 15 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Thursday, July 1, 1982, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

- 4 -


