














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 20-21, 1982

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 20, 1982, at 3:00 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, December 21, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.

Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 

Mrs. Steele,1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman,1/ Deputy General Counsel 

Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Ettin,1/ J. Davis,1/ R. Davis,1/ Keran,1/ Koch,1/ 
Prell,1/ Siegman,1/ Truman, and Zeisel,1/ Associate 
Economists 

1/ Left the meeting prior to discussion and adoption of domestic policy 
directive.

PRESENT:



12/20-21/82

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross,1/ Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,2/ Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn,2/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey,2/ Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach,2/ Burns,2/ T. Davis,2/ Eisenmenger,2/ 
Mullineaux,2/ Scheld,2/ and Stern,2/ Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, 
Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus,2/ and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond, and New York 

Ms. Meulendyke,2/ Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 16, 1982, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

November 16 through December 20, 1982, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise to $4 billion the dollar limit on 

intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S. Government and Federal 

agency securities, effective immediately, for the period through the close of 

business on February 9, 1983.  

1/ Entered the meeting following the action to ratify transactions in 
the System open market account.  

2/ Left the meeting prior to discussion and adoption of domestic policy 
directive.



12/20-21/82

Secretary's Note: All of the preceding actions were taken 
on Monday, December 20, 1982.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 16 through December 21, 1982, were 

ratified.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of drawings on the 

System by the Bank of Mexico maturing January 7 through February 17, 1983, 

was noted without objection.  

With Messrs. Black and Ford dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP declined in the fourth quarter, although 
final sales apparently were maintained, and that the 
rise in prices remained much less rapid than in 1981.  
Retail sales and housing activity have strengthened in 
recent months, but business fixed investment apparently 
has weakened further and efforts to reduce inventories 
have continued. In November industrial production and 
nonfarm payroll employment declined further, and the 
unemployment rate rose 0.4 percentage point to 10.8 
percent. Initial claims for unemployment insurance, 
although down from the early autumn peaks, have 
remained relatively high. In recent months the 
advance in the index of average hourly earnings has 
slowed appreciably further.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has declined from peaks reached 
in early November. The U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
rose sharply further in October.

- 3 -



12/20-21/82

Growth of M1 has remained rapid in recent months, 
while growth of M2 and M3 has continued at about or 
somewhat below the rates of earlier in the year. On 
balance short-term market interest rates have declined 
since mid-November, while bond yields have risen somewhat 
in response to unusually heavy borrowing by businesses 
and governments; mortgage rates have edged down further.  
The Federal Reserve announced reductions in the discount 
rate from 9-1/2 percent to 9 percent on November 19 and 
to 8-1/2 percent on December 13.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation, promote a resumption of growth in 
output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions. In 
July, the Committee agreed that these objectives would 
be furthered by reaffirming the monetary growth ranges 
for the period from the fourth quarter of 1981 to the 
fourth quarter of 1982 that it had set at the February 
meeting. These ranges were 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for 
M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent 
for M3. The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 
9 percent. The Committee agreed that growth in the 
monetary and credit aggregates around the top of the 
indicated ranges would be acceptable in the light of 
the relatively low base period for the M1 target and 
other factors, and that it would tolerate for some 
period of time growth somewhat above the target should 
unusual precautionary demands for money and liquidity 
be evident in the light of current economic uncertain
ties. The Committee had also earlier indicated that it 
was tentatively planning to continue the current ranges 
for 1983, but it will review that decision carefully at 
its February 1983 meeting in light of economic develop
ments and institutional changes associated with the new 
deposit accounts authorized by the Depository Institutions 
Deregulation Committee.  

Specification of the behavior of M1 over the months 
ahead remains subject to substantial uncertainty because 
of special circumstances in connection with the public's 
response to the new deposit accounts available at deposi
tory institutions. The difficulties in interpretation of 
M1 continue to suggest that much less than usual weight 
be placed on movements in that aggregate during the coming 
quarter. The institutional changes also add a degree of 
uncertainty to the behavior of the broader monetary aggre
gates.

- 4 -



12/20-21/82 - 5 

In all the circumstances, the Committee seeks to 
maintain expansion in bank reserves consistent with 
growth of M2 of around 9-1/2 percent at an annual rate, 
and of M3 at about an 8 percent rate, from December to 
March, allowing in the case of M2 for modest shifting 
into the new money market accounts from large-denomination 
CD's or market instruments. The Committee indicated that 
greater growth would be acceptable if analysis of incoming 
data and other evidence from bank and market reports in
dicate that the new money market accounts are generating 
more substantial shifts of funds into broader aggregates 
from market instruments. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for 
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objec
tives and related reserve paths during the period before 
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a 
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 
to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday and Wednesday, February 8-9, 1983, beginning in the 

afternoon on Tuesday, February 8, 1983.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's Note: On January 25-26, 1983, by unanimous 
vote, Committee members voted to approve an additional 
increase of $1.5 billion, to $5.5 billion, in the limit 
on changes between Committee meetings in System Account 
holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities 
specified in paragraph 1(a) of the authorization for 
domestic open market operations, effective immediately, 
for the period ending with the close of business on 
February 9, 1983.

Secretary


