














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

July 15, 1982 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on 

Thursday, July 15, 1982. This was a telephone conference meeting, and 

each individual was in Washington, D. C., except as otherwise indicated 

in parentheses in the following list of those participating.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman (New York) 
Mr. Balles (San Francisco) 
Mr. Black (Richmond) 
Mr. Ford (Atlanta) 
Mrs. Horn (Cleveland) 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. Teeters 

Messrs. Guffey (Kansas City), Keehn (Chicago), Roos (St. Louis), 
and Timlen (New York), Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Boykin (Dallas), and Corrigan 
(Minneapolis), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director 
Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis (Cleveland), Keran (San Francisco), Koch 
(Atlanta), Prell, Siegman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Cross (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



7/15/82

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. McIntosh (Boston), First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston 

Messrs. T. Davis (Kansas City), Eisenmenger (Boston), 
and Stern (Minneapolis), Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus (Richmond), Burger (St. Louis), 
Nichols (Chicago), and Soss, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
Chicago, and New York, respectively 

Mr. Lang (Philadelphia), Research Officer, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Pearce (Dallas), Assistant Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas 

With Mrs. Teeters dissenting, the Committee reaffirmed the following 

ranges for growth of the monetary aggregates over the year from the fourth 

quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 that it had adopted in early 

February: for M1, 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent; for M2, 6 to 9 percent; and for M3, 

6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 per

cent. At the same time, the Committee agreed that growth in the monetary and 

credit aggregates around the top of the indicated ranges would be acceptable 

in the light of the relatively low base period for the M1 target and other 

factors, and that it would tolerate for some period of time growth somewhat 

above the target range should unusual precautionary demands for for money 

and liquidity be evident in the light of current economic uncertainties.



7/15/82

By unanimous vote, the Committee indicated that for 1983 it 

was tentatively planning to continue the current ranges for 1982, but 

would review that decision carefully in the light of developments over 

the remainder of 1982.  

Secretary's note: Shortly afterwards, Messrs. Gramley, Rice, 
and Wallich, who had been unable to attend this meeting but 
who had been present for the main discussion of the longer-run 
ranges for monetary growth held at the meeting on June 30 
July 1, 1982, associated themselves with the Committee in its 
actions with respect to the ranges for both 1982 and 1983.  

Following the Committee's actions, the next to last paragraph of 

the domestic policy directive adopted at its meeting on June 30-July 1 read 

as follows: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation, promote a resumption of growth in 
output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions.  
At its meeting in early February, the Committee had 
agreed that its objectives would be furthered by 
growth of M1, M2, and M3 from the fourth quarter of 
1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982 within ranges of 
2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6-1/2 to 
9-1/2 percent respectively. The associated range for 
bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. The Committee began 
a review of these ranges at its meeting on June 30
July 1, and at a meeting on July 15, it reaffirmed the 
targets for the year set in February. At the same 
time the Committee agreed that growth in the monetary 
and credit aggregates around the top of the indicated 
ranges would be acceptable in the light of the rela
tively low base period for the M1 target and other 
factors, and that it would tolerate for some period 
of time growth somewhat above the target range should 
unusual precautionary demands for money and liquidity 
be evident in the light of current economic uncertain
ties. The Committee also indicated it was tentatively 
planning to continue the current ranges for 1983, but 
would review that decision carefully in the light of 
developments over the remainder of 1982.

-3-



7/15/82 -4

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market 

Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 24, 1982, at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


