














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 23, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 23, 1983, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roberts 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Eisenmenger, Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



8/23/83

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, Parthemos, 
and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, 
Philadelphia, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Burger, and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, and New York, respectively 

Ms. Clarkin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on July 12-13, 1983, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period July 13 through August 22, 1983, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

July 13 through August 22, 1983, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



8/23/83

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
continued rapid growth in real GNP in the current 
quarter. Industrial production increased sharply in 
July following large gains in the second quarter.  
Nonfarm payroll employment also rose substantially 
further in July and the civilian unemployment rate 
declined 1/2 percentage point to 9.5 percent. After 
rising sharply in the spring, retail sales have 
leveled off recently. Housing starts edged down 
over the past two months but permits continued to 
rise. Recent data on new orders and shipments on 
average continued to indicate strength in the demand 
for business equipment. In July, information on 
producer and consumer prices and the index of 
average hourly earnings was consistent with earlier 
indications of a considerable moderation in the 
rate of inflation.  

Growth in the broader monetary aggregates slowed 
substantially in July, bringing M2 to a level near the 
midpoint of the Committee's range for 1983 and M3 to 
a level somewhat below the upper limit of its range.  
Growth in M1 decelerated considerably from.its May
June pace, but its level remained above the Committee's 
monitoring range for the year. Interest rates rose 
appreciably through much of the intermeeting period 
but recently market rates have retraced most of their 
rise.  

In part reflecting the course of U.S. interest 
rates, the weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies rose substantially further in 
July and early August, but the rise was followed by a 
subsequent decline that reversed most of the earlier 
increase. The U.S. foreign trade deficit was smaller 
in June than in May, but the deficit in the second 
quarter was much larger than in the first as imports 
rose while exports were essentially unchanged.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At its meeting 
in July the Committee reconsidered the growth ranges 
for monetary and credit aggregates established earlier 
for 1983 in furtherance of these objectives and set 
tentative ranges for 1984. The Committee recognized 
that the relationships between such ranges and ultimate



8/23/83 -4

economic goals have become less predictable; that the 
impact of new deposit accounts on growth of the monetary 

aggregates cannot be determined with a high degree of 
confidence; and that the availability of interest on 
large portions of transaction accounts may be reflected 
in some changes in the historical trends in velocity.  

Against this background, the Committee at its July 
meeting reaffirmed the following growth ranges for the 
broader aggregates: for the period from February-March 
of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 7 to 10 percent 
at an annual rate for M2; and for the period from the 
fourth quarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The Committee also 
agreed on tentative growth ranges for the period from 
the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 
1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent 
for M3. The Committee considered that growth in Ml in 
a range of 5 to 9 percent from the second quarter of 
1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, and in a range of 
4 to 8 percent from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the 
fourth quarter of 1984 would be consistent with the 
ranges for the broader aggregates. The associated 
range for total domestic nonfinancial debt was re
affirmed at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent for 1983 and 
tentatively set at 8 to 11 percent for 1984.  

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would continue to be placed on the 
behavior of the broader monetary aggregates. The behavior 
of M1 and total domestic nonfinancial debt will be monitored, 
with the degree of weight placed on M1 over time dependent 
on evidence that velocity characteristics are resuming more 
predictable patterns. The Committee understood that policy 
implementation would involve continuing appraisal of the 
relationships between the various measures of money and 
credit and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions 
in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.  

The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain the 
existing degree of reserve restraint. The action is 
expected to be associated with growth of M2 and M3 at 
annual rates of around 8 percent from June to September, 
consistent with the targets established for these aggre
gates for the year. Depending on evidence about the 
strength of economic recovery and other factors bearing 
on the business and inflation outlook, lesser restraint 
would be acceptable in the context of a significant 
shortfall in growth of the aggregates from current ex
pectations, while somewhat greater restraint would be



8/23/83

acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly.  
The Committee anticipates that a deceleration in M1 
growth to an annual rate of around 7 percent from June 
to September will be consistent with its third-quarter 
objectives for the broader aggregates, and that expansion 
in total domestic nonfinancial debt would remain within 
the range established for the year. The Chairman may 
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during 
the period before the next meeting is likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, October 4, 1983.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


