














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 28-29, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., beginning on Monday, March 28, 1983, at 3:00 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, March 29, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roberts 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Alternate

Messrs. Black, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin, 
Prell, Scheld, Siegman, 1/ and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Attended Monday session only.



3/28-29/83

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, 1/ Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors

Mr. Sims, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, Philadelphia, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Richmond and New York 

Ms. Joan Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1983, had been received by 

the Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, with 
Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, as alternate; 

Anthony M. Solomon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate;

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



3/28-29/83

Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with 
Karen N. Horn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 
as alternate; 

Theodore H. Roberts, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, with 
Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as 
alternate; 

Roger Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, with 
E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
as alternate; 

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 1984, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the 

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they 

would cease to have any official connection with the Federal Open Market 

Committee:

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Stephen H. Axilrod 
Normand R. V. Bernard 
Nancy M. Steele 
Michael Bradfield 
James H. Oltman 
James L. Kichline 
Edwin M. Truman 

Anatol Balbach, Richard G. Davis, 
Thomas E. Davis, Robert Eisenmenger, 
Edward C. Ettin, Michael J. Prell, 
Charles J. Siegman, Karl A. Scheld, 
Joseph S. Zeisel

Staff Director and Secretary 
Assistant Secretary 
Deputy Assistant Secretary 
General Counsel 
Deputy General Counsel 
Economist 
Economist (International)

Associate Economists

Paul A. Volcker 
Anthony M. Solomon

-3-



3/28-29/83

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after 

February 29, 1984.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were selected 

to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of Manager for 

Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for Foreign 

Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the understanding 

that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently received that 

the selections indicated above were satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations of the 

Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of reviewing such matters 

at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On March 11, 1983, certain continuing 

authorizations of the Committee listed below had been 
distributed by the Assistant Secretary with the advice 

that, in accordance with procedures approved by the 

Committee, they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March organization meeting to give 

members an opportunity to raise any questions they had 

concerning them. It was noted that the Chairman planned 
to place on the agenda consideration of an amendment to 

the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations 
and conforming admendments to the Resolution of the FOMC 
authorizing certain actions by Federal Reserve Banks 

during an emergency and the Regulation relating to Open 

Market Operations of Federal Reserve Banks. Members 

were asked to indicate if they wished to have any of 

the other authorizations in question placed on the 

agenda for consideration at this meeting, and no such 
requests were received.



3/28-29/83

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. List of Treasury Department officials to whom weekly 
reports on open market operations may be sent.  

3. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal Reserve 
Bank as agent to operate the System Account in case 
the New York Bank is unable to function.  

4. Resolution of FOMC to provide for the continued operation 
of the Committee during an emergency and Resolution of 
FOMC authorizing certain actions by Federal Reserve 
Banks during an emergency.  

5. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

6. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

7. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

8. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 28, 1983 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open market 
at home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with 
the U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other international financial 
institutions:



3/28-29/83

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $8.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all 
foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi
tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:



3/28-29/83

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 

Regular 700 
Special 325 

Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment 
return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 
adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 
transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 
exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 
arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 
the Committee.



3/28-29/83

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 
in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 
maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 
securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 
members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 
Manager for Foreign Operations, for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 
of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 
of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

-8-



3/28-29/83 -9

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
Reaffirmed March 28, 1983 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 
countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 
for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 
Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 
States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 
and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 
IMF Article IV.



3/28-29/83

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 28, 1983 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 
net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair
man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available):

-10-



3/28-29/83

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the agreement of 

January 17, 1977, to "warehouse" foreign currencies for the Exchange 

Stabilization Fund and for the Treasury on the terms agreed upon by the 

Committee at its meeting on March 18, 1980, with the understanding that 

the agreement would be subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market 

Operations was amended to read as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
(As amended March 28, 1983) 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $4.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting;

-11-



3/28-29/83

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of 
goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 

expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 

aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 

authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable 
limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 

that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 

System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern

ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 
set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 
such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com

parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 
for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, 
subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in

-12-



3/28-29/83

paragraph 1(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 

securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 

between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro
visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, the Resolution of Federal Open Market Committee 

Authorizing Certain Actions by Federal Reserve Banks During an Emergency was 

amended to read as follows: 

RESOLUTION OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE AUTHORIZING 

CERTAIN ACTIONS BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS DURING AN EMERGENCY 

Amended March 28, 1983 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes each Federal 

Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions set forth below during war or 
defense emergency when such Federal Reserve Bank finds itself unable after 

reasonable efforts to be in communication with the Federal Open Market 

Committee (or with the Interim Committee acting in lieu of the Federal Open 
Market Committee) or when the Federal Open Market Committee (or such Interim 
Committee) is unable to function.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of economic conditions 
and the general credit situation then prevailing (after taking into account 

the possibility of providing necessary credit through advances secured by 
direct obligations of the United States under the last paragraph of section 
13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and 

sell obligations of the United States for its own account, either outright 
or under repurchase agreement, from and to banks, dealers or other holders 

of such obligations.  

(2) Such Federal Reserve Bank may engage in operations of the types 
specified in the Committee's authorization for System foreign currency 

operations when requested to do so by an authorized official of the U.S.  
Treasury Department; provided, however, that such Bank shall take all 
steps practicable at the time to insure as far as possible that, in light 

of the information available on other System foreign currency operations, 
its own operations do not result in the aggregate in breaching any of the 
several dollar limits specified in the authorization.  

Authority to take the actions set forth shall be effective only 

until such time as the Federal Reserve Bank is able again to establish 

communications with the Federal Open Market Committee (or the Interim 
Committee), and such Committee is then functioning.

-13-



3/28-29/83

By unanimous vote, the Regulation Relating to Open Market 

Operations of Federal Reserve Banks was amended to read as follows: 

REGULATION RELATING TO 
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS OF 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS 
Amended March 28, 1983 

SECTION 270.1--AUTHORITY 

This Part is issued by the Federal Open Market Committee (the "Committee") 
pursuant to authority conferred upon it by sections 12A and 14 of the Federal 
Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. Sections 263, 355).  

SECTION 270.2--DEFINITIONS 

(a) The term "obligations" means Government securities, U.S. agency 
securities, bankers' acceptances, bills of exchange, cable transfers, bonds, 
notes, warrants, debentures, and other obligations that Federal Reserve Banks 

are authorized by law to purchase and sell.  

(b) The term "Government securities" means direct obligations of the 

United States (i.e., U.S. bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, and 
Treasury bills) and obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest 
by the United States.  

(c) The term "U.S. agency securities" means obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States.  

(d) The term "System Open Market Account" means the obligation acquired 
pursuant to authorizations and directives issued by the Committee and held 
on behalf of all Federal Reserve Banks.  

SECTION 270.3--GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 

As required by section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act, the time, character, 
and volume of all purchases and sales of obligations in the open market by 
Federal Reserve Banks are governed with a view to accommodating commerce and 
business and with regard to their bearing upon the general credit situation 

of the country.

-14-



3/28-29/83

SECTION 270.4--TRANSACTIONS IN OBLIGATIONS 

(a) Each Federal Reserve Bank shall engage in open market operations 
under section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act only in accordance with this 
Part and with the authorizations and directives issued by the Committee 
from time to time, and no Reserve Bank shall decline to engage in open 
market operations as directed by the Committee.  

(b) Transactions for the System Open Market Account shall be executed 
by a Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee. The participations of 
the several Federal Reserve Banks in such Account and in the profits and 
losses on transactions for the Account shall be allocated in accordance with 
principles determined by the Committee from time to time.  

(c) In accordance with such limitations, terms, and conditions as are 
prescribed by law and in authorizations and directives issued by the Committee, 
the Reserve Bank selected by the Committee is authorized and directed-

(1) To buy and sell Government securities and U.S. agency securities 
in the open market for the System Open Market Account, and to exchange 
maturing securities with the issuer; 

(2) To buy and sell bankers' acceptances in the open market for 
its own account; 

(3) To buy Government securities, U.S. agency securities, and 
bankers' acceptances of the kinds described above, under agreements 
for repurchase of such obligations, in the open market for its own 
account; and 

(4) To buy and sell foreign currencies in the form of cable 
transfers in the open market for the System Open Market Account and 
to maintain for such Account reciprocal currency arrangements with 
foreign banks among those designated by the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of this chapter [Regulation 
N].  

(d) The Federal Reserve Banks are authorized and directed to engage in 
such other operations as the Committee may from time to time determine to be 
reasonably necessary to the effective conduct of open market operations and 
the effectuation of open market policies.

-15-



3/28-29/83

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 8-9, 1983, were approved.  

Renewal for further periods of three months of drawings on the System 

by the Bank of Mexico maturing April 9 through May 27, 1983, was noted without 

objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

February 9 through March 28, 1983, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: All of the above actions were taken on 
Monday, March 28, 1983.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP rose moderately in the first quarter, 
after a decline in the fourth quarter; the turnaround 
reflects a considerable slowing in inventory liquidation.  
Private final sales apparently increased only slightly 
less than in the fourth quarter with housing activity 
strengthening further. Business fixed investment has 
remained weak. Nonfarm payroll employment rose on 
balance in January and February, after an extended 
period of declines; the civilian unemployment rate 
was unchanged in February at 10.4 percent. In early 
1983 the rise in average prices and the advance in 
the index of average hourly earnings have slowed 
further.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies rose somewhat on balance 
between early February and late March. The U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit declined marginally in 
January.  

M2 continued to grow at an exceptional rate in 
February and M3 also expanded at a rapid pace, but 
growth in both of the broader aggregates appears to 
be decelerating substantially in March. The decelera
tion reflects in part the marked slowing in growth of 
money market deposit accounts (MMDAs) in recent weeks 
and apparently also a moderation in the underlying

-16-



3/28-29/83

growth of these aggregates, abstracting from shifts 
from market instruments. M1 has expanded rapidly 
since late January, largely reflecting accelerated 
growth in NOW accounts. Growth in debt of domestic 
nonfinancial sectors appears to have been moderate 
in the first quarter. Short-term interest rates have 
risen somewhat since early February while long-term 
rates, including mortgage rates, have declined.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote a resumption of 
growth in output on a sustainable basis, and contri
bute to a sustainable pattern of international trans
actions. At its meeting in February the Committee 
established growth ranges for monetary and credit 
aggregates for 1983 in furtherance of these objectives.  
The Committee recognized that the relationships between 
such ranges and ultimate economic goals have been less 
predictable over the past year; that the current impact 
of new deposit accounts on growth rates of monetary 
aggregates cannot be determined with a high degree of 
confidence; and that the availability of interest on 
large portions of transaction accounts, declining 
inflation, and lower market rates of interest may be 
reflected in some changes in the historical trends in 
velocity. A substantial shift of funds into M2 from 
market instruments, including large certificates of 
deposit not included in M2, in association with the 
extraordinarily rapid build-up of money market deposit 
accounts, has distorted growth in that aggregate during 
the first quarter.  

In establishing growth ranges for the aggregates 
for 1983 against this background, the Committee felt 
that growth in M2 might be more appropriately measured 
after the period of highly aggressive marketing of 
money market deposit accounts has subsided. The 
Committee also felt that a somewhat wider range was 
appropriate for monitoring M1. Those growth ranges 
will be reviewed in the spring and altered, if appro
priate, in the light of evidence at that time.  

With these understandings, the Committee established 
the following growth ranges: for the period from February
March of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 7 to 10 per
cent at an annual rate for M2, taking into account the

-17-



3/28-29/83

probability of some residual shifting into that aggregate 
from non-M2 sources; and for the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 6-1/2 to 
9-1/2 percent for M3, which appeared to be less distorted 
by the new accounts. For the same period a tentative 
range of 4 to 8 percent was established for M1, assuming 
that Super NOW accounts would draw only modest amounts 
of funds from sources outside M1 and assuming that the 
authority to pay interest on transaction balances is not 
extended beyond presently eligible accounts. An associated 
range of growth for total domestic nonfinancial debt was 
estimated at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.  

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would be placed on behavior of the 
broader monetary aggregates, expecting that distortions in 
M2 from the initial adjustment to the new deposit accounts 
will abate. The behavior of M1 will be monitored, with 
the degree of weight placed on that aggregate over time 
dependent on evidence that velocity characteristics are 
resuming more predictable patterns. Debt expansion, while 
not directly targeted, will be evaluated in judging responses 
to the monetary aggregates. The Committee understood that 
policy implementation would involve continuing appraisal 
of the relationships between the various measures of money 
and credit and nominal GNP, including evaluation of con
ditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.  

For the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain 
generally the existing degree of restraint on reserve 
positions, anticipating that would be consistent with a 
slowing from March to June in growth of M2 and M3 to 
annual rates of about 9 and 8 percent, respectively.  
The Committee expects that M1 growth at an annual rate 
of about 6 to 7 percent would be consistent with its 
objectives for the broader aggregates. Lesser restraint 
would be acceptable in the context of more pronounced 
slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates relative 
to the paths implied by the long-term ranges (taking 
account of the distortions relating to the introduction 
of new accounts), or indications of a weakening in the 
pace of economic recovery. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for 
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objec
tives and related reserve paths during the period before 
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a 
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
6 to 10 percent.

-18-



3/28-29/83

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, May 24, 1983.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's note: On May 9-10, 1983, by unanimous vote, 
with Mr. Timlen voting as alternate for Mr. Solomon, 
Committee members approved a temporary increase from 
$4 billion to $5 billion in the limit on changes between 
Committee meetings in System Account holdings of U.S.  
government and federal agency securities specified in 
paragraph 1(a) of the authorization for domestic open 
market operations effective May 10 for the period ending 
with the close of business on May 24, 1983.

Secretary

-19-


