














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 12-13, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, July 12, 1983, at 2:30 p.m., 

and continuing on Wednesday, July 13, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 

Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 

Mr. Keehn 

Mr. Martin 

Mr. Morris 

Mr. Partee 

Mr. Rice 

Mr. Roberts 

Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele,1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman,1/ Deputy General Counsel 

Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach,1/ R. Davis,1/ T. Davis,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ 
Ettin,1/ Prell,1/ Scheld,1/ Siegman,1/ and Zeisel,1/ 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



7/12-13/83

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn,1/ Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey,1/ Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Jensen,1/ Economist, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Rosine,1/ Economist, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Burns,1/ J. Davis,1/ Keran,1/ Koch,1/ Mullineaux,1/ 
and Stern,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, 
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus,1/ Meek, and Soss, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, 
and New York, respectively 

Mr. McCurdy,1/ Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on May 24, 1983, were approved.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Wednesday session.  

Renewal for further periods through August 23, 1983, of drawings on 

the System by the Bank of Mexico maturing July 24 through August 17, 1983, 

was noted without objection.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

May 24 through July 12, 1983, were ratified.

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



7/12-13/83

With Mr. Morris dissenting, the Committee voted for the following 

longer-run policy: 

The Committee reaffirmed the longer-run ranges 
established earlier for growth in M2 and M3 for 1983.  
The Committee also agreed on tentative growth ranges 
for the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the 
fourth quarter of 1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 
and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The Committee considered that 
growth in M1 in a range of 5 to 9 percent from the second 
quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983 and in a 
range of 4 to 8 percent from the fourth quarter of 1983 
to the fourth quarter of 1984 would be consistent with 
the ranges for the broader aggregates. The associated 
range for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed 
at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent for 1983 and tentatively set 
at 8 to 11 percent for 1984.  

With Mrs. Teeters and Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The rapid growth in real GNP in the second quarter 
and other information reviewed at this meeting suggest 
that the economic recovery is proceeding at a strengthened 
pace. Expenditures on consumption and housing expanded 
substantially in the second quarter and businesses 
apparently began to add to inventories after a period 
of sharp liquidation. Nonfarm payroll employment rose 
considerably in May and June and the civilian unemploy
ment rate declined to 10.0 percent in June. Industrial 
production continued to rise markedly in May and partial 
data suggest a sizable gain in June. Data on new orders 
and shipments continued to indicate improvement in the 
demand for business equipment. In May housing starts 
increased substantially following small declines earlier 
and retail sales rose appreciably further. Average 
prices and the index of average hourly earnings have 
risen at a reduced pace in the first five months of 1983.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies rose substantially in late 
May and the first half of June and subsequently 
has fluctuated in a narrow range. Reflecting the 
strength of the U.S. economy and the persistent high

-3-



7/12-13/83

level of the dollar, the U.S. foreign trade deficit 
increased sharply in April-May from its reduced 
first-quarter rate; exports declined and both oil 
and nonoil imports rose.  

Strong growth in the broader aggregates in May 
and June raised M2 to a level somewhat above the mid
point of the Committee's range for 1983 and M3 to 
around the upper limit of its range. M1 grew very 
rapidly over both months and was well above its 
range for the year. Growth in debt of domestic 
nonfinancial sectors appears to have picked up in 
the second quarter. Interest rates have risen 
appreciably since early May.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At its meeting 
in February the Committee established growth ranges for 
monetary and credit aggregates for 1983 in furtherance of 
these objectives. The Committee recognized that the 
relationships between such ranges and ultimate economic 
goals have been less predictable over the past year; that 
the impact of new deposit accounts on growth ranges of 
monetary aggregates cannot be determined with a high 
degree of confidence; and that the availability of 
interest on large portions of transaction accounts, 
declining inflation, and lower market rates of interest 
may be reflected in some changes in the historical trends 
in velocity.  

In establishing growth ranges last February for the 
aggregates for 1983 against this background, the Committee 
felt that growth in M2 might be more appropriately measured 
after the period of highly aggressive marketing of money 
market deposit accounts had subsided. The Committee also 
felt that a somewhat wider range was appropriate for 
monitoring M1. With these understandings, the Committee 
established the following growth ranges: for the period 
from February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2, taking into 
account the probability of some residual shifting into 
that aggregate from non-M2 sources; and for the period from 
the fourth quarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3, which appeared to be less 
distorted by the new accounts. For the same period a 
tentative range of 4 to 8 percent was established for M1 
assuming that Super NOW accounts would draw only modest 
amounts of funds from sources outside M1 and assuming 
that the authority to pay interest on transaction balances



7/12-13/83

was not extended beyond presently eligible accounts. An 
associated range of growth for total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was estimated at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. These 

ranges were reviewed at the May meeting and left unchanged, 
pending further review in July.  

At this meeting, the Committee reaffirmed the longer-run 
ranges established earlier for growth in M2 and M3 for 1983.  
The Committee also agreed on tentative growth ranges for the 

period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter 
of 1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent 
for M3. The Committee considered that growth in M1 in a 
range of 5 to 9 percent from the second quarter of 1983 to 
the fourth quarter of 1983, and in a range of 4 to 8 percent 
from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 

1984 would be consistent with the ranges for the broader 
aggregates. The associated range for total domestic non
financial debt was reaffirmed at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent 

for 1983 and tentatively set at 8 to 11 percent for 1984.  

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 

that substantial weight would continue to be placed on the 
behavior of the broader monetary aggregates. The behavior 
of M1 and total domestic nonfinancial debt will be monitored, 
with the degree of weight placed on M1 over time dependent 
on evidence that velocity characteristics are resuming 
more predictable patterns. The Committee understood that 

policy implementation would involve continuing appraisal of 
the relationships between the various measures of money and 
credit and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions 
in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.  

The Committee seeks in the short run to increase 
slightly further the existing degree of reserve restraint.  
The action is expected to be associated with growth of 
M2 and M3 at annual rates of about 8-1/2 and 8 percent 
respectively from June to September, consistent with the 
targets established for these aggregates for the year.  
Depending on evidence about the strength of economic 
recovery and other factors bearing on the business and 
inflation outlook, lesser restraint would be acceptable 
in the context of a significant shortfall in growth of 
the aggregates from current expectations, while somewhat 
greater restraint would be acceptable should the aggregates 
expand more rapidly. The Committee anticipates that a 

deceleration in M1 growth to an annual rate of around 7 
percent from June to September will be consistent with 
its third-quarter objectives for the broader aggregates, 
and that expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt 
would remain within the range established for the year.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 

appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that

-5-



7/12-13/83

pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely 
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, August 23, 1983.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


