














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 4, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 4, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roberts 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell, 
Scheld, Siegman,1/ and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered the meeting after the action to approve the minutes of the 

August 23, 1983, meeting.



10/4/83 -2

Mr. Coyne,1/ Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff 

Director for Monetary and Financial Policy, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Forrestal, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, Philadelphia, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Broaddus, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond 

Mr. Pearce, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas 

Ms. Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on August 23, 1983, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

August 23 through October 3, 1983, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

1/ Entered the meeting after the action to ratify transactions in the System 
Open Market Account.



10/4/83

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

that real GNP continued to grow rapidly in the third 

quarter, although the rate of expansion moderated from 
that in the second quarter. Industrial production and 

employment increased appreciably further in August, 

following large gains in previous months, and the 
civilian unemployment rate remained at 9.5 percent.  

After rising sharply in the spring, growth in consumer 

spending has moderated substantially. Housing starts 
rose in August but permits turned down. Data on new 

orders and shipments generally continued to indicate 

strength in the demand for business equipment. Producer 
and consumer prices increased somewhat more in August 

than in other recent months, but over the first eight 

months of the year average prices and the index of 
average hourly earnings have risen more slowly than 

in 1982.  

After slowing substantially in July, growth in M2 

remained at a reduced pace over the August-September 

period, while expansion in M3 picked up. Through 
September M2 is estimated to be at a level in the 

lower portion of the Committee's range for 1983 and 

M3 in the upper portion of its range. Growth in M1 
decelerated considerably further in August-September 
and moved within the Committee's monitoring range for 

the second half of the year. Interest rates have 
declined somewhat since mid-August.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar, as 
measured by its weighted average value against major 

foreign currencies, has fluctuated within a relatively 

narrow range since mid-August. The U.S. foreign 
trade deficit rose substantially in July-August from 

the second-quarter rate, reflecting a further increase 

in imports of a broad range of goods.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 

monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 

a sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable 

pattern of international transactions. At its meeting 
in July the Committee reconsidered the growth ranges 

for monetary and credit aggregates established earlier 

for 1983 in furtherance of these objectives and set 

tentative ranges for 1984. The Committee recognized 

that the relationships between such ranges and ultimate



10/4/83

economic goals have become less predictable; that the 
impact of new deposit accounts on growth of the 
monetary aggregates cannot be determined with a high 
degree of confidence; and that the availability of 
interest on large portions of transaction accounts 
may be reflected in some changes in the historical 
trends in velocity.  

Against this background, the Committee at its 
July meeting reaffirmed the following growth ranges 
for the broader aggregates: for the period from 
February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2; and for 
the period from the fourth quarter of 1982 to the 
fourth quarter of 1983, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for 
M3. The Committee also agreed on tentative growth 
ranges for the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 

to the fourth quarter of 1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 
percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The 
Committee considered that growth in M1 in a range 
of 5 to 9 percent from the second quarter of 1983 
to the fourth quarter of 1983, and in a range of 
4 to 8 percent from the fourth quarter of 1983 to 
the fourth quarter of 1984, would be consistent with 
the ranges for the broader aggregates. The associated 
range for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed 
at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent for 1983 and tentatively set 
at 8 to 11 percent for 1984.  

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would continue to be placed on the 
behavior of the broader monetary aggregates. The behavior 
of M1 and total domestic nonfinancial debt will be monitored, 
with the degree of weight placed on M1 over time dependent 
on evidence that velocity characteristics are resuming more 
predictable patterns. The Committee understood that policy 
implementation would involve continuing appraisal of the 
relationships between the various measures of money and 
credit and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions 
in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.  

The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain the 
slightly lesser degree of reserve restraint sought in recent 
weeks. The action is expected to be associated with growth 
of M2 and M3 at annual rates of around 8-1/2 percent from 
September to December, consistent with the targets established 
for these aggregates for the year. Depending on evidence 

about the strength of economic recovery and other factors 
bearing on the business and inflation outlook, lesser



10/4/83

restraint would be acceptable in the context of a significant 
shortfall in growth of the aggregates from current expecta
tions, while somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable 
should the aggregates expand more rapidly. The Committee 
anticipates that M1 growth at an annual rate of around 7 
percent from September to December will be consistent with 
its fourth-quarter objectives for the broader aggregates, 
and that expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt 
would remain within the range established for the year.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely 
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, November 15, 1983.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


