














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 19-20, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 19, 1983, at 3:00 p.m., and 

continuing on Tuesday, December 20, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roberts 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Forrestal, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell, Siegman, 
Scheld, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



12/19-20/83

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff 

Director for Monetary and Financial Policy, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Koch, Mullineaux, Keran, and 
Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 

of Dallas, Cleveland, Atlanta, Philadelphia, San 
Francisco, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus and Burger, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond and St. Louis 

Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on November 14-15, 1983, were approved.  

The report of examination of the System open market account, made 

by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as of the close of 

business February 4, 1983, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 15 through December 19, 1983, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

November 15 through December 19, 1983, were ratified.



12/19-20/83

By unanimous vote, the Committee extended the temporary increase 

to $5 billion in the limit specified in paragraph 1(a) of the authorization 

for domestic open market operations for the intermeeting period beginning 

December 21, 1983.  

With Mr. Martin dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP has grown at a relatively rapid pace in 

the current quarter, although the rate of expansion 
appears to have moderated since the spring and summer.  
In November, industrial production and nonfarm payroll 
employment increased appreciably further and the civilian 
unemployment rate declined 0.4 percentage point to 8.4 
percent. Retail sales rose substantially in November 
following sizable gains in September and October.  
Housing starts increased in November to a level close 
to their third-quarter average. Recent data indicate 
continuing expansion in business capital spending.  
Producer prices were little changed on average in 
October and November, and consumer prices continued 

to increase in October at about the same pace as in 
other recent months. The index of average hourly 
earnings changed little in November after rising 
somewhat faster in September and October than in 
previous months; over the first eleven months of 
the year the index has risen more slowly than in 1982.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar has 
risen considerably further since mid-November against 
a trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies.  
In October the U.S. foreign trade deficit was markedly 
higher than in the third quarter, reflecting a sharp 

rise in imports.  

After slowing substantially over the summer months, 
growth in M2 and M3 strengthened in October and November.  
Ml continued to grow at a sluggish pace in November but 
increased substantially in early December. Through

-3-



12/19-20/83

November, M2 was at a level in the lower portion of the 
Committee's range for 1983, M3 was close to the upper 
limit of its range, and M1 was near the lower end of 
the Committee's monitoring range for the second half 
of the year. Most interest rates have risen somewhat 
since mid-November.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to a sustainable 
pattern of international transactions. At its meeting 
in July the Committee reconsidered the growth ranges 
for monetary and credit aggregates established earlier 
for 1983 in furtherance of these objectives and set 
tentative ranges for 1984. The Committee recognized 
that the relationships between such ranges and ultimate 
economic goals have become less predictable; that the 
impact of new deposit accounts on growth of monetary 
aggregates cannot be determined with a high degree 
of confidence; and that the availability of interest 
on large portions of transaction accounts may be 
reflected in some changes in the historical trends 
in velocity.  

Against this background, the Committee at its 
July meeting reaffirmed the following growth ranges 
for the broader aggregates: for the period from 
February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2; and for 
the period from the fourth quarter of 1982 to the 
fourth quarter of 1983, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for 
M3. The Committee also agreed on tentative growth 
ranges for the period from the fourth quarter of 
1983 to the fourth quarter of 1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 
percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The 
Committee considered that growth of M1 in a range 
of 5 to 9 percent from the second quarter of 1983 
to the fourth quarter of 1983, and in a range of 
4 to 8 percent from the fourth quarter of 1983 to 
the fourth quarter of 1984, would be consistent with 
the ranges for the broader aggregates. The associated 
range for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed 
at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent for 1983 and tentatively set 
at 8 to 11 percent for 1984.



12/19-20/83

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would continue to be placed on the 
behavior of the broader monetary aggregates. The behavior 
of M1 and total domestic nonfinancial debt will be monitored, 
with the degree of weight placed on M1 over time dependent 
on evidence that velocity characteristics are resuming 
more predictable patterns. The Committee understood that 
policy implementation would involve continuing appraisal 
of the relationships between the various measures of money 
and credit and nominal GNP, including evaluation of con
ditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.  

The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain at 
least the existing degree of reserve restraint. The 
action is expected to be associated with growth of M2 
and M3 at annual rates of around 8 percent from November 
to March. The Committee anticipates that M1 growth at 
an annual rate of around 6 percent from November to March 
will be consistent with its objectives for the broader 
aggregates, and that expansion in total domestic non
financial debt would continue at around its recent pace.  
Depending on evidence about the continuing strength of 
economic recovery and other factors bearing on the 
business and inflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint 
would be acceptable should the aggregates expand more 
rapidly. The Chairman may call for Committee consulta
tion if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related 
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting 
is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


