














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 8-9, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 8, 1983, at 2:30 p.m. and 

continuing on Wednesday, February 9, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Ford 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris 1/, and Roberts, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Axilrod, Staff Director 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield, General Counsel 
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Ettin, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Parthemos, 
Prell, Siegman, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate 
Economists 

1/ Entered the meeting following the action to approve minutes for the 
December 20-21, 1982, meeting.



2/8-9/83

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Dooley, Assistant Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Scanlon 1/, Senior Economist, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger 2/, 
Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Messrs. Meek and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 20-21, 1982, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

December 21 through February 8, 1983, were ratified.  

1/ Left the meeting following discussion of the Committee's longer-run 
objectives for monetary and credit aggregates.  

2/ Entered the meeting following the action to approve minutes for the 
December 20-21, 1982, meeting.



2/8-9/83

Renewal for further periods of three months of drawings on the 

System by the Bank of Mexico maturing February 20 through April 8, 1983, 

was noted without objection.  

With Messrs. Black, Ford, Mrs. Horn, and Mr. Wallich dissenting, 

the Committee established the following longer-run ranges for monetary 

growth: for the period from February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter 

of 1983, 7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2, taking into account the 

probability of some residual shifting into that aggregate from non-M2 sources; 

and for the period from the fourth quarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 

1983, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3, which appears to be less distorted by 

the new accounts. For the same period a tentative range of 4 to 8 percent 

has been established for monitoring M1, assuming that Super NOW accounts 

draw only modest amounts of funds from sources outside M1 and assuming that 

the authority to pay interest on transaction balances is not extended beyond 

presently eligible accounts. An associated range of growth for total domestic 

nonfinancial debt has been estimated at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.  

With Mr. Ford dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that real GNP declined in the fourth quarter because 
of a sharp reduction in business inventories. Final 
sales increased appreciably, and the rise in prices 
remained much less rapid than in 1981. Retail sales 
and housing activity have strengthened in recent months,

- 3 -



2/8-9/83

but business fixed investment has weakened further.  
Nonfarm payroll employment rose in January, after an 

extended period of declines, and the civilian unemploy
ment rate fell 0.4 percentage point to 10.4 percent.  
In recent months the advance in the index of average 
hourly earnings has slowed further.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 

major foreign currencies depreciated moderately further 
from mid-December to mid-January, but a subsequent 
appreciation has more than offset that decline. In 
the fourth quarter the U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
was close to the relatively high third-quarter rate.  

Growth of M2 surged to an extraordinary pace in 
January, apparently reflecting shifts of funds into 
recently authorized money market deposit accounts.  
Growth of M3 accelerated, following very slow expansion 
in December. Growth of M1 remained rapid in January, 
although it was down appreciably from the average pace 
in other recent months. Market interest rates on U.S.  
Treasury obligations have risen somewhat since the latter 
part of December, while rates on most private market 
instruments are about unchanged to slightly higher.  
Mortgage rates have declined further.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote a resumption of 
growth in output on a sustainable basis, and contribute 
to a sustainable pattern of international transactions.  
In establishing growth ranges for monetary and credit 

aggregates for 1983 in furtherance of these objectives, 
the Committee recognized that the relationships between 
such ranges and ultimate economic goals have been less 
predictable over the past year; that the current impact 
of new deposit accounts on growth rates of monetary 
aggregates cannot be determined with a high degree of 
confidence; and that the availability of interest on 
large portions of transaction accounts, declining 
inflation, and lower market rates of interest may be 
reflected in some changes in the historical trends 
in velocity. A substantial shift of funds into M2

- 4 -



2/8-9/83

from market instruments, including large certificates 
of deposit not included in M2, in association with the 
extraordinarily rapid build-up of money market deposit 
accounts has distorted growth in that aggregate during 
the current quarter.  

In establishing growth ranges for the aggregates 
for 1983 against this background, the Committee felt 
that growth in M2 might be more appropriately measured 
after the period of highly aggressive marketing of 
money market deposit accounts has subsided. The 
Committee also felt that a somewhat wider range was 
appropriate for monitoring M1. Those growth ranges 
will be reviewed in the spring and altered, if appro
priate, in the light of evidence at that time.  

With these understandings, the Committee established 
the following growth ranges: for the period from 
February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2, taking into 
account the probability of some residual shifting into 
that aggregate from non-M2 sources; and for the period 
from the fourth quarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter 
of 1983, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3, which appears 
to be less distorted by the new accounts. For the same 
period a tentative range of 4 to 8 percent has been 
established for M1, assuming that Super NOW accounts 
draw only modest amounts of funds from sources outside 
M1 and assuming that the authority to pay interest on 
transaction balances is not extended beyond presently 
eligible accounts. An associated range of growth for 
total domestic nonfinancial debt has been estimated at 
8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.  

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would be placed on behavior of 
the broader monetary aggregates, expecting that current 
distortions in M2 from the initial adjustment to the new 
deposit accounts will abate. The behavior of M1 will be 
monitored, with the degree of weight placed on that aggre
gate over time dependent on evidence that velocity character
istics are resuming more predictable patterns. Debt ex
pansion, while not directly targeted, will be evaluated 
in judging responses to the monetary aggregates. The 
Committee understood that policy implementation would 
involve continuing appraisal of the relationships between 
the various measures of money and credit and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.

- 5 -



2/8-9/83

For the more immediate future, the Committee seeks 
to maintain the existing degree of restraint on reserve 
positions. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the 
context of appreciable slowing of growth in the monetary 
aggregates to or below the paths implied by the long-term 
ranges, taking account of the distortions relating to the 
introduction of new accounts. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for 
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objec
tives and related reserve paths during the period before 
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held.  

on Tuesday, March 29, 1983, beginning at 9:30 a.m.  

The meeting adjourned.

Assistant Secretary

-6-


