














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 24, 1983 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 24, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roberts 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta, 
respectively

Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin, Prell, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions.



5/24/83

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Burns, Koch, Parthemos, and Stern, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Dallas, Atlanta, Richmond, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Ms. Arak, Messrs. Bisignano, Lang, and Soss, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, San Francisco, Philadelphia, and 
New York, respectively 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Stevens, Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on March 28-29, 1983, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

March 29 through May 23, 1983, were ratified.  

Renewal through August 23 of drawings on the System by the Bank of 

Mexico maturing June 7 through July 20, 1983, was noted without objection.  

With Messrs. Solomon, Guffey, Morris, Rice, and Mrs. Teeters 

dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



5/24/83

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real GNP has accelerated in the current 
quarter following a moderate increase in the first 
quarter. Industrial production increased sharply in 
April after rising at a moderate pace in previous months; 
nonfarm payroll employment and retail sales rose con
siderably in March and April. Housing starts declined 
somewhat in both months but were still well above 
depressed 1982 levels. Data on new orders and shipments 
suggest that the demand for business equipment is 
reviving. The civilian unemployment rate edged down 
to 10.2 percent in April. Average prices have changed 
little and the index of average hourly earnings has risen 
at a much reduced pace in the early months of 1983.  

The weighted average value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has remained in a narrow range 
near its recent high level since late March. The U.S.  
foreign trade deficit fell substantially in the first 
quarter, reflecting a sharp drop in the value of oil 
imports.  

Growth in M2 and M3 decelerated further in April to 
relatively low rates but appears to have picked up recently.  
Ml declined in April but has strengthened markedly in 
early May. Growth in debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors 
appears to have been moderate over the first four months of 
the year. Interest rates have changed little on balance 
since late March.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote a resumption of growth 
in output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to a 
sustainable pattern of international transactions. At 
its meeting in February the Committee established growth 
ranges for monetary and credit aggregates for 1983 in 
furtherance of these objectives. The Committee recognized 
that the relationships between such ranges and ultimate 
economic goals have been less predictable over the past 
year; that the impact of new deposit accounts on growth 
ranges of monetary aggregates cannot be determined with 

a high degree of confidence; and that the availability of 
interest on large portions of transaction accounts, 
declining inflation, and lower market rates of interest 
may be reflected in some changes in the historical trends 
in velocity. A substantial shift of funds into M2 from 
market instruments, including large certificates of

-3-



5/24/83

deposit not included in M2, in association with the 
extraordinarily rapid build-up of money market deposit 
accounts, distorted growth in that aggregate during the 
first quarter.  

In establishing growth ranges for the aggregates for 
1983 against this background, the Committee felt that growth 
in M2 might be more appropriately measured after the period 
of highly aggressive marketing of money market deposit 
accounts had subsided. The Committee also felt that a 
somewhat wider range was appropriate for monitoring M1.  

Those growth ranges were to be reviewed in the spring and 
altered, if appropriate, in the light of evidence at that 
time. The Committee reviewed the ranges at this meeting and 
decided not to change them at this time, pending further 
review at the July meeting. With these understandings, 
the Committee established the following growth ranges: for 

the period from February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter 
of 1983, 7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2, taking 
into account the probability of some residual shifting into 
that aggregate from non-M2 sources; and for the period from 
the fourth quarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3, which appeared to be less 
distorted by the new accounts. For the same period a 
tentative range of 4 to 8 percent was established for M1, 
assuming that Super NOW accounts would draw only modest 
amounts of funds from sources outside M1 and assuming that 
the authority to pay interest on transaction balances was 
not extended beyond presently eligible accounts. An 
associated range of growth for total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was estimated at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.  

In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would continue to be placed on 
behavior of the broader monetary aggregates expecting that 
distortions in M2 from the initial adjustment to the new 
deposit accounts will abate. The behavior of M1 will 
continue to be monitored, with the degree of weight placed 
on that aggregate over time dependent on evidence that 
velocity characteristics are resuming more predictable 
patterns. Debt expansion, while not directly targeted, 
will be evaluated in judging responses to the monetary 
aggregates. The Committee understood that policy imple
mentation would involve continuing appraisal of the 
relationships between the various measures of money and 
credit and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions 
in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.



5/24/83

The Committee seeks in the short run to increase only 
slightly the degree of reserve restraint. The action was 
taken against the background of M2 and M3 remaining slightly 

below the rates of growth of 9 and 8 percent, respectively, 
established earlier for the quarter and within their long
term ranges, M1 growing well above anticipated levels for 
some time, and evidence of some acceleration in the rate 
of business recovery. Lesser restraint would be appropriate 
in the context of more pronounced slowing of growth in the 
broader monetary aggregates relative to the paths implied 
by the long-term ranges and deceleration of M1, or indica
tions of a weakening in the pace of economic recovery. The 

Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears 
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the 
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday-Wednesday, July 12-13, 1983.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


