














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 17-18, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 17, 1984, at 3:00 p.m. and 

continuing on Tuesday, December 18, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang, 
Lindsey, Prell, Siegman, Stern, and 
Zeisel, 1/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/17-18/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Garbarini, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Messrs. Balbach, Bisignano, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell, 
Mr. Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, 
Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Broaddus, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on November 7, 1984, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the renewal for further 

periods of one year of all of the Committee's reciprocal currency ("swap") 

arrangements.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period November 7 through 

December 17, 1984, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $4 billion to $6 billion the 

dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

on February 13, 1985.

-2-



12/17-18/84

With Messrs. Gramley and Solomon dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates a 
mixed pattern of developments but on balance suggests that 
economic activity is continuing to expand in the current 
quarter at a rate approximating the considerably reduced 
pace recorded in the third quarter. Nonfarm payroll employ
ment rose substantially further outside of manufacturing in 
November, and the civilian unemployment rate fell from 7.4 
to 7.2 percent. After two months of decline industrial 
production increased somewhat in November, largely reflect
ing a rebound in auto production from strike-reduced levels.  
Retail sales registered a large gain in November after 
changing little in October. Information on outlays suggests 
substantially slower expansion in business fixed investment, 
following exceptionally rapid growth earlier. Since the 
beginning of the year, broad measures of prices generally 
have continued to rise at rates close to, or somewhat 
above, those recorded in 1983, and the index of average 
hourly earnings has risen somewhat more slowly.  

Growth of the monetary aggregates strengthened 
markedly in November. The November expansion in M1 
offset the decline in October, and this aggregate.has 
grown little on balance since early summer; from the 
fourth quarter of 1983 through November, M1 grew at a 
rate in the lower half of the Committee's range for 
1984. Growth in the broader aggregates was especially 
rapid in November, bringing M2 to the midpoint of its 
longer-run range and M3 a bit further above the upper 
limit of its range. Expansion in total domestic non
financial debt is continuing above the Committee's 
monitoring range for the year, reflecting very large 
government borrowing and strong private credit growth.  
Interest rates have fallen further since the November 
meeting of the Committee, with the largest declines 
concentrated in short-term markets. On November 21, 
the Federal Reserve approved a reduction in the discount 
rate from 9 to 8-1/2 percent.

-3-



12/17-18/84

Since early November the foreign exchange value of 
the dollar against a trade-weighted average of major 
foreign currencies has appreciated substantially, re
versing most of the previous decline from its mid-October 
peak. The merchandise trade deficit in October was 
significantly reduced from the rate in the third quarter, 
mainly reflecting a sharp decline in non-oil imports.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee agreed at the July meeting to 
reaffirm the ranges for monetary growth that it had 
established in January: 4 to 8 percent for M1 and 6 to 
9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the period from the 
fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1984.  
The associated range for total domestic nonfinancial debt 
was also reaffirmed at 8 to 11 percent for the year 1984.  
It was anticipated that M3 and nonfinancial debt might 
increase at rates somewhat above the upper limits of their 
1984 ranges, given developments in the first half of the 
year, but the Committee felt that higher target ranges 
would provide inappropriate benchmarks for evaluating 
longer-term trends in M3 and credit growth. For 1985 the 
Committee agreed on tentative ranges of monetary growth, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1984 to the fourth 
quarter of 1985, of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 8-1/2 
percent for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated 
range for nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, in
cluding evaluations of conditions in domestic credit and 
foreign exchange markets.  

In the implementation of policy in the short run, the 
Committee seeks to reduce pressures on reserve positions 
consistent with growth of M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates 
of around 7, 9, and 9 percent, respectively, during the 
period from November to March. Somewhat more rapid growth 
of M1 would be acceptable in light of the currently estima
ted shortfall in growth for the fourth quarter relative 
to the Committee's expectations at the beginning of the

-4-



12/17-18/84

period, particularly in the context of sluggish growth in 
economic activity and continued strength of the dollar in 
exchange markets. Greater restraint on reserve positions 
might be acceptable in the event of substantially more rapid 
monetary growth and indications of significant strengthening 
of economic activity and inflationary pressures. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the 
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday-Wednesday, February 12-13, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary's note: Advice was received of the election 
by the directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
of E. Gerald Corrigan as a member of the Federal Open 
Market Committee. It was noted that Mr. Corrigan was 
elected to serve from January 1, 1985 for the term 
ending February 28, 1985 and had executed his oath of 
office.

Secretary

-5-


