














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

January 30-31, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, January 30, 1984, at 2:00 p.m., and 

continuing on Tuesday, January 31, 1984, at 9:00 a.m.

Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Gramley 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Roberts 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Forrestal, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 

Mrs. Steele,1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 

Mr. Oltman,1/ Deputy General Counsel 

Mr. Kichline, Economist 

Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach,1/ T. Davis,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ Prell,1/ 
Siegman,1/ Scheld,1/ and Zeisel,1/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account

PRESENT:

1/ Attended Monday session and Tuesday Session after action to establish 
long-run ranges.



1/30-31/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn,1/ Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff 

Director for Monetary and Financial Policy, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Lindsey,1/ Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Freund 2/ and Madigan,2/ Economists, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek,1/ Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Burns,1/ J. Davis,1/ Keran,1/ Koch,1/ Mullineaux,1/ 
Parthemos,1/ and Stern,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, 
Philadelphia, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Meek,1/ Vice President and Monetary Adviser, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on December 19-20, 1983, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period December 20, 1983 through January 30, 1984, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

December 20, 1983 through January 30, 1984, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: All of the above actions were taken on 
Monday, January 30, 1984.  

1/ Attended Monday session and Tuesday session after action to establish 
long-run ranges.  

2/ Attended part of Monday session only.

-2-



1/30-31/84

With Mr. Morris dissenting, the Committee voted for the following 

longer-run policy: 

The Committee established growth ranges for 
the broader aggregates of 6 to 9 percent for both 
M2 and M3 for the period from the fourth quarter of 
1983 to the fourth quarter of 1984. The Committee 
also considered that a range of 4 to 8 percent for 
M1 would be appropriate for the same period, taking 
account of the possibility that, in the light of the 
changed composition of M1, its relationship to GNP 
over time may be shifting. Pending further experience, 
growth in that aggregate will need to be interpreted 
in the light of the growth in the other monetary 
aggregates, which for the time being would continue 
to receive substantial weight. The associated range 
for total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 
8 to 11 percent for the year 1984.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that the advance in real GNP moderated in the fourth 
quarter, following rapid expansion in the spring and 
summer. In December, industrial production and nonfarm 
payroll employment increased somewhat further and the 
civilian unemployment rate declined 0.2 percentage 
point to 8.2 percent. Retail sales were reported to 
have changed little in December following sizable 
gains in preceding months. Housing starts declined 
in December but for the fourth quarter as a whole 
were close to their average for the year. Recent 
data indicate substantial strength in business 
capital spending. Producer prices were about 
unchanged on average in November and December, and 
consumer prices increased at about the moderate 
pace recorded for the year as a whole. The index 
of average hourly earnings rose somewhat faster 
in the fourth quarter than in the previous quarter, 
but for the year 1983 the index increased more 
slowly than in 1982.



1/30-31/84

The foreign exchange value of the dollar against 
a trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies 
has appreciated somewhat further since the latter 
part of December, with most of the rise occurring in early 
January. In the fourth quarter the U.S. foreign trade 
deficit was markedly higher than in the third quarter, 
reflecting a sharp rise in non-oil imports.  

M2 and M3 have expanded at moderate rates over the 
past two months. Expansion in M1 apparently accelerated 
in January, following several months of reduced growth.  
By the fourth quarter M2 was at a level close to the 
midpoint of the Committee's range for 1983, M3 was 
around the upper limit of its range, and M1 was around 
the middle of the Committee's monitoring range for 
the second half of the year. Most interest rates have 
declined somewhat since the latter part of December.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. The Committee 
established growth ranges for the broader aggregates 
of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the period 
from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter 
of 1984. The Committee also considered that a range 
of 4 to 8 percent for M1 would be appropriate for the 
same period, taking account of the possibility that, 
in the light of the changed composition of M1, its 
relationship to GNP over time may be shifting. Pending 
further experience, growth in that aggregate will need 
to be interpreted in the light of the growth in the 
other monetary aggregates, which for the time being 
would continue to receive substantial weight. The 
associated range for total domestic nonfinancial debt 
was set at 8 to 11 percent for the year 1984.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, in
cluding evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.



1/30-31/84

In the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain 
the existing degree of pressure on bank reserve positions, 
anticipating that approach will be consistent with growth 
of M2 and M3 each at annual rates of about 8 percent 
and M1 at an annual rate of about 7 percent during the 
period from December to March. Growth in nonfinancial 
debt is expected to be within the range established for 
the year. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the 
context of a shortfall in monetary and credit growth 
from current expectations, while somewhat greater 
restraint might be acceptable with more rapid expansion 
of the aggregates, both viewed in the context of the 
strength of the business expansion and inflationary 
pressures.  

In implementing policy in the weeks ahead, the Manager 
was instructed to take account of the uncertainties asso
ciated with the introduction of the system of more con
temporaneous reserve requirements, particularly including 
the possibility that depository institutions, during a 
transition period, may desire to hold more excess reserves.  

The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if 
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely 
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, March 27, 1984.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


