














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 21, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 21, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members 

of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Stern, 
and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



8/21/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Henderson, Associate Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Keran, Parthemos, Scheld, 
and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, San Francisco, 
Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston 

Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on July 16-17, 1984, were approved.  

The report of examination of the System Open Market Account, made 

by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as of the close of 

business January 13, 1984, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period July 17 through 

August 20, 1984, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise temporarily from $4 billion to 

$6 billion the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings 

of U. S. government and federal agency securities for the period from 

August 21, 1984 through October 2, 1984.



8/21/84

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and .directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the expansion in econpmic activity is continuing at 
a strong pace, but there are indications of a moderation 
in the rate of growth. In July, industrial production 
and nonfarm payroll employment rose further, but retail 
sales fell after rising considerably in earlier months 
and housing starts declined to a rate appreciably below 
the average in the second quarter. The civilian un
employment rate increased 0.4 percentage point to 7.5 
percent. Information on outlays and spending plans 
continues to suggest strength in business fixed invest
ment. Since the beginning of the year, average prices 
and the index of average hourly earnings have risen 
more slowly than in 1983.  

In July, M1 declined after two months of rapid 
growth, though data for early August suggested some 
rebound, while M2 expanded at a relatively slow pace.  
M3 growth, however, remained comparatively sizable.  
From the fourth quarter of 1983 through July, M1 grew 
at a rate a bit above the midpoint of the Committee's 
range for 1984; M2 increased at a rate a little below 
the midpoint of its longer-run range, while M3 expanded 
at a rate above the upper limit of its range. Growth 
in total domestic nonfinancial debt appears to be 
continuing at a pace above the Committee's monitoring 
range for the year, reflecting very large government 
borrowing along with strong private credit growth.  
Most interest rates have fallen considerably since 
the July meeting of the Committee, with the largest 
declines generally in intermediate and long-term 
bond markets.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar against 
a trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies 
rose further to a new high in early August and since 
then has fluctuated in a range just below the peak.  
The merchandise trade deficit in June was somewhat 
above the May level, and for the second quarter as 
a whole the deficit was little changed from the high 
first-quarter rate.



8/21/84

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at the July 
meeting to reaffirm the ranges for monetary growth that 
it had established in January: 4 to 8 percent for M1 
and 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the period 
from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter 
of 1984. The associated range for total domestic non
financial debt was also reaffirmed at 8 to 11 percent 
for the year 1984. It was anticipated that M3 and 
nonfinancial debt might increase at rates somewhat 
above the upper limits of their 1984 ranges, given 
developments in the first half of the year, but the 
Committee felt that higher target ranges would provide 
inappropriate benchmarks for evaluating longer-term 
trends in M3 and credit growth. For 1985 the Committee 
agreed on tentative ranges of monetary growth, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter 
of 1985, of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 8-1/2 percent 
for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated 
range for nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

In the implementation of policy in the short run, 
the Committee seeks to maintain existing pressures on 
reserve positions. This action is expected to be con
sistent with growth in M1 at an annual rate of around 
5 percent or slightly less, and in M2 and M3 at annual 
rates of around 7-1/2 and 9 percent respectively during 
the period from June to September. Somewhat greater 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the event of 
more substantial growth of the monetary aggregates, 
while somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable 
in the event of significantly slower growth. In either 
case, such a change would be considered only in the 
context of appraisals of the continuing strength of the 
business expansion, inflationary pressures, financial 
market conditions, and the rate of credit growth. The

-4-



8/21/84 -5

Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is 
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 8 to 12 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, October 2, 1984.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


