














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 2, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 2, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, 
Solomon, 

Boehne 
Boykin 
Corrigan 
Gramley 
.Horn 
Martin 
Partee 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey, 
Siegman, and Stern, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



10/2/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Griffith, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. T. Davis, Keran, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burger, Ms. Clarkin, and Mr. Fieleke, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
St. Louis, New York, and Boston, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on August 21, 1984, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period August 21 through October 1, 1984, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period August 21 through 

October 1, 1984, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Martin and Rice and Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the expansion in economic activity slowed appre
ciably in the third quarter from a strong pace earlier 
in the year. In August, industrial production rose 
only slightly and gains in nonfarm payroll employment



10/2/84

moderated further; retail sales and housing starts 
declined for the second month in a row. The civilian 
unemployment rate was unchanged in August at 7.5 percent.  
Information on outlays and spending plans suggests slower 
expansion in business fixed investment, following excep
tionally rapid growth in recent quarters. Since the 
beginning of the year, average prices and the index of 
average hourly earnings have risen more slowly than 
in 1983.  

In August the monetary aggregates expanded at 
relatively slow rates, but data available for September 

suggested some strengthening. From the fourth quarter 
of 1983 through September, M1 apparently grew at a 
rate close to the midpoint of the Committee's range 
for 1984, M2 at a rate somewhat below the midpoint 
of its longer-run range, and M3 at a rate near the 
upper limit of its range. Growth in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt appears to be continuing at a pace 
above the Committee's monitoring range for the year, 
reflecting large government borrowing along with 
relatively strong private credit growth. Interest 
rates generally have fallen somewhat further since 
the August meeting of the Committee.  

Over the past month, the foreign exchange value 
of the dollar against a trade-weighted average of 
major foreign currencies has fluctuated widely under 
often volatile market conditions, reaching a new 
high in the latter part of September; since then 
the dollar has declined somewhat. The merchandise 
trade deficit rose sharply to a record high rate 
in the July-August period.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at the July 
meeting to reaffirm the ranges for monetary growth 
that it had established in January: 4 to 8 percent 
for M1 and 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for 
the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the 
fourth quarter of 1984. The associated range for 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was also reaffirmed

-3-



10/2/84

at 8 to 11 percent for the year 1984. It was antici
pated that M3 and nonfinancial debt might increase 
at rates somewhat above the upper limits of their 
1984 ranges, given developments in the first half 
of the year, but the Committee felt that higher 
target ranges would provide inappropriate benchmarks 
for evaluating longer-term trends in M3 and credit 
growth. For 1985 the Committee agreed on tentative 
ranges of monetary growth, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985, of 

4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 8-1/2 percent for M2, 
and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated range 
for nonfinancial debt was set at 6 to 11 percent.  

The Committee understood that policy implemen
tation would require continuing appraisal of the 

relationships not only among the various measures 
of money and credit but also between those aggregates 
and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions 
in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.  

In the implementation of policy in the short run, 

the Committee seeks to maintain the lesser degree of 
restraint on reserve positions sought in recent weeks.  
This action is expected to be consistent with growth 
in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of around 6, 7-1/2, 
and 9 percent, respectively, during the period from 
September to December. A somewhat further lessening 
of restraint on reserve positions would be acceptable 
in the event of significantly slower growth in the 
monetary aggregates, evaluated in relation to the 
strength of business expansion and inflationary 
pressures, domestic and international financial 
market conditions, and the rate of credit growth.  
Conversely, greater restraint might be acceptable 
in the event of substantially more rapid monetary 
growth and indications of significant strengthening 
of economic activity and inflationary pressures.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if 
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 

that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related 
reserve paths during the period before the next 
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal 

funds rate persistently outside a range of 8 to 12 
percent.



10/2/84 -5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Wednesday, November 7, 1984.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


