














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 26-27, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the 

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 

D. C., on Monday, March 26, 1984 at 2:00 p.m., and continuing on Tuesday, 

March 27, 1984 at 12:00 p.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members of 
the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, 1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Burns,1/ J. Davis,1/ R. Davis,1/ Kohn,1/ 
Prell,1/ Siegman,1/ Stern,1/ and Zeisel,1/ 
Associate Economists

Lindsey,1/

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

session and Tuesday session before action to adopt 
directive.

1/ Attended Monday 
domestic policy



3/26-27/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ T. Davis,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ Ms. Greene, 
Messrs. Keran,1/ Mullineaux,1/ and Scheld,1/ Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Boston, New York, San Francisco, 
Philadelphia, and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Broaddus,1/ Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond 

Ms. Clarkin,1/ Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Mr. Keleher,1/ Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1984, had been received by 

the Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

Anthony M. Solomon, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, with 
Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as 
alternate; 

Karen N. Horn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with 
Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as 
alternate; 

Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with 
Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 
as alternate; 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
with John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, as alternate.  

1/ Attended Monday session and Tuesday session before action to adopt the 
domestic policy directive.



3/26-27/84

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 1985, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the 

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they 

would cease to have any official connection with the Federal Open Market 

Committee: 

Paul A. Volcker Chairman 
Anthony M. Solomon Vice Chairman 

Stephen H. Axilrod Staff Director and Secretary 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Nancy M. Steele Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Michael Bradfield General Counsel 
James H. Oltman Deputy General Counsel 
James L. Kichline Economist 
Edwin M. Truman Economist (International) 

Joseph E. Burns, John M. Davis, 
Richard G. Davis, Donald L. Kohn, 
Richard W. Lang, David E. Lindsey, 
Michael J. Prell, Charles J. Siegman, 
Gary H. Stern, and Joseph S. Zeisel Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee after 

February 28, 1985.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for 

Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the under

standing that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

- 3 -



3/26-27/84

Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently received that 
the selections indicated above were satisfactory to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations of 

the Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of reviewing such 

matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On March 7, 1984, certain continuing 
authorizations of the Committee, listed below, had been 
distributed by the Secretary with the advice that, in 
accordance with procedures approved by the Committee, 
they were being called to the Committee's attention 
before the March organization meeting to give members 
an opportunity to raise any questions they had concerning 
them. Members were asked to so indicate if they wished 
to have any of the authorizations in question placed on 
the agenda for consideration at this meeting, and no 
such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

3. Resolutions providing for continued operations of the 
Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 
during an emergency.  

4. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

5. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

7. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.

- 4 -



3/26-27/84

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 26, 1984 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with the 
U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 

for International Settlements, and with other international financial 
institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 

fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $8.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all

- 5 -



3/26-27/84

foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi
tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment

- 6 -



3/26-27/84

return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 
adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 

transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 
exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 
arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 

the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 
in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 
maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 
securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 
members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 

shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 
Manager for Foreign Operations, for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 
of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 

System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 

System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;

- 7 -



3/26-27/84

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 

information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 
of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 

Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
Reaffirmed March 26, 1984 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 
countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 
for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 

Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 

particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.

- 8 -



3/26-27/84

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 
States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 
and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 

IMF Aticle IV.  

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 26, 1984 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 
net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.

- 9 -



3/26-27/84 - 10 -

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair

man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 26, 1984 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $4.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of



3/26-27/84 - 11 -

goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 
aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable 
limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern
ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 
set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 
such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 
for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, 
subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in 
paragraph 1(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 

securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro

visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.



3/26-27/84 - 12 -

By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed the agreement of 

January 17, 1977, to "warehouse" foreign currencies for the Exchange 

Stabilization Fund and for the Treasury on the terms agreed upon by the 

Committee at its meeting on March 18, 1980, with the understanding that 

the agreement would be subject to annual review.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee agreed to discontinue use of 

repurchase agreements on bankers' acceptances in conducting open market 

operations. The effective date of this action is July 2, 1984.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted a program for safeguarding 

confidential FOMC information.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on January 30-31, 1984, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $4 billion to $6 billion the 

dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities effective March 28 through the 

close of business on May 22, 1984.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

January 31 through March 26, 1984, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: All of the above actions were taken on 
Monday, March 26, 1984.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



3/26-27/84

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
that growth in real GNP has accelerated markedly in the 
current quarter and suggests that demand for goods and 
services may remain relatively strong in the months 
ahead. In January and February, industrial production 
rose at a considerably faster pace than in the fourth 
quarter, and gains in nonfarm payroll employment were 
large over the two-month period. The civilian unemploy
ment rate declined 0.2 percentage point each month to 
7.8 percent in February. Retail sales grew at an 
exceptional pace in January and changed little in 
February. Housing starts rose substantially in both 
months to the highest rate in several years. Informa
tion on outlays and spending plans generally suggests 
continuing strength in business fixed investment.  
Prices rose somewhat faster in early 1984 than in 
the fourth quarter, with increases concentrated in 
the food sector. The index of average hourly earnings 
rose only slightly over the first two months of the 
year, although total compensation costs appear to 
have increased more rapidly.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar against 
a trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies 
declined considerably from the end of January through 
the first week of March, but part of that decline was 
retraced more recently. The merchandise trade deficit 
rose sharply in January, mainly because of larger 
non-oil imports.  

Data available through mid-March indicate that M1 
and M3 have expanded somewhat more rapidly than antici
pated at the previous meeting; since the fourth quarter 
of 1983, M1 and M3 are tentatively estimated to have 
grown at rates close to the upper limits of the 
Committee's ranges for 1984. Growth in M2 appears 
to have been less rapid than previously expected and 
was estimated to be at a rate in the lower part of 
its longer-run range. In January and February, growth 
of total domestic nonfinancial debt apparently rose 
at a pace substantially above the Committee's monitoring 
range for the year, and bank credit continued to expand 
at a relatively rapid rate. Interest rates have risen 
considerably since late January.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved

-13-



3/26-27/84

pattern of international transactions. The Committee 
established growth ranges for the broader aggregates 
of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the period 
from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter 
of 1984. The Committee also considered that a range 
of 4 to 8 percent for M1 would be appropriate for the 
same period, taking account of the possibility that, 
in the light of the changed composition of Ml, its 
relationship to GNP over time may be shifting. Pending 
further experience, growth in that aggregate will need 
to be interpreted in the light of the growth in the 
other monetary aggregates, which for the time being 
would continue to receive substantial weight. The 
associated range for total domestic nonfinancial debt 
was set at 8 to 11 percent for the year 1984.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

In the short run the Committee seeks to maintain 
pressures on bank reserve positions judged to be consis
tent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of 
around 6-1/2, 8, and 8-1/2 percent, respectively, 
during the period from March to June. Greater reserve 
restraint would be acceptable in the event of more 
substantial growth of the monetary aggregates, while 
somewhat lesser restraint might be acceptable if growth 
of the monetary aggregates slowed significantly; in 
either case, such a change would be considered in the 
context of appraisals of the continuing strength of 
the business expansion, inflationary pressures and 
the rate of credit growth.  

The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if 
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely 
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 22, 1984.

The meeting adjourned.

-14-



3/26-27/84 -15

Secretary's Note: On April 18, 1984, by unanimous 
vote, Committee members approved an additional 
increase of $1 billion, to $7 billion, in the limit 
on changes between Committee meetings in System Account 
holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities 
specified in paragraph 1(a) of the authorization for 
domestic open market operations, effective immediately, 
for the period ending with the close of business on 
May 22, 1984.  

Secretary


