














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 16-17, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, July 16, 1984, at 3:00 p.m., and continuing 

on Tuesday, July 17, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, 
Solomon, 
Boehne 

Boykin 

Corrigan 
Gramley 
Horn 

Martin 
Partee 

Rice 

Seger 
Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang, 
Prell, Stern, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



7/16-17/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Madigan 2/ and Rosine,2/ Economists, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. T. Davis, Keran, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burger, Fieleke, and Meek, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, Boston, 
and New York, respectively 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on May 21-22, 1984, were approved.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Tuesday session.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period May 22 through July 16, 1984, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

May 22 through July 16, 1984, were ratified.  

1/ Attended Monday session only.  

2/ Attended portion of meeting on Monday and Tuesday related to 
consideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives for 
monetary and credit aggregates.



7/16-17/84

By unanimous vote, the following longer-run policy for 1984 was 

reaffirmed by the Committee: 

The Committee agreed at this meeting to reaffirm 
the ranges for monetary growth that it had 
established in January: 4 to 8 percent for M1 
and 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the 
period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth 
quarter of 1984. The associated range for total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was also reaffirmed at 
8 to 11 percent for the year 1984. It was anticipated 
that M3 and nonfinancial debt might increase at rates 
somewhat above the upper limits of their 1984 ranges, 
given developments in the first half of the year, 
but the Committee felt that higher target ranges 
would provide inappropriate benchmarks for evaluating 
longer-term trends in M3 and credit growth.  

By unanimous vote, the following longer-run policy for 1985 was 

adopted by the Committee: 

For 1985 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985, of 4 to 7 
percent for M1, 6 to 8-1/2 percent for M2, and 
6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated range for 
nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

With Mr. Martin dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, 

to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the

following domestic policy directive:



7/16-17/84

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the expansion in economic activity is continuing at 
a strong pace, but there are indications of moderation 
in some sectors. In May and June, industrial production 
and retail sales expanded further, though at a somewhat 
slower pace than earlier in the year. Nonfarm payroll 
employment rose substantially further in both months 
and the civilian unemployment rate fell to 7.1 percent 
in June. Housing starts declined in May to a rate 
appreciably below the average in the first four months 
of 1984. Information on outlays and spending plans 
continues to suggest strength in business fixed in
vestment. Since the beginning of the year, average 
prices and the index of average hourly earnings have 
risen more slowly than in 1983.  

M1 grew rapidly in May and June after having changed 
little in April, while M2 continued to expand moderately.  
M3 growth slowed somewhat in June but was relatively 
strong over the second quarter. From the fourth quarter 
of 1983 through June, M1 grew at a rate somewhat below 
the upper limit of the Committee's range for 1984; M2 
increased at a rate a little below the midpoint of its 
longer-run range, while M3 expanded at a rate above 
the upper limit of its range. Total domestic non
financial debt continued to grow in the second quarter 
at a pace above the Committee's monitoring range for 
the year, reflecting very large government borrowing 
along with strong private credit growth. Interest 
rates have fluctuated considerably since the May 
meeting of the Committee. Financial markets were 
affected by concerns arising from international debt 
problems. On balance, rates on private short-term 
securities rose further, while rates on Treasury 
bills were about unchanged; in long-term debt markets, 
rates on most private obligations changed little 
while those on Treasury bonds declined.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar against 
a trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies 
has risen considerably further since mid-May to a 
level above its peak in early January. The merchandise 
trade deficit rose further in April-May compared with 
the first quarter; an increase in oil and non-oil 
imports exceeded a slight rise in exports.

-4-



7/16-17/84

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at this 
meeting to reaffirm the ranges for monetary growth 
that it had established in January: 4 to 8 percent 
for M1 and 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the 
period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth 
quarter of 1984. The associated range for total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was also reaffirmed at 
8 to 11 percent for the year 1984. It was anticipated 
that M3 and nonfinancial debt might increase at rates 
somewhat above the upper limits of their 1984 ranges, 
given developments in the first half of the year, 
but the Committee felt that higher target ranges 
would provide inappropriate benchmarks for evaluating 
longer-term trends in M3 and credit growth. For 
1985 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges of 
monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985, of 4 to 7 
percent for M1, 6 to 8-1/2 percent for M2, and 
6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated range for 
nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain 
existing pressures on reserve positions. This action 
is expected to be consistent with growth in M1, M2, 
and M3 at annual rates of around 5-1/2, 7-1/2, and 9 
percent respectively during the period from June to 
September. Somewhat greater reserve restraint would 
be acceptable in the event of more substantial growth 
of the monetary aggregates, while somewhat lesser 
restraint might be acceptable if growth of the monetary 
aggregates slowed significantly. In either case, such 
a change would be considered only in the context of 
appraisals of the continuing strength of the business 
expansion, inflationary pressures, financial market

-5-



7/16-17/84

conditions, and the rate of credit growth. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is 
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 8 to 12 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, August 21, 1984.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


