














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 21-22, 1984 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, May 21, 1984, at 3:30 p.m., and continuing 

on Tuesday, May 22, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 
Mr. Solomon, 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Corrigan 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 1/ 
Mr. Wallich

Chairman 
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs, Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey, Prell, 
Siegman, Stern, and Zeisel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



5/21-22/84

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, Parthemos, 
Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, 
Boston, San Francisco, Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, Federal Reseve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of the 

Federal Open Market Committee held on March 26-27, 1984, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

March 27, 1984 through May 21, 1984, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: All of the above actions were taken on 
Monday, May 21, 1984.  

With Mr. Boykin dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that growth in real GNP, while moderating from the 
unusually strong first-quarter pace, remains relatively 
rapid in the current quarter. In April, industrial 
production and nonfarm payroll employment rose sub
stantially following decreased growth in March; the 
civilian unemployment rate was unchanged at 7.8 per
cent in March and April as the labor force increased

-2-



5/21-22/84

appreciably. Retail sales grew rapidly in April after 
two months of decline, and housing starts recovered 
to a rate equaling their first-quarter average.  
Information on outlays and spending plans generally 
suggests continuing strength in business fixed 
investment. Since the beginning of the year, prices 
and wages have continued to rise at about the same 
pace as in 1983.  

Ml changed little in April on average, but data 
available for early May suggest a considerable 
strengthening. In April M2 grew about in line with 
expectations while M3 expanded more rapidly than 
anticipated. From the fourth quarter of 1983 through 
April, M1 grew at a rate a little below the midpoint 
of the Committee's range for 1984; M2 increased at a 
rate in the lower part of its longer-run range, while 
M3 expanded at a rate a bit above the upper limit of 
its range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt apparently 
is growing at a pace above the Committee's monitoring 
range for the year, with borrowing by businesses 
continuing to be concentrated in the short-term 
markets. Interest rates have risen considerably 
further since late March. On April 6, the Federal 
Reserve announced an increase in the discount rate 
from 8-1/2 to 9 percent. Recently, day-to-day market 
conditions have reflected considerable sensitivity 
to potential liquidity strains, as highlighted by 
problems of one large bank, and to uncertainties 
about the financial and budgetary outlook generally.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar against 
a trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies 
has risen considerably further since late March to 
a level close to the peak in early January. The 
merchandise trade deficit widened further in the first 
quarter, as a sharp rise in non-oil imports offset a 
substantial rise in exports.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. The Committee 
established growth ranges for the broader aggregates 
of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3 for the period 
from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter

-3-



5/21-22/84

of 1984. The Committee also considered that a range 
of 4 to 8 percent for M1 would be appropriate for 
the same period, taking account of the possibility 
that, in the light of the changed composition of M1, 
its relationship to GNP over time may be shifting.  
Pending further experience, growth in that aggregate 
will need to be interpreted in the light of the 
growth in the other monetary aggregates, which for 
the time being would continue to receive substantial 
weight. The associated range for total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent for the 
year 1984.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

In the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain 
existing pressures on bank reserve positions. This is 
expected to be consistent with growth in M1, M2, and 
M3 at annual rates of around 6-1/2, 8, and 10 percent, 
respectively, during the period from March to June.  
Somewhat greater reserve restraint might be acceptable 
in the event of more substantial growth of the monetary 
aggregates, while somewhat lesser restraint might be 
acceptable if growth of the monetary aggregates slowed 
significantly. In either case, such a change would be 
considered only in the context of appraisals of the 
continuing strength of the business expansion, infla
tionary pressures, financial market conditions, and 
the rate of credit growth. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager 
for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary 
objectives and related reserve paths during the period 
before the next meeting is likely to be associated with 
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday-Wednesday, July 10-11, 1984.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


