














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

August 20, 1985 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 20, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich 

Mr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Prell, 
Scheld, and Siegman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for the July meeting.



8/20/85

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Jack Guynn, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, and Lang, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Kansas City, and Philadelphia, respectively 

Messrs. McNees, Miller, Pearce, and Beebe, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis, Dallas, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Stevens, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 9-10, 1985, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period July 10, 1985, through 

August 19, 1985, were ratified.  

With Mr. Black and Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive:



8/20/85

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is probably expanding in the 
current quarter at a moderately faster rate than in 
the first half of the year. In July, industrial 
production continued to move somewhat higher and 
total retail sales rose modestly after two months 
of decline. On the other hand, housing starts fell 
somewhat in July. Information on business capital 
spending suggests further growth, though at a much 
less rapid pace than earlier in the economic ex
pansion. Total nonfarm payroll employment continued 
to increase in July, although employment in manu
facturing declined slightly further. The civilian 
unemployment rate remained at 7.3 percent in July, 
unchanged since February. Broad measures of prices 
and wages appear to be rising at rates close to 
those recorded in 1984.  

Since the Committee's meeting in July, the trade
weighted value of the dollar against major foreign 
currencies has depreciated further. The merchandise 
trade deficit widened in the second quarter to the 
highest rate on record. Both agricultural and non
agricultural exports fell substantially, while imports 
registered a small increase.  

Based on data for July and early August, M1 has 
been growing relatively rapidly. Demand deposits have 
shown little change on balance, but other checkable 
deposits have expanded substantially. Growth in M2 
has continued at around the upper end of its 1985 
range, while relatively sluggish growth in M3 recently 
has brought this aggregate to the midpoint of its 
range. Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt 
has remained high relative to the Committee's monitoring 
range for the year. Most interest rates have risen 
somewhat since the July meeting of the Committee.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee at the July meeting 
reaffirmed ranges for the year of 6 to 9 percent for 
M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The associated 
range for total domestic nonfinancial debt was re
affirmed at 9 to 12 percent. With respect to M1, 
the base was moved forward to the second quarter of



8/20/85

1985 and a range was established at an annual growth 
rate of 3 to 8 percent. The range takes account of 
expectations of a return of velocity growth toward 
more usual patterns, following the sharp decline in 
velocity during the first half of the year, while 
also recognizing a higher degree of uncertainty 
regarding that behavior. The appropriateness of 
the new range will continue to be reexamined in 
the light of evidence with respect to economic 
and financial developments including developments 
in foreign exchange markets. More generally, the 
Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates may 

be in the upper parts of their ranges, depending on 
continuing developments with respect to velocity 
and provided that inflationary pressures remain 
subdued.  

For 1986 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986, of 4 to 7 percent 
for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for 
M3. The associated range for growth in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at 8 to 11 
percent for 1986. With respect to M1 particularly, 
the Committee recognized that uncertainties surrounding 
recent behavior of velocity would require careful 
reappraisal of the target range at the beginning of 
1986. Moreover, in establishing ranges for next year, 
the Committee also recognized that account would need 
to be taken of experience with institutional and 

depositor behavior in response to the completion of 
deposit rate deregulation early in the year.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of 
pressure on reserve positions sought in recent weeks.  
This action is expected to be consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 at annual rates of around 8-1/2 and 6-1/2 
percent, respectively, during the period from June to 
September. M1 growth is expected to slow from its 
recent pace, but given the rapid growth in recent 
weeks, expansion over the June to September period may 
be at an 8 to 9 percent annual rate. Somewhat greater 
restraint would be acceptable in the event of sub
stantially higher growth in the monetary aggregates.  
Somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable in the

-4-



8/20/85

event of substantially slower growth. In either case 
such a change would be considered in the context of 
appraisals of the strength of the business expansion, 
developments in foreign exchange markets, progress 
against inflation, and conditions in domestic and 
international credit markets. The Chairman may call 
for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during 
the period before the next meeting is likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on October 1, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-5-


