














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 26, 1985 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Monday, March 26, 1985 at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Forrestal 
Gramley 
Keehn 
Martin 
Partee 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Messrs. Boykin, Guffey, Mrs. Horn, and Mr. Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Minneapolis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, R. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, 
Prell, Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. Tshinkel 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

1/ Entered meeting after action to ratify transactions in domestic operations.



3/26/85

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Garbarini and Hendricks, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Cleveland, 
respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, and Lang, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Dallas, Kansas City, and Philadelphia, respectively 

Messrs. McNees, Meek, and Rolnick, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1985, had been received by 
1/ 

the Secretary and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, with 
Frank E. Morris, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as 
alternate; 

Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with 
Karen N. Horn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as 
alternate; 

Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with 
Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 
as alternate; 

John J. Balles, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 
with Roger Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, as alternate.  

1/ Mr. Timlen, out of the country at this time, executed his oath of office 
on April 1, 1985.

- 2 -



3/26/85

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 1986, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the 

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have 

any official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 

Paul A. Volcker Chairman 
E. Gerald Corrigan Vice Chairman 

Stephen H. Axilrod Staff Director and Secretary 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Nancy M. Steele Deputy Assistant Secretary 

Michael Bradfield General Counsel 
James H. Oltman Deputy General Counsel 
James L. Kichline Economist 

Edwin M. Truman Economist (International) 

Joseph R. Bisignano, J. Alfred Broaddus, 
Richard G. Davis, Donald L. Kohn, 
David E. Lindsey, Michael J. Prell, 
Karl A. Scheld, Charles J. Siegman, 
and Sheila L. Tschinkel Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Committee after February 28, 1986.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for 

Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the under

standing that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subseqently received 

that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

- 3 -



3/26/85

Consideration was then given to the continuing authorizations of 

the Committee, in accordance with the customary practice of reviewing such 

matters at the first meeting in March of every year.  

Secretary's note: On March 6, 1985, certain continuing 
authorizations of the Committee, listed below, had been 
distributed by the Secretary with the advice that, in 
accordance with procedures approved by the Committee, 
they were being called to the Committee's attention 
before the March organization meeting to give members 
an opportunity to raise any questions they might have 
concerning them. Members were asked to so indicate if 
they wished to have any of the authorizations in question 

placed on the agenda for consideration at this meeting, 
and no such requests were received.  

The authorizations in question were as follows: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 

System Open Market Account.  

2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 

Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

3. Resolutions providing for continued operations of the 
Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 
during an emergency.  

4. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

5. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

7. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

8. Agreement with the U.S. Treasury to Warehouse Foreign 
Currencies

- 4 -



3/26/85

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

Reaffirmed March 26, 1985 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 

with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open market at 

home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with the 

U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other international financial 

institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 

was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $8.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all

- 5 -



3/26/85

foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi

tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity: 

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment

- 6 -



3/26/85

return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 

adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 
transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 

exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 

arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 

Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 

Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 
the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 
in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 

maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 
securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 

member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 
members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 
Manager for Foreign Operations, for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 
of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;

- 7 -



3/26/85

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 
of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 

Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.  

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
Reaffirmed March 26, 1985 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 
countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 
for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 
Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 

Committee.

- 8 -



3/26/85

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 

States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 
and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 
IMF Aticle IV.  

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 

Reaffirmed March 26, 1985 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 

net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in 1B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 

larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.

- 9 -



3/26/85 - 10 -

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair
man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph l(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $4 billion to $6 billion the 

limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings of U.S. government 

and federal agency securities. With this amendment, the authorization reads 

as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
Amended March 26, 1985 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 

provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $6.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting;



3/26/85 - 11 -

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 

to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 

for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of 

goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 

that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 
aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 

exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 

obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 

shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable 
limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 

such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 

System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 

acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 

Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 

Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 

the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern
ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 
set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 
such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 
for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers,



3/26/85 - 12 -

subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in 

paragraph 1(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro
visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 12-13, 1985, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances during the period 

February 13 through March 25, 1985, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 13 through March 25, 1985 were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP is currently expanding at a slower pace 
than in the fourth quarter, with an increased share of 
domestic spending apparently being met out of imports.  
Total retail sales rose considerably for January and 
February combined and housing starts, though declining 
in February, were above their fourth-quarter pace.  
However, information on business capital spending 
suggests less rapid expansion in early 1985. Business 
inventory investment continues at a moderate rate.  
Industrial production declined on balance in January 
and February and, with employment falling in the manu
facturing sector, total nonfarm payroll employment 
increased at a somewhat reduced pace. The civilian 
unemployment rate, at 7.3 percent in February, was 
little changed from its level at year-end. Broad 
measures of prices and the index of average hourly 
earnings appear to be continuing to rise at rates 
close to those recorded in 1984.



3/26/85

Since the Committee's meeting in mid-February, 
the foreign exchange value of the dollar has fluctuated 
widely in often volatile market conditions. Most 
recently, the trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against major foreign currencies has dropped sharply, 
more than offsetting its rise earlier in the inter
meeting interval. Monetary authorities sold dollars 
on a large scale during the period, especially in 
late February and early March. The merchandise trade 
deficit increased sharply in January from relatively 
low December and fourth-quarter rates. The current 
account deficit for the full year 1984 was more than 
double that recorded in 1983.  

Growth in M1 accelerated in February, following 
relatively rapid expansion in other recent months, but 
information available through mid-March indicates a 
considerable slowing. Growth in the broader aggregates 
moderated in February and appears to be slowing further 
in March. In January and February expansion in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt remained relatively rapid, 
though somewhat below the pace of previous months.  
Most interest rates have risen somewhat since the 
February meeting of the Committee.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at its meeting 
in February to establish ranges for monetary growth 
of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 
6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3 for the period from the 
fourth quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985.  
The associated range for total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was set at 9 to 12 percent for the year 1985.  
The Committee agreed that growth in the monetary aggre
gates in the upper part of their ranges for 1985 may 
be appropriate, depending on developments with respect 
to velocity and provided that inflationary pressures 
remain subdued.

- 13 -



3/26/85 - 14 -

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, taking account of the progress against inflation, 
uncertainties in the business outlook, and the exchange 
value of the dollar, the Committee seeks to maintain 
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.  
This action is expected to be consistent with growth 
in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of around 6, 7, and 
8 percent respectively during the period from March to 
June. Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be 
acceptable in the event of substantially slower growth 
of the monetary aggregates while somewhat greater 
restraint might be acceptable in the event of sub
stantially higher growth. In either case such a 
change would be considered in the context of appraisals 
of the strength of the business expansion, progress 
against inflation, and conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets. The Chairman may call 
for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during 
the period before the next meeting is likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 21, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

Secretary's note: On April 16, 1985, by unanimous 
vote, with Mr. Timlen voting as alternate for 
Mr. Corrigan and Messrs. Partee, Rice and Wallich 
absent and not voting, Committee members approved a 
temporary increase from $6 billion to $9 billion in 
the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System 
account holdings of U.S. government and federal 
agency securities for the period ending May 21, 1985.


