














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 21, 1985 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 21, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Forrestal 
Gramley 
Keehn 
Martin 
Partee 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Messrs. Boykin, Guffey, Mrs. Horn, and Mr. Morris, Alternate 

Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered the meeting after action to ratify transactions in domestic 

operations.



5/21/85

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Garbarini, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, and Syron, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia, 
and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Pearce and Rolnick, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 26, 1985, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period March 26, 1985, through 

May 20, 1985, were ratified.  

With Mr. Black dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:



5/21/85

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 

only a modest pick-up in real GNP in the current 
quarter from the reduced rate of growth in the first 
quarter. Total retail sales rose in April to a 

level somewhat above the average for the first quarter, 
and housing starts increased further after rising 
substantially in the first quarter. Information on 
business capital spending suggests further growth, 
though at a much less rapid pace than earlier in the 
economic expansion. Industrial production declined 

slightly in April after rising little over the first 
quarter. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased 
at a somewhat reduced pace in April with employment 
in manufacturing registering another decline. The 
civilian unemployment rate remained at 7.3 percent 
in April. Broad measures of prices and wages appear 
to be rising at rates close to those recorded in 1984.  

Since the Committee's meeting in late March, the 
trade-weighted value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has continued to fluctuate widely 
in often volatile market conditions and has declined 
moderately on balance. The trade and current account 
deficits widened in the first quarter as a rebound in 
non-oil imports from their low fourth-quarter level 
extended the pattern of sharp quarter-to-quarter 
swings experienced since the beginning of 1984.  

Growth in M1 slowed markedly in March from the 
rapid pace of earlier months and remained moderate 
in April. The broader aggregates showed little change 
in April after their growth had slowed appreciably in 
March. Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt 
has remained relatively rapid. Interest rates have 
declined considerably since the March meeting of the 
Committee. On May 17, the Federal Reserve Board 
approved a reduction in the discount rate from 8 to 
7-1/2 percent.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at its meeting

-3-



5/21/85

in February to establish ranges for monetary growth of 
4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6 
to 9-1/2 percent for M3 for the period from the fourth 
quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985. The 

associated range for total domestic nonfinancial debt 
was set at 9 to 12 percent for the year 1985. The 
Committee agreed that growth in the monetary aggregates 
in the upper part of their ranges for 1985 may be 
appropriate, depending on developments with respect 
to velocity and provided that inflationary pressures 
remain subdued.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of conditions in domestic credit 
and foreign exchange markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, and against the background of the recent 
reduction in the discount rate, the Committee seeks 
to maintain about the same degree of pressure on bank 
reserve positions. This action is expected to be 
consistent with growth in Ml at an annual rate of 
around 6 percent or a little higher during the 
period from March to June, while M2 and M3, in the 
light of their weakness in April, are expected to 
grow more slowly over the quarter than the 7 and 8 
percent annual rates, respectively, anticipated 
earlier. Somewhat lesser reserve restraint would 
be acceptable in the event of substantially slower 
growth of the monetary aggregates while somewhat 
greater restraint might be acceptable in the event 
of substantially higher growth. In either case such 
a change would be considered in the context of 
appraisals of the strength of the business expansion, 
progress against inflation, and conditions in 
domestic credit and foreign exchange markets. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve 
paths during the period before the next meeting is 
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.



5/21/85

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday-Wednesday, July 9-10, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


