














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 16-17, 1985 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 16, 1985, at 3:30 p.m. and continuing 

on Tuesday, December 17, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 

Mr. Guffey,1/ Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, Scheld, 
Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ At this meeting, Mr. Guffey voted as alternate for Mr. Balles.



12/16-17/85 -2

Mr. Roberts,1/ Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Griffith, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum, 
Scadding, and Thieke, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, 
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, San Francisco, 
and New York, respectively 

Messrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 4-5, 1985, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 5, 1985, through December 16, 1985 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securites and agency obligations during the period November 5, 1985, through 

December 16, 1985, were ratified.  

With Mr. Black dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held on 
November 4-5, 1985.



12/16-17/85

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is expanding at a relatively 
modest pace in the current quarter. Total nonfarm 
payroll employment increased further in November, 
though less than in October, and the civilian unemploy
ment rate edged down to 7.0 percent. Retail sales and 
industrial production picked up in November after 
declining in October. After strengthening in October, 
housing starts fell appreciably in November. Incoming 
information generally suggests relatively sluggish 
business capital spending. Revised merchandise trade 
data for the third quarter confirm that the deficit 
widened further, as non-oil imports continued to 
increase and exports fell somewhat. Broad measures 
of prices and wages appear to be rising at rates 
close to those recorded earlier in the year.  

After declining in October, M1 grew substantially 
in November while growth in M2 and M3 continued quite 
moderate. Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt 
has remained rapid. Through November, M1 expanded at a 
rate well above the long-run range set by the Committee, 
M2 grew at a rate a bit below the upper end of its range 
for the year, and M3 expanded at a rate near the mid
point of its range for 1985. Treasury bill rates have 
fallen somewhat while other short-term market interest 
rates have changed little on balance since the November 
meeting of the Committee; long-term rates have moved 
appreciably lower over the period. The trade-weighted 
value of the dollar against major foreign currencies 
has declined on balance since the Committee's meeting 
in early November, though the dollar has tended to 
stabilize more recently.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee at the July meeting 
reaffirmed ranges for the year of 6 to 9 percent for 
M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The associated range 
for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at 
9 to 12 percent. With respect to M1, the base was moved



12/16-17/85

forward to the second quarter of 1985 and a range was 
established at an annual growth rate of 3 to 8 percent.  

The range takes account of expectations of a return of 
velocity growth toward more usual patterns, following 
the sharp decline in velocity during the first half of 
the year, while also recognizing a higher degree of 
uncertainty regarding that behavior. The appropriateness 
of the new range will continue to be reexamined in the 

light of evidence with respect to economic and financial 
developments including developments in foreign exchange 
markets. More generally, the Committee agreed that 
growth in the aggregates may be in the upper parts of 
their ranges, depending on continuing developments 
with respect to velocity and provided that inflationary 

pressures remain subdued.  

For 1986 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986, of 4 to 7 percent 
for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for 

M3. The associated range for growth in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at 8 to 11 
percent for 1986. With respect to M1 particularly, 
the Committee recognized that uncertainties surrounding 
recent behavior of velocity would require careful 
reappraisal of the target range at the beginning of 

1986. Moreover, in establishing ranges for next year, 
the Committee also recognized that account would need 
to be taken of experience with institutional and 
depository behavior in response to the completion 
of deposit rate deregulation early in the year.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to decrease somewhat the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.  
This action is expected to be consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 over the period from November to March 
at annual rates of about 6 to 8 percent; while the 
behavior of Ml continues to be subject to unusual 
uncertainty, growth at an annual rate of 7 to 9 
percent over the period is anticipated. Somewhat 
greater reserve restraint might, and somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would, be acceptable depending on 
behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the

-4-



12/16-17/85

business expansion, developments in foreign exchange 
markets, progress against inflation, and conditions 
in domestic and international credit markets. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on February 11-12, 1986.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


