














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 1, 1985 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 1, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich 

Mr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, 1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Broaddus,l/ R. Davis,l/ Kohn,l/ Lindsey,l/ Prell,l/ 
Scheld,l/ and Ms. Tschinkel,l/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1/ Entered meeting after action to ratify foreign currency transactions.



10/1/85

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low,1/ Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. T. Davis,1/ Lang,1/ Ms. Munnell,1/ and Mr. Rolnick,1/ 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Messrs. Burger,1/ Pearce,1/ and Scadding,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Sniderman,1/ Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Ms. Meulendyke,1/ Manager, Securities Department, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 20, 1985, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period August 20, 1985, through September 30, 1985, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period August 20, 1985, through 

September 30, 1985, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved an increase from $8.0 

billion to $10.0 billion in the limit on the System's overall open position 

in all foreign currencies contained in paragraph 1D of the Authorization 

for Foreign Currency Operations. This action was effective immediately.

1/ Entered meeting after action to ratify foreign currency transactions.



10/1/85

With Mr. Black dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute 

transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity expanded in the third quarter 
at a moderately faster rate than in the first half of 
the year. In August, industrial production increased 
somewhat. Total retail sales rose considerably, boosted 
by a surge in auto sales. Housing starts, while 
increasing in August, were still no higher than their 
average level in the second quarter. Incoming informa
tion generally suggested a leveling of business capital 
spending. The merchandise trade deficit in July and 
August averaged somewhat less than in the second 
quarter as a drop in imports was partly offset by 
a slight decline in exports. Total nonfarm payroll 
employment rose somewhat more in August than in most 
other recent months. The civilian unemployment rate 
fell from 7.3 percent in July -- its level since 
February -- to 7.0 percent in August. Broad measures 
of prices and wages appear to be rising at rates 
close to or somewhat below those recorded earlier 
in the year.  

Following the Committee's meeting on August 20, the 
trade-weighted value of the dollar against major foreign 
currencies appreciated through mid-September. The dollar 
subsequently declined sharply, especially after the 
announcement on September 22 by the Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors of the G-5 countries that 
exchange rates have not fully reflected economic 
fundamentals.  

M1 growth surged in August, reflecting exceptional 
strength in interest-bearing checkable deposits and 
relatively rapid expansion in other components; data 
for the first half of September suggest slower but still 
substantial expansion. Reflecting the surge in M1, M2 
accelerated in August, and M3 also strengthened somewhat.  
Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt has remained 
relatively rapid. Most market interest rates have changed 
little on balance since the August meeting of the Committee.



10/1/85

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee at the July meeting reaffirmed 
ranges for the year of 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 
percent for M3. The associated range for total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at 9 to 12 percent.  
With respect to M1, the base was moved forward to the 
second quarter of 1985 and a range was established at an 
annual growth rate of 3 to 8 percent. The range takes 
account of expectations of a return of velocity growth 
toward more usual patterns, following the sharp decline 
in velocity during the first half of the year, while 
also recognizing a higher degree of uncertainty regarding 
that behavior. The appropriateness of the new range will 
continue to be reexamined in the light of evidence with 
respect to economic and financial developments including 
developments in foreign exchange markets. More generally, 
the Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates may 
be in the upper parts of their ranges, depending on 
continuing developments with respect to velocity and 
provided that inflationary pressures remain subdued.  

For 1986 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges of 
monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 
to the fourth quarter of 1986, of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 
6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The 
associated range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was provisionally set at 8 to 11 percent for 1986.  
With respect to M1 particularly, the Committee recognized 
that uncertainties surrounding recent behavior of velocity 
would require careful reappraisal of the target range at 
the beginning of 1986. Moreover, in establishing ranges 
for next year, the Committee also recognized that account 
would need to be taken of experience with institutional 
and depositor behavior in response to the completion of 
deposit rate deregulation early in the year.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of 
pressure on reserve positions sought in recent weeks.  
This action is expected to be consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 over the period from September to December

-4-



10/1/85

at annual rates of about 6 to 7 percent. A marked slowing 
of Ml growth over the period to an annual rate of around 
6 to 7 percent is also anticipated; slower growth over 
the next three months would be acceptable in the context 
of satisfactory economic performance, given recent very 
rapid growth in M1. Somewhat greater or lesser reserve 

restraint would be acceptable depending on behavior of 
the aggregates, taking account of appraisals of the 
strength of the business expansion, developments in 

foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, 
and conditions in domestic and international credit 
markets. The Chairman may call for Committee consulta
tion if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 
that reserve conditions during the period before the 
next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on November 5, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

Secretary's Note: On October 24, 1985, the Committee 
members approved an increase of $500 million, to a 
level of $2.0 billion, in the intermeeting limit on 
changes in the System's overall open position in 
foreign currencies specified under paragraph 2A of 
the "Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign 
Currency Operations." The action was effective 
October 24, 1985, for the period ending November 5, 
1985.  

Votes for this action: Messrs. Volcker, 
Black, Guffey, Keehn, Martin, Melzer, Rice, 
Ms. Seger, and Mr. Timlen. Votes against 
this action: None. Absent and not voting: 
Messrs. Partee and Wallich (Messrs. Guffey, 
Melzer, and Timlen voted as alternates).

-5-


