














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 12-13, 1985

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 12, 1985, at 2:30 p.m. and 

continuing on Wednesday, February 13, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Gramley 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Martin 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey, 
Prell, Siegman, and Stern, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



2/12-13/85

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Jones 1/ and Teplin 1/, Economists, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Gainor and Garbarini, First Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, Bisignano, T. Davis, Parthemos, Scheld, 

and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Kansas City, 
Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively 

Ms. Clarkin, Messrs. Judd and McNees, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, and 
Boston, respectively 

By unanimous vote, E. Gerald Corrigan was elected to serve as 

Vice Chairman of the Committee until the first meeting of the Committee after 

February 28, 1985.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 17-18, 1984, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign currencies 

during the period December 18, 1984 through February 12, 1985, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period December 18, 1984, through 

February 12, 1985, were ratified.  

1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday related to 

consideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives for monetary 
and credit aggregates.



2/12-13/85

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $4 billion to $6 billion the 

dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings of U. S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

on March 26, 1985.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Wednesday session.  

With Messrs. Boehne, Martin, and Wallich dissenting, the Committee 

voted for the following longer-run policy: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at this 
meeting to establish ranges for monetary growth of 
4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 
6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3 for the period from the 
fourth quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985.  
The associated range for total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was set at 9 to 12 percent for the year 1985.  
The Committee agreed that growth in the monetary 

aggregates in the upper part of their ranges for 1985 
may be appropriate, depending on developments with 
respect to velocity and provided that inflationary 
pressures remain subdued.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following

domestic policy directive:



2/12-13/85

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that real GNP expanded at a moderate pace in the fourth 
quarter, reflecting some strengthening in late 1984 
after several months of considerably reduced growth, and 
there was evidence of continued moderate expansion in 
early 1985. Total retail sales rose in January at about 
the same pace as the average for November and December, 
while the decline in housing starts appears to have ended.  
Industrial production and nonfarm payroll employment 
increased appreciably in the November-December period and 
nonfarm payroll employment rose substantially further in 
January. The civilian unemployment rate rose slightly in 
January to 7.4 percent. Information on business spending 
suggests less rapid expansion in outlays for fixed invest
ment, following exceptional growth earlier; businesses 
also appear to have made substantial progress in adjusting 
their inventories. During 1984 broad measures of prices 
generally increased at rates close to those recorded in 
1983, and the index of average hourly earnings rose 
somewhat more slowly.  

The foreign exchange value of the dollar against a 
trade-weighted average of major foreign currencies has 
continued to appreciate strongly since mid-December.  
After the announcement on January 17 by the G-5 Ministers 
of Finance and Central Bank Governors regarding coordinated 
intervention in exchange markets, and subsequent operations, 
the dollar's rise moderated somewhat. The merchandise 
trade deficit declined sharply in December and for the 
fourth quarter as a whole, primarily because of a large 
drop in imports from the high rate in the third quarter.  
Nevertheless, the deficit for the full year 1984 was sub
stantially higher than in 1983.  

After growing little on balance since early summer, 
Ml expanded at a rapid pace in late 1984 and early 1985.  
The broader aggregates also expanded rapidly in recent 
months. For the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 
to the fourth quarter of 1984, M1 grew at a rate of about 
5-1/4 percent, somewhat below the midpoint of the Committee's 
range for the year, and M2 increased at a rate of about 
7-3/4 percent, a bit above the midpoint of its longer-run 
range. Both M3 and total domestic nonfinancial debt 
expanded at rates above the Committee's ranges for the



2/12-13/85

year, reflecting very large government borrowing and strong 
private credit growth, boosted in part by the unusual size 
of merger-related credit activity. Short-term interest 
rates have risen somewhat on balance since the December 
meeting of the Committee, but long-term rates are about 
unchanged to a little lower. On December 21, the Federal 
Reserve approved a reduction in the discount rate from 8-1/2 
to 8 percent.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce 
inflation further, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of international 
transactions. In furtherance of these objectives the Committee 
agreed at this meeting to establish ranges for monetary growth 
of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6 to 
9-1/2 percent for M3 for the period from the fourth quarter 
of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985. The associated range 
for total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 9 to 12 percent 
for the year 1985. The Committee agreed that growth in the 
monetary aggregates in the upper part of their ranges for 
1985 may be appropriate, depending on developments with 
respect to velocity and provided that inflationary pressures 
remain subdued.  

The Committee understood that policy implementation 
would require continuing appraisal of the relationships 
not only among the various measures of money and credit 
but also between those aggregates and nominal GNP, in
cluding evaluation of conditions in domestic credit and 
foreign exchange markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, taking account of the progress against inflation, 
remaining uncertainties in the business outlook, and the 
strength of the dollar in the exchange markets, the 
Committee seeks to maintain reserve conditions character
istic of recent weeks. Should growth in M1 appear to 
be exceeding an annual rate of around 8 percent and 
M2 and M3 a rate of around 10 to 11 percent during the 
period from December to March, modest increases in 
reserve pressures would be sought, particularly if 
business activity is rising at a satisfactory rate and 
exchange market pressures diminish. Lesser restraint 
on reserve positions would be acceptable in the event 
of substantially slower growth in the monetary aggre
gates, particularly in the context of sluggish growth

-5-



2/12-13/85

in economic activity and continued strength of the 
dollar in foreign exchange markets. The Chairman may 
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the 
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the 
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during 
the period before the next meeting is likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, March 26, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


