














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 9-10, 1985 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 9, 1985, at 3:00 p.m., and continuing 

on Wednesday, July 10, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Forrestal 
Keehn 
Martin 
Partee 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Mr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, 2/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for the May meeting.

2/ Attended Wednesday session only.



7/9-10/85

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to.the Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, 
Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, and Syron, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Cleveland, Kansas City, New York, Philadelphia, 
Minneapolis, and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Judd, Pearce, and Scadding, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Dallas, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 21, 1985, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and agency obligations during the period May 21, 1985, through 

July 9, 1985, were ratified.  

With Mr. Black dissenting, the following longer-run policy for 1985 

was approved by the Committee: 

The Committee at this meeting reaffirmed ranges 
for the year of 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 
percent for M3. The associated range for total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at 9 to 12 percent.  
With respect to M1, the base was moved forward to the 
second quarter of 1985 and a range was established at 
an annual growth rate of 3 to 8 percent. The range 
takes account of expectations of a return of velocity 
growth toward more usual patterns, following the 
sharp decline in velocity during the first half of 
the year, while also recognizing a higher degree of 
uncertainty regarding that behavior. The appropriate
ness of the new range will continue to be reexamined

-2-



7/9-10/85

in the light of evidence with respect to economic 
and financial developments including developments 
in foreign exchange markets. More generally, the 
Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates 
may be in the upper parts of their ranges, depending 
on continuing developments with respect to velocity 
and provided that inflationary pressures remain 
subdued.  

With Mr. Martin and Ms. Seger dissenting, the following longer-run 

policy for 1986 was adopted by the Committee: 

For 1986 the Committee agreed on tentative 
ranges of monetary growth, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 
1986, of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent 
for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated 
range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was provisionally set at 8 to 11 percent for 
1986. With respect to M1 particularly, the Committee 
recognized that uncertainties surrounding recent 
behavior of velocity would require careful re
appraisal of the target range at the beginning of 
1986. Moreover, in establishing ranges for next year, 
the Committee also recognized that account would 
need to be taken of experience with institutional 
and depositor behavior in response to the completion 
of deposit rate deregulation early in the year.  

With Mr. Black and Ms. Seger dissenting from the short-run operational 

paragraph, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
some pickup in the expansion of economic activity in 
recent months following virtually no growth in the 
first quarter. Total retail sales rose on balance in 
April and May to a level appreciably above the average 
for the first quarter, and housing starts held earlier 
gains after rising substantially in the first quarter.  
Information on business capital spending suggests further 
growth, though at a much less rapid pace than earlier 
in the economic expansion. Industrial production 
declined slightly in April and May after rising little



7/9-10/85

over the first quarter. Total nonfarm payroll employ
ment increased at a somewhat reduced pace in May and 
June with employment in manufacturing registering 
further declines. The civilian unemployment rate 
remained at 7.3 percent in June, unchanged since 
February. Broad measures of prices and wages appear 
to be rising at rates close to those recorded in 1984.  

Since the Committee's meeting in May, the trade
weighted value of the dollar against major foreign 
currencies has generally moved within a relatively 
narrow range but recently has declined to a level 
below its April low. The merchandise trade deficit in 
April-May widened from the first-quarter rate as both 
agricultural and non-agricultural exports fell, while 
imports remained close to their high first-quarter 
level.  

M1 expanded very rapidly in May and June after 
growing at a moderate pace in the preceding two months.  
The broader aggregates also grew more rapidly in May 
and June after slowing appreciably earlier. From the 
fourth quarter of 1984 through June, M1 grew at a rate 
well above the Committee's range for 1985; M2 increased 
at a rate around the upper end of its longer-run range; 
while M3 expanded at a rate in the upper half of its 
range. Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt 
slowed a little in the second quarter but remained 
high relative to the Committee's monitoring range 
for the year. Interest rates have declined somewhat 
further since the May meeting of the Committee.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee at this meeting 
reaffirmed ranges for the year of 6 to 9 percent for 
M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The associated range 
for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed 
at 9 to 12 percent. With respect to M1, the base was 
moved forward to the second quarter of 1985 and a range 
was established at an annual growth rate of 3 to 8 
percent. The range takes account of expectations of

-4-



7/9-10/85

a return of velocity growth toward more usual patterns, 
following the sharp decline in velocity during the 
first half of the year, while also recognizing a 
higher degree of uncertainty regarding that behavior.  
The appropriateness of the new range will continue to 
be reexamined in the light of evidence with respect to 
economic and financial developments including develop
ments in foreign exchange markets. More generally, the 
Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates may be 
in the upper parts of their ranges, depending on 
continuing developments with respect to velocity and 
provided that inflationary pressures remain subdued.  

For 1986 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986, of 4 to 7 percent 
for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for M3.  
The associated range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt was provisionally set at 8 to 11 percent 
for 1986. With respect to Ml particularly, the Committee 
recognized that uncertainties surrounding recent behavior 
of velocity would require careful reappraisal of the 
target range at the beginning of 1986. Moreover, in 
establishing ranges for next year, the Committee also 
recognized that account would need to be taken of 
experience with institutional and depositor behavior 
in response to the completion of deposit rate deregulation 
early in the year.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action 
is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 
at an annual rate of around 7-1/2 percent during the 
period from June to September, and with a substantial 
slowing of M1 growth to an annual rate of 5 to 6 percent.  
Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable 
in the event of substantially slower growth of the 
monetary aggregates while somewhat greater restraint 
would be acceptable in the event of substantially 
higher growth. In either case such a change would 
be considered in the context of appraisals of the 
strength of the business expansion, progress against 
inflation, and conditions in domestic credit and 
foreign exchange markets. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager

-5-



7/9-10/85 -6

for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary 
objectives and related reserve paths during the period 
before the next meeting is likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on August 20, 1985.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


