














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 20, 1986 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Guffey 
Horn 
Johnson 
Melzer 
Morris 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, 
and Siegman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting of 
April 1, 1986.



Mr. Coyne, 1/ Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr..Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld, 
Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Minneapolis, 
Dallas, San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Burger, Cook, and Fieleke, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond, 
and Boston, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 1, 1986, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securites and Federal agency obligations during the period April 1, 1986, 

through May 19, 1986, were ratified.  

Without objection, the Committee agreed to a suggestion by the 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, that, given 

changes in recent years in reserve requirement reporting periods, the Manager's 

weekly "Report of Open Market Operations and Money Market Conditions" should 

be replaced by a report covering operations and money market developments 

for each 2-week reserve maintenance period.  

1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting of 
April 1, 1986.

5/20/86 -2-



5/20/86

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
a mixed pattern of developments but suggests on balance 
that economic activity is expanding at a relatively 
modest pace in the current quarter. Total nonfarm pay
roll employment increased moderately further in April 
following a considerable rise in the first quarter, 
but employment in manufacturing fell for the third 
consecutive month. The civilian unemployment rate 
edged down to 7.1 percent. Industrial production and 
total retail sales turned up in April following earlier 
declines, while housing starts rose somewhat further 
from a relatively high level. Weakness in the energy 
sector has contributed to a slowing of business capital 
spending. The merchandise trade deficit appears to 
have decreased somewhat in the first quarter, as the 
volume and average price of oil imports fell. Largely 
reflecting declines in energy prices, consumer prices 
have declined somewhat since late 1985 and producer 
prices have fallen substantially.  

In April M1 continued to grow at a rapid pace, leaving 
this aggregate above the upper end of its range for the 
year. Growth of the broader aggregates, especially of M2, 
strengthened considerably in April, bringing M2 into the 
lower part of its long-run range and M3 slightly above the 
midpoint of its range for 1986. Most short-term interest 
rates have declined on balance since the April 1 meeting 
of the Committee, while long-term rates are somewhat 
higher. On April 18, the Federal Reserve Board approved 
a reduction in the discount rate from 7 to 6-1/2 percent.  
The trade-weighted value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has risen somewhat recently but on 
balance the dollar has declined further since the April 
meeting, particularly against the Japanese yen.



5/20/86

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 

of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee agreed at its February meeting 
to establish the following ranges for monetary growth, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth 
quarter of 1986. With respect to M1, the Committee 
recognized that, based on the experience of recent 
years, the behavior of that aggregate was subject to 
substantial uncertainties in relationship to economic 
activity and prices, depending among other things on 
its responsiveness to changes in interest rates. It 
agreed that an appropriate target range under existing 
circumstances would be 3 to 8 percent, but it intends 
to evaluate movements in M1 in the light of its con
sistency with the other monetary aggregates, developments 
in the economy and financial markets, and potential 
inflationary pressures. It adopted a range of 6 to 9 
percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The associated 
range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt was 
set at 8 to 11 percent for the year 1986.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action 
is expected to be consistent with a deceleration in 
money growth over the balance of the quarter. However, 
in view of the rapid money growth thus far in the 
quarter and the apparent weakness in velocity, the 
Committee anticipates faster growth for the monetary 
aggregates, particularly M1, than expected at the 
last meeting. M2 and M3 are expected to expand over 
the period from March to June at annual rates of about 
8 to 10 percent. While the behavior of M1 continues 
to be subject to unusual uncertainty, growth at an 
annual rate of about 12 to 14 percent over the period 
is now anticipated. If the anticipated slowing in 
monetary growth does not develop, somewhat greater 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the context 
of a pickup in growth of the economy, taking account 
of conditions in domestic and international financial 
markets and the behavior of the dollar in foreign



5/20/86 -5

exchange markets. Somewhat lesser reserve restraint 
might be acceptable in the context of a marked slowing 
in money growth and pronounced sluggishness in economic 
performance. The Chairman may call for Committee con
sultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 
Operations that reserve conditions during the period 
before the next meeting are likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a 

range of 5 to 9 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on July 8-9, 1986.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


