














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 11-12, 1986

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 11, 1986, at 3:10 p.m. and 

continuing on Wednesday, February 12, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan,1/ Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Martin 
Parry 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Mr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, 
respectively 

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Steele,1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman,1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Broaddus, Kohn,1/ Lindsey, Prell, Scheld, 
Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross,1/ Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting of 
December 16-17, 1985, and acceptance of the report of Examination 
of the System Open Market Account.



2/11-12/86

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Danker 1/ and Mr. Stockton,1/ Economists, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek,2/ Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, 
Rosenblum, and Scadding, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, 
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Higgins and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Kansas City and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Guentner, Manager, Securities Department, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting notice of the 
election of Robert T. Parry as member of the Federal Open 
Market Committee for the period February 5 through 
February 28, 1986, had been received by the Secretary, 
and Mr. Parry had executed his oath of office.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 16-17, 1985, were approved.  

The report of examination of the System Open Market Account, made 

by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as of the close of 

business May 31, 1985, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securites and Federal agency obligations during the period December 17, 1985, 

through February 11, 1986, were ratified.  

1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
and action on monetary growth ranges for 1986.  

2/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting of 

December 16-17, 1985, and acceptance of the report of Examination 
of the System Open Market Account.

-2-



2/11-12/86

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Wednesday session.  

By unanimous vote, the Comittee voted for the following longer-run 

policy: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed to establish 
the following ranges for monetary growth, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter 
of 1986. With respect to M1, the Committee recognized 
that, based on the experience of recent years, the 
behavior of that aggregate was subject to substantial 
uncertainties in relationship to economic activity 
and prices, depending among other things on its 
responsiveness to changes in interest rates. It 
agreed that an appropriate target range under existing 
circumstances would be 3 to 8 percent, but it intends 
to evaluate movements in M1 in the light of its 
consistency with the other monetary aggregates, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, 
and potential inflationary pressures. It adopted 
a range of 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent 
for M3. The associated range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent 
for the year 1986.  

With Mr. Martin and Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is currently expanding at a 
moderate pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
increased substantially further in January, and the 
civilian unemployment rate declined to 6.7 percent.

-3-



2/11-12/86

In December industrial production rose further, and 
available information suggests some additional rise 
in January. Retail sales increased considerably in 
December after declining on balance over the previous 
two months, and housing starts rebounded from their 
October-November pace. Business capital spending 
strengthened somewhat in the fourth quarter.  
Merchandise trade data for the fourth quarter 
suggest that the deficit widened further from the 
very high third-quarter level. In late 1985 
consumer and producer prices rose somewhat more 
than earlier, but for the year as a whole broad 
measures of prices and wages increased at rates 
close to those recorded in 1984.  

With respect to the Committee's ranges for longer
term monetary growth, M1 expanded at a rate well above 
the range set for the second half of 1985; M2 grew at a 
rate somewhat below the upper end of its range for the 
year; and M3 expanded at a rate near the midpoint of its 
range for 1985. Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial 
debt was above the upper end of its monitoring range for 
the year. In January growth in M1 and M2 slowed markedly, 
while growth in M3 picked up as banks issued a substantial 
volume of large time deposits to support further robust 
growth in bank credit. Interest rates have fluctuated 
considerably since the December meeting of the Committee; 
on balance, short-term interest rates have risen a little 
while longer-term rates are unchanged to somewhat lower.  
The trade-weighted value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies has declined further.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster 
monetary and financial conditions that will help to 
reduce inflation further, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed to establish 
the following ranges for monetary growth, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter 
of 1986. With respect to M1, the Committee recognized 
that, based on the experience of recent years, the 
behavior of that aggregate was subject to substantial 
uncertainties in relationship to economic activity 
and prices, depending among other things on its 
responsiveness to changes in interest rates. It 
agreed that an appropriate target range under existing



2/11-12/86

circumstances would be 3 to 8 percent, but it intends 
to evaluate movements in M1 in the light of its 
consistency with the other monetary aggregates, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, 
and potential inflationary pressures. It adopted 
a range of 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent 
for M3. The associated range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent 
for the year 1986.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 

future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action 
is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 
over the period from November to March at annual rates 
of about 6 percent and 7 percent, respectively; while 
the behavior of M1 continues to be subject to unusual 
uncertainty, growth at an annual rate of about 7 percent 
over the period is anticipated. Somewhat greater reserve 
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be 
acceptable depending on behavior of the aggregates, the 
strength of the business expansion, developments in 
foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, 
and conditions in domestic and international credit 
markets. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation 
if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on April 1, 1986.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


