














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 8-9, 1986 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 8, 1986, at 3:00 p.m., and continuing 

on Wednesday, July 9, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Guffey 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn, 
Lindsey, Prell, and Siegman, Associate Economists

1/ Attended Wednesday session only.



7/8-9/86

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for 

Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Danker 1/and Mr. Struckmeyer, 1/ Economists, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, 
Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld, Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, 
San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Ms. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 20, 1986, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in Government 

securities and Federal agency obligations during the period May 20, 1986, 

through July 8, 1986, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the following longer-run policy for 1986 was 

approved by the Committee: 

The Committee agreed at this meeting to reaffirm 
the ranges established in February for growth of 
6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3, measured from 
the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 
1986. With respect to Ml, the Committee recognized 
that, based on the experience of recent years, the 

1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday.related to 
consideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives for 
monetary and debt aggregates.



7/8-9/86

behavior of that aggregate is subject to substantial 
uncertainties in relation to economic activity and 
prices, depending among other things on the respon
siveness of M1 growth to changes in interest rates. In 
light of these uncertainties and of the substantial 
decline in velocity in the first half of the year, the 
Committee decided that growth of M1 in excess of the 
previously established 3 to 8 percent range for 1986 
would be acceptable. Acceptable growth of M1 over the 
remainder of the year will depend on the behavior of 
velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, and 
price pressures. Given its rapid growth in the early 
part of the year, the Committee recognized that the 
increase in total domestic nonfinancial debt in 1986 
may exceed its monitoring range of 8 to 11 percent, but 
felt an increase in that range would provide an 
inappropriate benchmark for evaluating longer-term 
trends in that aggregate.  

With Ms. Seger dissenting, the following longer-run policy for 

1987 was adopted by the Committee: 

For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987, of 5-1/2 to 
8-1/2 percent for M2 and M3. While a range of 3 to 8 
percent for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the 
light of most historical experience, the Committee 
recognized that the exceptional uncertainties surrounding 
the behavior of M1 velocity over the more recent period 
would require careful appraisal of the target range at 
the beginning of 1987. The associated range for growth 
in total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally 
set at 8 to 11 percent for 1987.  

With Mr. Melzer dissenting from the short-run operational para

graph, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
a mixed pattern of developments but suggests on balance 
that economic activity expanded slowly in the second 
quarter. In June total nonfarm payroll employment grew



7/8-9/86

little after accounting for striking workers, with 
continued weakness in the industrial sector reflected 
in further declines in employment in manufacturing and 

mining. The civilian unemployment rate moved down to 
7.1 percent from 7.3 percent in May. Industrial 
production declined in May. Total retail sales were 
about unchanged during the month, although consumer 
spending rose considerably for the second quarter as 
a whole. Housing starts fell somewhat in May from a 
relatively high level. Weakness in the energy sector 
has contributed to a slowing of business capital 
spending. Preliminary data for the U.S. merchandise 
trade balance in April show a somewhat larger deficit 
than the rate recorded in the first quarter. Both 
consumer and producer prices turned up in May but 
have fallen on balance since late 1985, largely 
reflecting declines in energy prices.  

M1 growth in June, though less than in May, was 
still rapid; through June, M1 grew at a rate well above 
the Committee's range for 1986. Growth of M2 slowed 
somewhat and expansion of M3 remained relatively moderate 
in June, keeping these two aggregates close to the middle 
of their respective ranges for the year. Expansion in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt remains appreciably 
above the monitoring range for 1986. Most short-term 
interest rates have declined on balance since the 
May 20 meeting of the Committee. Rates on Treasury 
bonds also have moved lower while rates on private 
long-term obligations are about unchanged to somewhat 
higher. The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has declined somewhat on balance 
since the May meeting.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee agreed at this meeting to re
affirm the ranges established in February for growth of 
6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986.  
With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on the experience of recent years, the behavior 
of that aggregate is subject to substantial uncertainties 
in relation to economic activity and prices, depending 
among other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth 
to changes in interest rates. In light of these un
certainties and of the substantial decline in velocity 
in the first half of the year, the Committee decided 
that growth of M1 in excess of the previously established 
3 to 8 percent range for 1986 would be acceptable.

-4-



7/8-9/86

Acceptable growth of M1 over the remainder of the year 
will depend on the behavior of velocity, growth in the 
other monetary aggregates, developments in the economy 
and financial markets, and price pressures. Given its 
rapid growth in the early part of the year, the Committee 
recognized that the increase in total domestic non
financial debt in 1986 may exceed its monitoring range 
of 8 to 11 percent, but felt an increase in that range 
would provide an inappropriate benchmark for evaluating 
longer-term trends in that aggregate.  

For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987, of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for M2 and M3. While a range of 3 to 8 percent 
for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the light of 
most historical experience, the Committee recognized 
that the exceptional uncertainties surrounding the 
behavior of M1 velocity over the more recent period would 
require careful appraisal of the target range at the 
beginning of 1987. The associated range for growth in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally 
set at 8 to 11 percent for 1987.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to decrease somewhat the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions,.taking 
account of the possibility of a change in the discount 
rate. This action is expected to be consistent with 
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from June to September 
at annual rates of about 7 to 9 percent. While growth 
in M1 is expected to moderate from the exceptionally 
large increase during the second quarter, that growth 
will continue to be judged in the light of the behavior 
of M2 and M3 and other factors. Somewhat greater or 
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable depending 
on the behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the 
business expansion, developments in foreign exchange 
markets, progress against inflation, and conditions 
in domestic and international credit markets. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 
percent.

-5-



7/8-9/86 -6

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on August 19, 1986.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Assistant Secretary


