














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

December 15-16, 1986 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 15, 1986, at 3:30 p.m. and continuing 

on Tuesday, December 16, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Heller 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Morris 
Ms. Seger 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, 
Kohn, Prell and Siegman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



12/15-16/86

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for 

Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors 
Mr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Oltman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Scheld, Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, Philadelphia, Chicago, Dallas, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Beebe, Fieleke, and Miller, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Guentner, Securities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 5, 1986, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period November 5, 1986, 

through December 15, 1986, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity continues to grow at a moderate 
pace in the current quarter. Total nonfarm payroll 
employment grew appreciably further in October and 
November, and employment in manufacturing also rose 
after declining on balance in previous months. The 
civilian unemployment rate remained at 7.0 percent in 
November for the third consecutive month. Industrial 
production picked up considerably in November. Total 
retail sales rose moderately last month after changing



12/15-16/86

little on balance over September and October. Housing 
starts have weakened and business capital spending 
generally appears to have remained sluggish. Pre
liminary data for the U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
in October suggest a moderate narrowing. Broad 
measures of prices have firmed somewhat in recent 
months due to developments in food and energy markets.  
Labor cost increases this year have remained moderate 
compared with other recent years.  

Growth of M2 slowed substantially in November, while 
growth of M3 remained moderate. Expansion of these two 
aggregates for the year through November has been just 
below the upper end of their respective ranges established 
by the Committee for 1986. In November growth of M1 
accelerated to a very rapid rate. Expansion in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt remains appreciably above 
the Committee's monitoring range for 1986. Short-term 
interest rates have risen somewhat since the November 5 
meeting of the Committee, while long-term rates have 
declined on balance. In foreign exchange markets the 
trade-weighted value of the dollar against other G-10 
currencies has declined moderately on balance since 
the November meeting.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster reasonable 
price stability over time, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at the July 
meeting to reaffirm the ranges established in February 
for growth of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter 
of 1986. With respect to M1, the Committee recognized 
that, based on the experience of recent years, the 
behavior of that aggregate is subject to substantial 
uncertainties in relation to economic activity and 
prices, depending among other things on the responsive
ness of M1 growth to changes in interest rates. In 
light of these uncertainties and of the substantial 
decline in velocity in the first half of the year, the 
Committee decided that growth of M1 in excess of the 
previously established 3 to 8 percent range for 1986 
would be acceptable. Acceptable growth of M1 over the 
remainder of the year would depend on the behavior of



12/15-16/86

velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, and 
price pressures. Given its rapid growth in the early 
part of the year, the Committee recognized that the 
increase in total domestic nonfinancial debt in 1986 
may exceed its monitoring range of 8 to 11 percent, 
but felt an increase in that range would provide an 
inappropriate benchmark for evaluating longer-term 
trends in that aggregate.  

For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987, of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for M2 and M3. While a range of 3 to 8 percent 
for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the light of 
most historical experience, the Committee recognized that 
the exceptional uncertainties surrounding the behavior 
of M1 velocity over the more recent period would require 
careful appraisal of the target range at the beginning 
of 1987. The associated range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at 
8 to 11 percent for 1987.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action 
is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 
over the period from November to March at an annual 
rate of about 7 percent. Growth in M1 will continue 
to be appraised in the light of the behavior of M2 and 
M3 and the other factors cited below. Slightly greater 
reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable depending on the behavior of the 
aggregates, taking into account the strength of the 
business expansion, developments in foreign exchange 
markets, progress against inflation, and conditions 
in domestic and international credit markets. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on February 10-11, 1987.  

The meeting adjourned.

Assistant Secretary


