














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 19, 1986 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 19, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 

Mr.  
Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Ms.  

Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Guffey 
Heller 
Horn 

Johnson 
Melzer 
Morris 
Rice 
Seger 
Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield, General Counsel 
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Kichline, Economist 
Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, and 
Prell, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 

Open Market Account



8/19/86

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for 

Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Wallace, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Dallas 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Scadding, and Scheld, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. McNees, Pearce, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Dallas, and 
Cleveland, respectively 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Mr. Weber, Senior Economist, and Ms. Rosenbaum, Economist 
Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting notice was 
given that Mr. H. Robert Heller had executed his oath 
as member of the Federal Open Market Committee.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 8-9, 1986, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period July 9, 1986,

through August 18, 1986, were ratified.

-2-



With Messrs. Melzer and Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicates 
a mixed pattern of developments but suggests on balance 
that economic activity is expanding moderately in the 
current quarter. In July total nonfarm payroll employ
ment grew strongly, boosted in part by the return of 
striking workers. However, continued weakness in the 
industrial sector was reflected in further declines 
in employment in manufacturing and mining. The civilian 
unemployment rate moved down to 6.9 percent from 7.1 
percent in June. Industrial production declined 
slightly further in July. The nominal value of total 
retail sales was about unchanged during the month, as 
sales of new autos declined somewhat but spending on 
other consumer goods remained strong. Housing starts 
fell somewhat in May and June from a relatively high 
level earlier in the year. Business capital spending 
appears to have remained weak, partly reflecting 
continuing declines in the energy sector. While 
fluctuations in energy prices have caused some 
month-to-month volatility, on average prices and 
wages are rising more slowly this year than in 1985.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against 
major foreign currencies has continued to decline 
since the July 8-9 meeting of the Committee. The 
U.S. merchandise trade deficit in the second quarter 
appears to have been about unchanged from the first 
quarter. The value of total exports and of total 
imports remained about the same in the two quarters, 
although the value of oil imports continued to fall in 
the second quarter while that of non-oil imports rose 
further.  

Growth of M2 and especially of M3 picked up in July, 
lifting expansion of these two aggregates for the year 
through July well into the upper portion of their 
respective ranges established by the Committee for 1986.  
In July M1 continued to grow at a rate close to the very 
rapid pace of the second quarter. Expansion in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt remains appreciably above

8/19/86 -3-



8/19/86

the Committee's monitoring range for 1986. Short-term 
interest rates have declined somewhat since the July 
meeting of the Committee, while most long-term interest 
rates are about unchanged to slightly lower on balance.  
On July 10, the Federal Reserve Board approved a reduction 
in the discount rate from 6-1/2 to 6 percent.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee agreed at the July meeting to 
reaffirm the ranges established in February for growth 
of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986.  
With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on the experience of recent years, the behavior 

of that aggregate is subject to substantial uncertainties 
in relation to economic activity and prices, depending 
among other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth 
to changes in interest rates. In light of these un
certainties and of the substantial decline in velocity 
in the first half of the year, the Committee decided 
that growth of M1 in excess of the previously established 
3 to 8 percent range for 1986 would be acceptable.  
Acceptable growth of M1 over the remainder of the year 
will depend on the behavior of velocity, growth in the 
other monetary aggregates, developments in the economy 
and financial markets, and price pressures. Given its 
rapid growth in the early part of the year, the Committee 
recognized that the increase in total domestic non
financial debt in 1986 may exceed its monitoring range 
of 8 to 11 percent, but felt an increase in that range 
would provide an inappropriate benchmark for evaluating 
longer-term trends in that aggregate.  

For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987, of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for M2 and M3. While a range of 3 to 8 percent 
for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the light of 
most historical experience, the Committee recognized 
that the exceptional uncertainties surrounding the 
behavior of M1 velocity over the more recent period would 
require careful appraisal of the target range at the 
beginning of 1987. The associated range for growth in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set 
at 8 to 11 percent for 1987.



8/19/86

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, taking 
account of the possibility of a change in the discount 
rate. This action is expected to be consistent with 
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from June to September 
at annual rates of about 7 to 9 percent. While growth 
in M1 is expected to moderate from the exceptionally 
large increase during the second quarter, that growth 
will continue to be judged in the light of the behavior 
of M2 and M3 and other factors. Somewhat greater or 
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable depending 
on the behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the 
business expansion, developments in foreign exchange 
markets, progress against inflation, and conditions 
in domestic and international credit markets. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on September 23, 1986.  

The meeting adjourned.

Assistant Secretary


