














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

September 23, 1986 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 23, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Heller 
Mrs. Horn 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Morris 
Mr. Rice 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Ms. Munnell, 
Messrs. Prell and Siegman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



9/23/86

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for 

Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors 
Mr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 

Board of Governors 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding, 
Scheld, Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, San Francisco, 
Chicago, New York, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Skaperdas, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
of Cleveland 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 19, 1986, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period August 19, 1986, 

through September 22, 1986, were ratified.  

With Mr. Wallich dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
some pickup in the growth of economic activity from the 
slow pace in the second quarter. In August total nonfarm 
payroll employment grew considerably further, with 
employment in manufacturing rising for the first time 
since January. The civilian unemployment rate edged 
down further to 6.8 percent. Industrial production rose



9/23/86

slightly in July and August after declining on balance 
during the first half of the year. Consumer spending 
has remained relatively strong in recent months, with 
gains in retail sales in August paced by a sharp rise 
in auto sales. Housing starts in July and August 
stayed at a relatively high level. Business capital 
spending appears to have remained sluggish, reflecting 
weakness in nonresidential construction. A more 
moderate rate of wage increases has been sustained in 
recent months, while broad measures of prices have 
firmed somewhat due to developments in food and energy 
markets.  

The trade-weighted value of the dollar against major 
foreign currencies is essentially unchanged on balance 
since the August 19 meeting of the Committee. Preliminary 
data for the U.S. merchandise trade deficit in July 
indicate a larger deficit than in previous months.  

Growth of M2 and especially of M3 moderated in 
August, but expansion of these two aggregates for the 
year through August has been at the upper end of their 
respective ranges established by the Committee for 1986.  
In August M1 continued to grow very rapidly. Expansion 
in total domestic nonfinancial debt remains appreciably 
above the Committee's monitoring range for 1986. Short
term interest rates have declined further since the 
August meeting of the Committee while long-term market 
rates have risen on balance. On August 20, the Federal 
Reserve Board approved a reduction in the discount rate 
from 6 to 5-1/2 percent.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster reasonable 
price stability over time, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at the July 
meeting to reaffirm the ranges established in February 
for growth of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 
1986. With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on the experience of recent years, the behavior 
of that aggregate is subject to substantial uncertainties 
in relation to economic activity and prices, depending 
among other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth



9/23/86

to changes in interest rates. In light of these un
certainties and of the substantial decline in velocity 
in the first half of the year, the Committee decided that 
growth of M1 in excess of the previously established 
3 to 8 percent range for 1986 would be acceptable.  
Acceptable growth of M1 over the remainder of the year 
will depend on the behavior of velocity, growth in the 
other monetary aggregates, developments in the economy 
and financial markets, and price pressures. Given its 
rapid growth in the early part of the year, the Committee 
recognized that the increase in total domestic nonfinancial 
debt in 1986 may exceed its monitoring range of 8 to 11 
percent, but felt an increase in that range would provide 
an inappropriate benchmark for evaluating longer-term 
trends in that aggregate.  

For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter 
of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987, of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for M2 and M3. While a range of 3 to 8 percent 
for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the light of 
most historical experience, the Committee recognized 
that the exceptional uncertainties surrounding the 
behavior of M1 velocity over the more recent period would 
require careful appraisal of the target range at the 
beginning of 1987. The associated range for growth in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set 
at 8 to 11 percent for 1987.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action 
is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 
over the period from August to December at annual rates 

of 7 to 9 percent. While growth in M1 is expected to 
moderate from the exceptionally large increase during 
the past several months, that growth will continue to 
be judged in the light of the behavior of M2 and M3 and 
other factors. Slightly greater reserve restaint would, 
or slightly lesser reserve restraint might, be acceptable 

depending on the behavior of the aggregates, taking into 
account the strength of the business expansion, develop
ments in foreign exchange markets, progress against 
inflation, and conditions in domestic and international 
credit markets. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 

Operations that reserve conditions during the period 
before the next meeting are likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 4 to 8 percent.

-4-



9/23/86 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on November 5, 1986.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Assistant Secretary


