














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

September 22, 1987 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 22, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Heller 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Kelley 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey and Melzer, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis, 
respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



9/22/87

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Eisenmenger and Hendricks, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland, 
respectively 

Messrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Ms. Tshinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City, and 
and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

Messrs. Judd, McNees, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston, 
and Cleveland, respectively 

Ms. Ann-Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 18, 1987, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period August 18, 1987, 

through September 21, 1987, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period August 18, 1987, through September 21, 1987, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:

-2-



9/22/87

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
on balance that economic activity is expanding in the 
current quarter at a pace similar to that in the first 
half of the year. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
rose further in August after a large increase in July.  
The civilian unemployment rate remained at 6.0 percent, 
well below its level at the start of the year. Indus
trial production increased further in August following 
large gains in other recent months. Consumer spending, 
bolstered by a rise in auto sales, posted a large 
increase in August. Recent indicators of business 
capital spending point to some strength, particularly 
in equipment outlays. Housing starts fell in August 
to a level a little below their average in other 
recent months. Preliminary data suggest that the 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was unchanged 
in July from its June level but larger than the second
quarter average. The rise in consumer and producer 
prices has slowed in recent months, reflecting favor
able price developments in food and energy.  

Growth of the monetary aggregates strengthened in 
August, but for 1987 through August, expansion of both 
M2 and M3 remained below the lower ends of the ranges 
established by the Committee for the year; growth in 
M1 has been at a much reduced pace in 1987. Expansion 
in total domestic nonfinancial debt has moderated this 
year. Interest rates have risen considerably since the 
meeting on August 18. On September 4, the Federal 
Reserve Board approved an increase in the discount rate 
from 5-1/2 to 6 percent. In foreign exchange markets, 
the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of 
the other G-10 currencies has depreciated on balance 
since the latest meeting; some of the decline in the 
dollar early in the intermeeting period was later 
reversed.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster reasonable 
price stability over time, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at its meeting 
in July to reaffirm the ranges established in February 
for growth of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth 
quarter of 1987. The Committee agreed that growth in 
these aggregates around the lower ends of their ranges 
may be appropriate in light of developments with re
spect to velocity and signs of the potential for some 
strengthening in underlying inflationary pressures,

-3-



9/22/87

provided that economic activity is expanding at an 
acceptable pace. The monitoring range for growth in 

total domestic nonfinancial debt set in February for 
the year was left unchanged at 8 to 11 percent.  

For 1988, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988, of 5 to 8 percent 

for both M2 and M3. The Committee provisionally set 
the associated range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt at 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.  

With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate 

must be judged in the light of other evidence relating 
to economic activity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have 
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes in 
interest rates, among other factors. Because of this 
sensitivity, which has been reflected in a sharp slowing 
of the decline in M1 velocity over the first half of the 

year, the Committee again decided at the July meeting 
not to establish a specific target for growth in M1 over 
the remainder of 1987 and no tentative range was set for 
1988. The appropriateness of changes in M1 this year 
will continue to be evaluated in the light of the be
havior of its velocity, developments in the economy and 
financial markets, and the nature of emerging price 
pressures. The Committee welcomes substantially slower 
growth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 in the context of 
continuing economic expansion and some evidence of 
greater inflationary pressures. The Committee in 
reaching operational decisions over the balance of the 
year will take account of growth in M1 in the light of 
circumstances then prevailing. The issues involved with 
establishing a target for M1 will be carefully reappraised 
at the beginning of 1988.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of 
pressure on reserve positions sought in recent weeks.  
Somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable depending on 
indications of inflationary pressures, the strength of 
the business expansion, developments in foreign exchange 
markets, as well as the behavior of the aggregates. This 
approach is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 
and M3 over the period from August through December at 
annual rates of around 4 percent and around 6 percent, 
respectively. M1 is expected to continue to grow



9/22/87

relatively slowly. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 
Operations that reserve conditions during the period 

before the next meeting are likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 5 to 9 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on November 3, 1987.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

Secretary's note: By unanimous vote, Mr. Ernest T.  
Patrikis was elected as Deputy General Counsel of the 
Federal Open Market Committee, effective October 28, 
1987, to serve until the election of his successor at 
the first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 
1988, with the understanding that in the event of 
discontinuance of his offical connection with the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, he would cease to 
have any official connection with the Federal Open 
Market Committee.


