














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

November 3, 1987 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 3, 1987, at 9:30 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Heller 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Stern 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Hoskins, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Cleveland, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Fousek, Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rosenblum, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



11/3/87

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
Mmes. Munnell and Tshinkel, Senior Vice Presidents 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, 
Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Weber, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting, notice 
had been received of the election of W. Lee Hoskins 
as an alternate member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee for the period October 9, 1987 through 
February 29, 1988, and Mr. Hoskins had executed 
his Oath of Office.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on September 22 1987, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period September 22, 1987, 

through November 2, 1987, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $6 billion to $9 billion 

the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

December 16, 1987.



11/3/87

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period September 22, 1987, through November 2, 1987 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the renewal for further 

periods of one year of the System's reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements 

having the amounts and maturity dates indicated below:

Foreign bank 

Austrian National Bank 
National Bank of Belgium 
Bank of Canada 
National Bank of Denmark 
Bank of England 
Bank of France 
German Federal Bank 
Bank of Italy 
Bank of Japan 
Bank of Mexico 
Netherlands Bank 
Bank of Norway 
Bank of Sweden 
Swiss National Bank 
Bank for International 

Settlements
Swiss francs 
Other authorized 
European currencies

Amount of 
arrangement 

(millions of 

$ equivalent) 

$ 250.0 

1,000.0 
2,000.0 
250.0 

3,000.0 
2,000.0 

6,000.0 

3,000.0 
5,000.0 
700.0 

500.0 
250.0 
300.0 

4,000.0 

600.0 

1,250.0

Term 
(months) 

12 mos.  

" 

" 

"

Maturity 
date 

12/03/87 
12/17/87 
12/28/87 
12/29/87 
12/03/87 
12/28/87 
12/28/87 
12/28/87 
12/03/87 
12/03/87 
12/28/87 
12/03/87 
12/03/87 
12/03/87 

12/03/87 

12/03/87

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:



11/3/87

The economic information available at this meeting 
was reviewed against the backdrop of extraordinary develop
ments in financial markets in the period since the previous 
Committee meeting on September 22, Share prices in the 
stock market were down sharply. Following a particularly 
large decline of stock prices in mid-October, interest 
rates fell steeply and increases that had occurred during 
the first part of the intermeeting period subsequently 
were more than reversed on most types of debt obligations.  
Foreign exchange markets were relatively calm over most 
of the intermeeting period, but the dollar came under 
significant downward pressure late in the period.  

In the third quarter economic activity had expanded 
at a fairly brisk pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
rose further in September, with the manufacturing sector 
continuing to record relatively sizable gains. The 
civilian unemployment rate edged down to 5.9 percent.  
Industrial production increased somewhat further in 
September following large gains in other recent months.  
Retail sales declined somewhat in September, but consumer 
spending, bolstered by a rise in auto sales, posted a 
large increase over the third quarter. Business capital 
spending was strong in the third quarter and forward 
indicators pointed to continuing gains. Housing starts 
were up in September but were little changed in the 
third quarter from their second-quarter average. The 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit narrowed in 
August, but the July-August average remained above 
the second-quarter rate. The rise in consumer and 
producer prices was relatively moderate in recent 
months following more rapid increases earlier in 
the year.  

Growth of the monetary aggregates appeared to have 
strengthened in October, with some of the strength 
reflecting heightened demands for transaction balances 
and other liquid assets in the latter part of the 
month. Even so, for 1987 through October, expansion 
of M2 evidently moved closer to, but remained below, 
the lower end of the range established by the Committee 
for the year, while growth of M3 was around the lower 
end of its range. Expansion in total domestic non
financial debt has remained on a more moderate trend 
in recent months.

-4-



11/3/87

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster reasonable 
price stability over time, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis; and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives the Committee agreed at its meeting 
in July to reaffirm the ranges established in February 
for growth of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth 
quarter of 1987. The Committee agreed that growth in 
these aggregates around the lower ends of their ranges 
may be appropriate in light of developments with respect 
to velocity and signs of the potential for some strength
ening in underlying inflationary pressures, provided 
that economic activity is expanding at an acceptable 
pace. The monitoring range for growth in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt set in February for the year was left 
unchanged at 8 to 11 percent.  

For 1988, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988, of 5 to 8 percent 
for both M2 and M3. The Committee provisionally set 
the associated range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt at 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.  

With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate 
must be judged in the light of other evidence relating 
to economic activity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have 
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes in 
interest rates, among other factors. Because of this 
sensitivity, which has been reflected in a sharp slowing 
of the decline in M1 velocity over the first half of the 
year, the Committee again decided at the July meeting 
not to establish a specific target for growth in M1 over 
the remainder of 1987 and no tentative range was set for 
1988. The appropriateness of changes in M1 this year 
will continue to be evaluated in the light of the be
havior of its velocity, developments in the economy and 
financial markets, and the nature of emerging price 
pressures. The Committee welcomes substantially slower 
growth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 in the context of 
continuing economic expansion and some evidence of



greater inflationary pressures. The Committee in 
reaching operational decisions over the balance of the 
year will take account of growth in M1 in the light of 

circumstances then prevailing. The issues involved with 
establishing a target for M1 will be carefully reappraised 
at the beginning of 1988.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of 
pressure on reserve positions sought in recent days.  
The Committee recognizes that the volatile conditions 
in financial markets and uncertainties in the economic 
outlook may continue to call for a special degree of 
flexibility in open market operations, depending, in 
particular, on demands for liquidity growing out of 
recent or prospective developments in financial markets.  
Apart from such considerations, somewhat lesser reserve 
restraint would, or slightly greater reserve restraint 
might, be acceptable depending on the strength of the 
business expansion, indications of inflationary pressures, 
developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the 
behavior of the monetary aggregates. While the outlook 
for monetary growth over the months ahead is subject to 
unusual uncertainty, the contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 
over the period from September through December at annual 
rates of about 6 to 7 percent, but more rapid growth is 
possible should preferences for liquidity be particularly 
strong. Over the same period, growth in M1 is expected 
to be well above its average pace in the previous several 
months. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation 
if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 
that reserve conditions during the period before the 
next meeting are likely to be associated with a 
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
4 to 8 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on December 15-16, 1987.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

9/22/87 -6-


