














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 18, 1987 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Heller 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Kelley 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston, 
respectively

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



8/18/87

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
Ms. Munnell, Mr. Thieke, and Ms. Tshinkel, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, 
Boston, New York, and Atlanta, respectively 

By unanimous vote, Alan Greenspan was elected to serve as Chairman 

of the Committee until the first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 

1988.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 7, 1987, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period July 7, 1987, through August 17, 1987, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period July 7, 1987, 

through August 17, 1987, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $6 billion to $12 billion 

the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

on September 22, 1987.



8/18/87

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
on balance that economic activity is expanding at a 
moderate pace in the current quarter. In July, total 
nonfarm payroll employment rose considerably further; 
the increase included continuing large gains in the 
service-producing sector and a sizable advance in 
manufacturing. The civilian unemployment rate fell 
slightly further to 6.0 percent. Industrial production 
increased strongly in July after rising moderately on 
balance in the first half of the year. Consumer 
spending grew at a reduced pace earlier in the year 
but retail sales posted large increases in June and 
July. Housing starts were unchanged in July and 
remained at their reduced second-quarter level.  
Recent indicators of business capital spending point 
to some strength, particularly in equipment outlays.  
The rise in consumer and producer prices has been 
moderate in recent months, but for the year to date 
prices generally have risen more rapidly than in 1986, 
primarily reflecting sizable increases in prices of 
energy and non-oil imports. Wage increases have 
remained relatively moderate in recent months.  

In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted 
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies 
was unchanged on balance since the meeting of the 
Committee on July 7. In the second quarter the 
merchandise trade deficit in current dollars was about 
the same as in the first quarter.  

The monetary aggregates grew slowly in July. For 
1987 through July, expansion of both M2 and M3 has been 
below the lower ends of the ranges established by the 
Committee for the year, while growth in M1 has been well 
below its pace in 1986. Expansion in total domestic non
financial debt has moderated this year. Most long-term 
interest rates have risen somewhat since the July meeting; 
in short-term markets, Treasury bill rates also have 
increased somewhat while private rates are little changed.  
Stock prices have risen substantially since the latest 
meeting.



8/18/87

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster reasonable 
price stability over time, promote growth in output on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee agreed at its meeting in July 
to reaffirm the ranges established in February for growth 
of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 
1987. The Committee agreed that growth in these aggregates 
around the lower ends of their ranges may be appropriate 
in light of developments with respect to velocity and 
signs of the potential for some strengthening in under
lying inflationary pressures, provided that economic 
activity is expanding at an acceptable pace. The 
monitoring range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial 
debt set in February for the year was left unchanged at 
8 to 11 percent.  

For 1988, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges of 
monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1987 
to the fourth quarter of 1988, of 5 to 8 percent for both 
M2 and M3. The Committee provisionally set the associated 
range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt at 
7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.  

With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate 
must be judged in the light of other evidence relating 
to economic activity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have 
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes in 
interest rates, among other factors. Because of this 
sensitivity, which has been reflected in a sharp slowing 
of the decline in M1 velocity over the first half of the 
year, the Committee again decided at the July meeting 
not to establish a specific target for growth in M1 over 
the remainder of 1987 and no tentative range was set for 
1988. The appropriateness of changes in M1 this year 
will continue to be evaluated in the light of the be
havior of its velocity, developments in the economy and 
financial markets, and the nature of emerging price 
pressures. The Committee welcomes substantially slower 
growth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 in the context of 
continuing economic expansion and some evidence of 
greater inflationary pressures. The Committee in 
reaching operational decisions over the balance of the 
year will take account of growth in M1 in the light of 
circumstances then prevailing. The issues involved with 
establishing a target for M1 will be carefully reappraised 

at the beginning of 1988.



8/18/87 -5

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Somewhat greater 
reserve restraint would, or slightly lesser reserve 
restraint might, be acceptable depending on indications 
of inflationary pressures, the strength of the business 
expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, 
as well as the behavior of the aggregates. This approach 
is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over 
the period from June through September at annual rates 
of around 5 percent. Growth in M1, while picking up 
from recent levels, is expected to remain well below 
its pace during 1986. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 
Operations that reserve conditions during the period 
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with 
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
4 to 8 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on September 22, 1987.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


