














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

December 15-16, 1987 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, December 15, 1987, at 3:15 p.m., 

and continuing on Wednesday, December 16, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 

Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Heller 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Keehn 1 
Mr. Kelley 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Stern 

Messrs. Black, Hoskins, and Parry, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, 2 Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld,1 

Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

1/ Present for Wednesday session; participated in Tuesday session via telephone 
conference from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.  

2/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held on 

November 3, 1987.



12/15-16/87 -2

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Madigan,1 Assistant Director, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Mr. Small,1 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Guynn, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Atlanta 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis, 
and Ms. Tschinkel, 2 Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, 
Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. Frydl and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Guentner, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Ms. Rosenbaum,3 Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 3, 1987, were approved.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Wednesday session.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 3, 1987 through December 15, 1987, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period November 3, 1987, 

through December 15, 1987, were ratified.  

1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday.  

2/ Attended Wednesday session only.

3/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/15-16/87

By unanimous vote, paragraph l(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $6 billion to $9 billion 

the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

February 10, 1988.  

With Mr. Johnson and Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The economic information reviewed at this meeting 
largely reflected the influence of developments that 
were under way before the financial disturbances of mid
October. The extent to which those disturbances would 
affect the economy remained uncertain. Information 
available for the current quarter suggested that the 
expansion in economic activity was moderating from a 
brisk pace in the third quarter. Total nonfarm payroll 
employment rose strongly further over October and 
November, with the manufacturing sector recording 
relatively large gains. The civilian unemployment 
rate, at 5.9 percent in November, remained close to 
its level since mid-year. Industrial production also 
increased considerably further over October and 
November, following sizable advances since late 
spring. Retail sales edged up in November after two 
months of substantial declines. Recent indicators 
of business capital spending suggested modest further 
growth after a surge in the third quarter. Housing 
starts rose somewhat in November, after slowing in 
October, but were little changed from the average 
pace in the second and third quarters. The nominal 
U.S. merchandise trade deficit in October appeared 
to have deteriorated substantially from the average 
rate in the third quarter. The rise in broad measures 
of prices and wages in recent months generally has 
been close to that experienced earlier in the year.



12/15-16/87

Financial markets remained somewhat unsettled. Stock 
and bond prices continued to fluctuate over a relatively 
wide range during the period since the previous Committee 
meeting on November 3. On balance, share prices fell 
somewhat further in this period. Changes in long-term 
yields were mixed while short-term interest rates rose, 
especially on short-maturity private market instruments.  
The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar 
in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined considerably 
further.  

The monetary aggregates weakened in November after 
strengthening in October in conjunction with a temporary 
surge in demands for transaction balances and other liquid 
assets in the latter part of that month. For 1987 through 
November, expansion of M2 fell somewhat further below the 
lower end of the range established by the Committee for 
the year, while growth of M3 remained around the lower 
end of its range. Growth of M1 was close to that of 
nominal GNP for the year to date and expansion in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt remained well within the 
Committee's monitoring range for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster reasonable 
price stability over time, promote growth in output 
on a sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives, the Committee agreed at its meeting 
in July to reaffirm the ranges established in February 
for growth of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth 
quarter of 1987. The Committee agreed that growth in 
these aggregates around the lower ends of their ranges 
might be appropriate in light of developments with 
respect to velocity and signs of the potential for 
some strengthening in underlying inflationary pressures, 
provided that economic activity was expanding at an 
acceptable pace. The monitoring range for growth in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt set in February for 
the year was left unchanged at 8 to 11 percent.  

For 1988, the Committee agreed in July on tentative 
ranges of monetary growth, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988, of 5 to 8 
percent for both M2 and M3. The Committee provisionally 
set the associated range for growth in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt at 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.

-4-



12/15-16/87

With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate 
must be judged in the light of other evidence relating 
to economic activity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have 
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes in 
interest rates, among other factors. Because of this 
sensitivity, which had been reflected in a sharp slowing 
of the decline in M1 velocity over the first half of the 
year, the Committee again decided at the July meeting 
not to establish a specific target for growth in M1 over 
the remainder of 1987 and no tentative range was set for 
1988. The appropriateness of changes in M1 this year 
would continue to be evaluated in the light of the be
havior of its velocity, developments in the economy and 
financial markets, and the nature of emerging price 
pressures. The Committee welcomed substantially slower 
growth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 in the context of 
continuing economic expansion and some evidence of 
greater inflationary pressures. The Committee indicated 
in July that in reaching operational decisions over the 
balance of the year it would take account of growth in 
M1 in the light of circumstances then prevailing. The 

issues involved with establishing a target for M1 will 
be carefully reappraised at the beginning of 1988.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. The Committee 
recognizes that still sensitive conditions in financial 
markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook may 
continue to call for a special degree of flexibility 
in open market operations. Taking account of conditions 
in financial markets, somewhat lesser reserve restraint 
or somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable 
depending on the strength of the business expansion, 
indications of inflationary pressures, developments in 
foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates. The contemplated reserve 
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 over the period from November through March 
at annual rates of about 5 percent and 6 percent, re
spectively. Over the same period, growth in M1 is 
expected to remain relatively limited. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to 
the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve 
conditions during the period before the next meeting 
are likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 percent.



12/15-16/87 -6

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on February 9-10, 1988.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


