














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 19, 1987 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 19, 1987, at 9:10 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Heller 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston, 
respectively

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of 

Staff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland 

Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Mmes. Munnell and Tshinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. Beebe, Burger, and Cook, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, St. Louis, 
and Richmond, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 31, 1987, were approved.  

The report of examination of the System Open Market Account, made 

by the Board's Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations as of the close 

of business October 31, 1986, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period March 31, 1987, through May 18, 1987, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period March 31, 1987, 

through May 18, 1987, were ratified.

5/19/87 -2-



5/19/87

With Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
on balance that economic activity is expanding at a 
moderate pace in the current quarter. Total nonfarm 
payroll employment rose considerably further in April, 
with most of the gains continuing to be in the service
producing sectors. The civilian unemployment rate fell 
to 6.3 percent from 6.6 percent in March. In April, 
industrial production declined after increasing at a 
moderate rate in the first quarter. Total retail sales 
changed little but were up somewhat from their average 
level in the first quarter. Housing starts were down 
somewhat in April from their first-quarter average.  
Recent indicators of business capital spending point 
to some recovery over the near term from a depressed 
level in the first quarter. Consumer and producer 
prices have risen more rapidly this year, primarily 
reflecting sizable increases in prices of energy and 
non-oil imports. Labor cost increases have remained 
relatively moderate in recent months.  

Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in April from a 
sluggish pace in February and March, but for 1987 to 
date expansion of these two aggregates has been slightly 
below the lower ends of their respective ranges estab
lished by the Committee for the year. M1 surged in 
April prompted by exceptionally large tax payments.  
Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt has 
moderated somewhat thus far this year. Most interest 
rates have risen considerably since the March 31 meeting 
of the Committee, with the largest increases occurring 
in longer-term markets.  

In foreign exchange markets, the dollar was under 
heavy downward pressure over most of the intermeeting 
period and intervention purchases of dollars were sub
stantial. Recently the dollar has tended to stabilize, 
but on balance its trade-weighted value against the 
other G-10 currencies declined over the period. In 
March the merchandise trade deficit was close to the 
average for January and February.

-3-



5/19/87

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee at its February meeting established 
growth ranges of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth 
quarter of 1987. The associated range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent for 
1987.  

With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate must 
be judged in the light of other evidence relating to 
economic activity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have 
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes 
in interest rates, among other factors. During 1987, 
the Committee anticipates that growth in M1 should slow.  
However, in the light of its sensitivity to a variety 
of influences, the Committee decided at the February 
meeting not to establish a precise target for its growth 
over the year as a whole. Instead, the appropriateness 
of changes in M1 during the course of the year will be 
evaluated in the light of the behavior of its velocity, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, and 
the nature of emerging price pressures.  

In that connection, the Committee believes that, 
particularly in the light of the extraordinary expansion 
of this aggregate in recent years, much slower monetary 
growth would be appropriate in the context of continuing 
economic expansion accompanied by signs of intensifying 
price pressures, perhaps related to significant weakness 
of the dollar in exchange markets, and relatively strong 
growth in the broad monetary aggregates. Conversely, 
continuing sizable increases in M1 could be accommodated 
in circumstances characterized by sluggish business 
activity, maintenance of progress toward underlying price 
stability, and progress toward international equilibrium.  
As this implies, the Committee in reaching operational 
decisions during the year might target appropriate growth 
in M1 from time to time in the light of circumstances then 
prevailing, including the rate of growth of the broader 
aggregates.

-4-



5/19/87

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to increase somewhat the 
degree of reserve pressure sought in recent weeks, taking 
into account the possibility of a change in the discount 
rate. Somewhat greater reserve restraint would, or somewhat 
lesser reserve restraint might, be acceptable depending on 
indications of inflationary pressures and on developments 
in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior of 
the aggregates and the strength of the business expansion.  
This approach is expected to be consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 over the period from March through June at 
annual rates of around 6 percent or less. Growth in M1 
is expected to remain well below its pace during 1986.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on July 7-8, 1987.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


