














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 31, 1987 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1987 at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Volcker, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Heller 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston, 
respectively

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



3/31/87

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of 

Staff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy, 
Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hendricks and Powell, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and San Francisco, 
respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Burger, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell, 
Messrs. Scadding and Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, 
San Francisco, New York, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the year commencing March 1, 1987, had been received 

and the named individuals had executed their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
Thomas M. Timlen, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, with 
Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as 
alternate; 

Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago; 

Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with 
Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 
as alternate; 

Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, with 
Robert T. Parry, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 
as alternate.

- 2 -



3/31/87

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 1988, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the 

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have 

any official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 

Paul A. Volcker Chairman 
E. Gerald Corrigan Vice Chairman 

Donald L. Kohn Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Rosemary R. Loney Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Michael Bradfield General Counsel 
James H. Oltman Deputy General Counsel 
James L. Kichline Economist 
Edwin M. Truman Economist (International) 

Peter Fousek, Richard W. Lang, 
David E. Lindsey, Michael J. Prell, 
Arthur J. Rolnick, Harvey Rosenblum, 
Karl A. Scheld, Charles J. Siegman, 
and Thomas D. Simpson Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Committee after February 29, 1988.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for 

Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the under

standing that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subseqently received 
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

- 3 -



3/31/87

Secretary's note: On March 9, 1987, certain continuing 
rules, regulations, authorizations, and other instruments 
of the Committee had been distributed with the advice 
that, in accordance with procedures approved by the 
Committee, they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March 31 organization meeting to 
give members an opportunity to raise any questions they 
might have concerning them. Members were asked to so 
indicate if they wished to have any of the instruments 
in question placed on the agenda for consideration at 
this meeting, and no such requests were received.  
Accordingly, the instruments remained in effect in 
their existing forms. They are listed below: 

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

3. Resolutions providing for the continued operation of the 
Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 
during an emergency.  

4. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

5. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

7. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

8. Agreement with the U.S. Treasury to Warehouse Foreign 
Currencies.

9. Program for Security of FOMC Information.

- 4 -



3/31/87

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 31, 1987 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $6.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of 
goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 
aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable

- 5 -



limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern
ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 
set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 
such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 
for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, 
subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in 
paragraph l(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro
visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote paragraph 1D of the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations was amended to raise from $10 billion to $12 billion the 

limit on the overall open position in all foreign currencies. With this 

amendment, the authorization reads as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
As Amended March 31, 1987 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time:

3/31/87 - 6 -



A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form of 

cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open market at 

home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with the 

U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other international financial 
institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $12.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all 
foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi
tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:

3/31/87 - 7 -



Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment 
return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 
adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 
transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 
exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 
arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 
the Committee.

3/31/87 - 8 -



5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 
in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 

maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 
securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 

be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 

member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 
members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 
Manager for Foreign Operations, for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 
of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 
of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

3/31/87 - 9 -



3/31/87 - 10 -

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
Reaffirmed March 31, 1987 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 
countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 
for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 
Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 
States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 
and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 

IMF Aticle IV.



3/31/87 - 11 -

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 31, 1987 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 
net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in lB.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair
man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.



3/31/87 - 12 -

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 10-11, 1987, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 11 through March 30, 1987, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and agency obligations during the period February 11 through 

March 30, 1987, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
on balance that economic activity has been expanding 
at a faster pace than in the fourth quarter, with 
output apparently strengthened by a rebuilding of 
business inventories and some improvement in foreign 
trade. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose strongly 
again in February. The civilian unemployment rate 
remained at 6.7 percent for the third consecutive 
month. Industrial production also increased appreciably 
further in February. Total retail sales have continued 
to fluctuate substantially from month to month, largely 
reflecting the uneven pattern of automobile sales, but 
on balance overall consumer spending has been relatively 
flat over the past several months. Housing starts 
strengthened further in February after rising in 
December and January to their highest level since late 
spring. Business capital spending appears to have 
weakened in early 1987. Consumer and producer prices



- 13 -

rose more rapidly in early 1987, primarily reflecting 
sizable increases in energy prices. Labor cost in
creases have remained relatively moderate in recent 
months.  

Growth of M2 and M3 has slowed substantially from 
the pace in December and January, and for 1987 to date 
expansion of these two aggregates appears to have been 
around the lower ends of their respective ranges 
established by the Committee for the year. Growth of 
M1, after moderating in January from an exceptionally 

rapid pace in late 1986, also has slowed markedly further.  
Expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt appears to 
have moderated appreciably since year-end. Interest 
rates generally have fluctuated in a relatively narrow 
range since the February 10-11 meeting of the Committee, 
although they have firmed somewhat recently. At a 
meeting in the latter part of February, the Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors of major industrial 
countries agreed to cooperate closely to foster stability 
of exchange rates around then-current levels. However, 
after mid-March, the trade-weighted value of the dollar 
against the other G-10 currencies declined further on 
balance, including a sizable decline against the yen.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee at its February meeting established 
growth ranges of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth 
quarter of 1987. The associated range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 8 to 11 percent for 
1987.  

With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, 
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate must 
be judged in the light of other evidence relating to 
economic activity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have 
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes 
in interest rates, among other factors. During 1987, 
the Committee anticipates that growth in M1 should slow.  
However, in the light of its sensitivity to a variety

3/31/87



- 14 -

of influences, the Committee decided at the February 
meeting not to establish a precise target for its growth 

over the year as a whole. Instead, the appropriateness 
of changes in M1 during the course of the year will be 
evaluated in the light of the behavior of its velocity, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, and 
the nature of emerging price pressures.  

In that connection, the Committee believes that, 
particularly in the light of the extraordinary expansion 
of this aggregate in recent years, much slower monetary 
growth would be appropriate in the context of continuing 
economic expansion accompanied by signs of intensifying 
price pressures, perhaps related to significant weakness 
of the dollar in exchange markets, and relatively strong 
growth in the broad monetary aggregates. Conversely, 
continuing sizable increases in M1 could be accommodated 
in circumstances characterized by sluggish business 
activity, maintenance of progress toward underlying price 
stability, and progress toward international equilibrium.  
As this implies, the Committee in reaching operational 
decisions during the year, might target appropriate growth 
in M1 from time to time in the light of circumstances then 
prevailing, including the rate of growth of the broader 
aggregates.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Somewhat 
greater reserve restraint might be acceptable depending 
on developments in foreign exchange markets, taking into 
account the behavior of the aggregates, the strength 
of the business expansion, progress against inflation, 
and conditions in credit markets. This approach is 
expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over 
the period from March through June at annual rates of 
around 6 percent or less. Growth in M1 is expected to 
remain substantially below its pace in 1986. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 percent.

3/31/87



3/31/87 - 15 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 19, 1987.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

Secretary's note: On April 22, 1987, the Committee 
approved an increase of $3 billion, to $9 billion, 
in the intermeeting limit on changes in System 
holdings of U.S. government and federal agency 
securities specified in paragraph 1(a) of the 
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.  
On May 6, the Committee approved a further increase 
of $2 billion, to $11 billion, in the limit. These 
actions were effective immediately, for the period 
ending May 19, 1987.


