














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

June 29-30, 1988 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, June 29, 1988, at 3:00 p.m. and continuing 

on Thursday, June 30, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Heller 
Hoskins 
Johnson 
Kelley 
Parry 
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and 
Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield, General Counsel 
Patrikis, 1/ Assistant General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Broaddus, J. Davis, R.Davis, Lindsey, 
Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account

1/ Attended Thursday's session only.



6/29-30/88

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Rea 1/ and Whitesell, Economists, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Mr. Oliner, 1/ Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, 

Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Mr. Thomson, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Minneapolis, 
Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. McNees and Meyer, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and Philadelphia, respectively 

Ms. Krieger, Section Chief, Open Market Function, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 17, 1988, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period May 17, 1988, through June 28, 1988 were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period May 17, 1988, 

through June 28, 1988, were ratified.  

1/ Attended portion of meeting related to consideration of the Committee's 
longer-run objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.

-2-



6/29-30/88

By unanimous vote, the following ranges for growth in the broader 

aggregates and nonfinancial debt for 1988 and the role of M1 were approved 

by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 

and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In futherance 
of these objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this 
meeting the ranges it had established in February for 
growth of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter 
of 1988. The monitoring range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was also maintained at 
7 to 11 percent for the year.  

With respect to M1, the Committee reaffirmed 
its decision in February not to establish a specific 
target for 1988 and also decided not to set a tentative 
range for 1989. The behavior of this aggregate will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of movements 
in its velocity, developments in the economy and 
financial markets, and the nature of emerging price 
pressures.  

With Ms. Seger dissenting, the following longer-run policy for 

1989 was appproved by the Committee: 

For 1989, the Committee agreed on tentative 
ranges for monetary growth, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 
1989, of 3 to 7 percent for M2 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 
percent for M3. The Committee set the associated 
monitoring range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. It was 
understood that all these ranges were provisional 
and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in 
the light of intervening developments.  

With Messrs. Angell and Kelley and Ms. Seger dissenting from the 

operational paragraph on policy implementation in the period immediately 

ahead, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the 

System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



6/29-30/88

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity has continued to expand at a 
fairly vigorous pace. Growth in total nonfarm payroll 
employment moderated somewhat in April and May. The 
civilian unemployment rate rose to 5.6 percent in May, 
a level just below its average in the first quarter.  
Industrial production advanced considerably in April 
and May. Retail sales were little changed on balance 
over the two months after rising appreciably in the 
first quarter. Available data indicate that business 
capital spending has remained at the high level reached 
in the first quarter. Housing starts fell sharply in 
May, but other indicators suggested little change in 
the pace of recent housing activity. The nominal 
U.S. merchandise trade deficit declined substantially 
in April, as imports dropped sharply and exports 
were essentially unchanged. Most measures indicate 
that prices and wages have risen somewhat more 
rapidly in recent months. Prices of a broad range 
of commodities, particularly agricultural goods, 
have increased sharply in the past few weeks.  

Short-term interest rates have risen since the 
Committee's meeting on May 17, while bond yields 
have moved lower. The trade-weighted foreign 
exchange value of the dollar in terms of the other 
G-10 currencies appreciated considerably over the 
intermeeting period.  

Expansion of M2 and M3 slowed considerably in 
May and M1 was about unchanged, but data available 
for June suggested some pickup in monetary growth.  
From a fourth-quarter base, M2 and M3 have grown at 
rates in the upper portion of the ranges established 
by the Committee for 1988. Expansion in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt for the year thus far 
appears to be at a pace somewhat below that in 1987.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved 
pattern of international transactions. In furtherance 
of these objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this 
meeting the ranges it had established in February for 
growth of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter 
of 1988. The monitoring range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was also maintained at 
7 to 11 percent for the year.



6/29-30/88

For 1989, the Committee agreed on tentative 
ranges for monetary growth, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 
1989, of 3 to 7 percent for M2 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 
percent for M3. The Committee set the associated 
monitoring range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. It was 
understood that all these ranges were provisional 
and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in 
the light of intervening developments.  

With respect to M1, the Committee reaffirmed 
its decision in February not to establish a specific 
target for 1988 and also decided not to set a 
tentative range for 1989. The behavior of this 
aggregate will continue to be evaluated in the 
light of movements in its velocity, developments 
in the economy and financial markets, and the 
nature of emerging price pressures.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to increase slightly the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.  
Taking account of indications of inflationary 
pressures, the strength of the business expansion, 
developments in foreign exchange and domestic 
financial markets, and the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, somewhat greater reserve restraint would, 
or slightly lesser reserve restraint might, be accept
able in the intermeeting period. The contemplated 
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from 
June through September at annual rates of about 
5-1/2 and 7 percent, respectively. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears 
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the 
next meeting are likely to be associated with a 
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
5 to 9 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, August 16, 1988.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-5-


