














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 16, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Heller 
Hoskins 
Johnson 
LaWare 
Parry 
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and 
Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, R. Davis, Lindsey, 
Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

1. Entered the meeting following action to approve minutes for the 
June 29-30, 1988, meeting.



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Whitesell, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, and Scheld, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, and 
Chicago, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Messrs. McNees, Miller, and O'Driscoll, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Guentner, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 29-30, 1988, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period June 29, 1988, through August 15, 1988, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period June 29, 1988, 

through August 15, 1988, were ratified.  

With Mr. Hoskins dissenting and Mr. Kelley absent, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive:



The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity has continued to expand at a 
vigorous pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment grew 
sharply further in June and July. The civilian un
employment rate in July, at 5.4 percent, was slightly 
below its average level in the second quarter.  
Industrial production advanced considerably further in 
July. Growth in retail sales remained moderate last 
month. Business capital spending has continued to grow 
rapidly. Some measures of prices indicate a pickup from 
recent trends and labor costs have risen more rapidly 
in recent months.  

Most interest rates have increased appreciably 
since the Committee's meeting on June 29-30. On August 
9 the Federal Reserve Board approved an increase in the 
discount rate from 6 to 6-1/2 percent.  

The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit fell in 
the second quarter as exports continued to rise and non
oil imports declined. Over the intermeeting period, the 
trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar 
appreciated somewhat further in terms of the other G-10 
currencies.  

Expansion of M2 and to a lesser extent M3 slowed in 
July but growth of M1 remained relatively strong. From 
a fourth-quarter base through July, M2 and M3 have grown 
at rates somewhat above the midpoints of the ranges 
established by the Committee for 1988. Expansion in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt for the year thus far 
appears to be at a pace somewhat below that in 1987.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in late June 
reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for 
growth of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 
1988. The monitoring range for growth in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was also maintained at 7 to 11 percent 
for the year.  

For 1989, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
for monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989, of 3 to 7 percent 
for M2 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent for M3. The Committee 
set the associated monitoring range for growth in total 
domestic nonfinancial debt at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.



It was understood that all these ranges were provisional 
and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in the 
light of intervening developments.  

With respect to M1, the Committee reaffirmed its 
decision in February not to establish a specific target 
for 1988 and also decided not to set a tentative range 
for 1989. The behavior of this aggregate will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of movements in its 
velocity, developments in the economy and financial 
markets, and the nature of emerging price pressures.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account 
of indications of inflationary pressures, the strength 
of the business expansion, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve 
restraint would, or slightly lesser reserve restraint 
might, be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from 
June through September at annual rates of about 3-1/2 
and 5-1/2 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call 
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager 
for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during 
the period before the next meeting are likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on 

Tuesday, September 20, 1988.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


