














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 17, 1988 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 17, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Heller 
Hoskins 
Johnson 
Kelley 
Parry 
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and 
Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield, General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R.Davis, Lindsey, 
Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



5/17/88

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Whitesell, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, 
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 

Mr. Fieleke and Ms. Lovett, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and New York, respectively 

Ms. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 29, 1988, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period March 29, 1988, through May 16, 1988, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period March 29, 1988, 

through May 16, 1988, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Hoskins and Parry dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive:



5/17/88

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
continuing strong expansion in economic activity and 
rising levels of resource utilization. In April total 
nonfarm payroll employment rose further; the increase 
included sizable growth in the manufacturing sector.  
The civilian unemployment rate fell to 5.4 percent, 
down appreciably from its level at the start of the 
year. Growth in industrial production picked up 
considerably in April from a reduced pace earlier in 
the year. Retail sales fell appreciably last month 
but estimates of sales in February and March were 
revised substantially higher. Indicators of business 
capital spending point to substantial gains thus far 
this year, notably for equipment. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit in the first quarter was 
substantially smaller than that for the fourth quarter.  
Consumer and producer prices have risen more rapidly 
recently following a period of relatively modest 
increases. Broad measures of labor costs indicate 
a substantial advance in the first quarter, in part 
because of a rise in payroll taxes.  

Interest rates have risen somewhat since the 
Committee's meeting on March 29. The trade-weighted 
foreign exchange value of the dollar in terms of other 
G-10 currencies had increased slightly on balance over 
the intermeeting period prior to May 17 and jumped 
following release of the March trade data.  

M1 and M2 grew rapidly in April, owing in part to 
a buildup in transaction balances associated with tax 
payments, while M3 expanded at a slower pace than in 
previous months. Through April, expansion of M2 and M3 
was in the upper portion of the ranges established by 
the Committee for 1988. Expansion in total domestic 
nonfinancial debt appears to be continuing at a pace 
close to that in 1987.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price stability 
over time, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these objectives, 
the Committee at its meeting in February established 
growth ranges of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth 
quarter of 1988. The monitoring range for growth in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 7 to 11 
percent for the year.

-3-



5/17/88

With respect to M1, the Committee decided in 
February not to establish a specific target for 1988.  
The behavior of this aggregate in relation to economic 
activity and prices has become very sensitive to changes 
in interest rates, among other factors, as evidenced by 
sharp swings in its velocity in recent years. Conse
quently, the appropriateness of changes in M1 this 
year will continue to be evaluated in the light of the 
behavior of its velocity, developments in the economy 
and financial markets, and the nature of emerging 
price pressures.  

In the initial implementation of policy, the 
Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of 
pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of 
conditions in financial markets, the strength of the 
business expansion, indications of inflationary 
pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, 
and the behavior of the monetary aggregates, the 
Committee expects that a slight increase in the 
degree of pressure on reserve positions would be 
appropriate in the weeks ahead. Depending on further 
developments in these factors, somewhat greater 
reserve restraint would, or slightly lesser reserve 
restraint might, also be acceptable later in the 
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve 
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 over the period from March through June 
at annual rates of about 6 to 7 percent. The Chairman 
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to 
the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve 
conditions during the period before the next meeting 
are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside a range of 5 to 9 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on June 29-30, 1988.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary

-4-


