














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 13-14, 1988

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 13, 1988, at 2:30 p.m. and 

continuing on Wednesday, December 14, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Heller 
Mr. Hoskins 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Parry 
Ms. Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, and Melzer, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and 
Minneapolis, respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Bradfield General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis, 
Lindsey, Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1. Attended Wednesday session only.



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Feinman and Rea, Economists, Division of 

Monetary Affairs 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gillum, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Eisenmenger, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum, 
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, 
Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 

Ms. Lovett, Messrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Boston, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 1, 1988, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 1, 1988, through December 13, 1988, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period November 1, 

1988, through December 13, 1988, were ratified.  

2. Attended portion of Tuesday's meeting relating to review of recent 
experience with borrowing and the federal funds rate and the 
implementation of open market operations.



With Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that, apart from the direct effects of the drought, 
economic activity has continued to expand at a vigorous 
pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply in 
October and November, with sizable increases indicated 
in manufacturing after declines in late summer. The 
civilian unemployment rate, at 5.4 percent in November, 
remained in the lower part of the range that has 
prevailed since early spring. Industrial production 
advanced considerably in October and November. Housing 
starts turned up in October after changing little on 
balance over the previous several months. Growth in 
consumer spending has been somewhat more moderate in 
recent months, and indicators of business capital 
spending suggest a substantially slower rate of 
expansion than earlier in the year. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit narrowed further in the third 
quarter. Preliminary data for October indicate a small 
decline from the revised deficit for September. The 
latest information on prices and wages suggest little if 
any change from recent trends.  

Interest rates have risen since the Committee 
meeting on November 1, with appreciable increases 
occurring in short-term markets. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms 
of the other G-10 currencies declined significantly 
further on balance over the intermeeting period.  

Expansion of M2 and M3 strengthened in November 
from relatively slow rates of growth in previous months, 
especially in the case of M2. Thus far this year, M2 
has grown at a rate a little below, and M3 at a rate a 
little above, the midpoint of the ranges established by 
the Committee for 1988. M1 has increased only slightly 
on balance over the past several months, bringing growth 
so far this year to 4 percent. Expansion of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt for the year thus far appears 
to be at a pace somewhat below that in 1987 and around 
the midpoint of the Committee's monitoring range for 
1988.



The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a 
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern 
of international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in late June 
reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for 
growth of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 
1988. The monitoring range for growth of total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was also maintained at 7 to 11 percent 
for the year.  

For 1989, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges 
for monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989, of 3 to 7 percent 
for M2 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent for M3. The Committee 
set the associated monitoring range for growth of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.  
It was understood that all these ranges were provisional 
and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in the 
light of intervening developments.  

With respect to M1, the Committee reaffirmed its 
decision in February not to establish a specific target 
for 1988 and also decided not to set a tentative range 
for 1989. The behavior of this aggregate will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of movements in its 
velocity, developments in the economy and financial 
markets, and the nature of emerging price pressures.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to increase somewhat the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.  
Taking account of indications of inflationary pressures, 
the strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat 
greater reserve restraint would, or slightly lesser 
reserve restraint might, be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are 
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over 
the period from November through March at annual rates 
of about 3 and 6-1/2 percent, respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range of 7 to 11 percent.



-5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on 

Tuesday-Wednesday, February 7-8, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


