














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

January 5, 1988 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on 

Tuesday, January 5, 1988, at 4:00 p.m. This was a telephone conference 

meeting and each individual was in Washington, D. C., except as otherwise 

indicated in parentheses in the following list of those participating.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman (New York) 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Boehne (Philadelphia) 
Mr. Boykin (Dallas) 
Mr. Heller 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Keehn (Chicago) 
Mr. Kelley 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Stern (Minneapolis) 

Messrs. Black (Richmond), Forrestal (Atlanta), Hoskins (Cleveland), 
and Parry (San Francisco), Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Melzer (St. Louis) and Morris (Boston), Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 
Mr. Truman, Economist (International) 

Messrs. Lindsey and Prell, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



1/5/88

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Czerwinski (Kansas City), First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City 

With Ms. Seger dissenting, the Committee changed the operational 

paragraph of the directive issued at its meeting on December 15-16, 1987 

to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to read as follows: 

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. The Committee 
agrees that the passing of time and the year-end should 
permit further progress toward restoring a normal 
approach to open market operations, although still 
sensitive conditions in financial markets and uncer
tainties in the economic outlook may continue to call 
for some flexibility in operations. Taking account of 
conditions in financial markets, somewhat lesser reserve 
restraint or somewhat greater reserve restraint would 
be acceptable depending on the strength of the business 
expansion, indications of inflationary pressures, 
developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as 
the behavior of the monetary aggregates. The contem
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from November 
through March at annual rates of about 5 percent and 6 
percent, respectively. Over the same period, growth 
in M1 is expected to remain relatively limited. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8 percent.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


