














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 9-10, 1988

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, February 9, 1988, at 3:00 p.m., 

and continuing on Wednesday, February 10, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Heller 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Kelley 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Hoskins, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mrs 
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary 

Bradfield General Counsel 
Patrikis, 1 Deputy General Counsel 
Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, 
Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account

1/ Attended Wednesday session only.



2/9-10/88

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gillum, 1 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Wascher, 1 Economist, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis, 
and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, 
Richmond, Cleveland, New York, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. McNees and Cacy, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and Kansas City, respectively 

Mr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 15-16, 1987, and 

January 5, 1988, were approved.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Wednesday session.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period December 16, 1987, through February 9, 1988, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period December 16, 1987, 

through February 9, 1988, were ratified.  

1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
and action on monetary growth ranges for 1988.



2/9-10/88

By unanimous vote, the following longer-run policy for 1988 was 

approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a sustain
able basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these objectives, 
the Committee at this meeting established growth ranges 
of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988.  
The monitoring range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt was set at 7 to 11 percent for the year.  

With respect to M1, the Committee again decided not 
to establish a specific target for 1988. The behavior of 
this aggregate in relation to economic activity and prices 
has become very sensitive to changes in interest rates, 
among other factors, as evidenced by sharp swings in its 
velocity in recent years. Consequently, the appropriateness 
of changes in M1 this year will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of the behavior of its velocity, developments in 
the economy and financial markets, and the nature of 
emerging price pressures.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions 

in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting indicated 
that economic activity continued to expand rapidly in 
the fourth quarter but that the advance reflected a 
build-up in inventories as domestic final demands 
weakened. The growth in output appeared to have slowed 
around year-end. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose 
much less in January than on average over the previous 
three months; the manufacturing sector also recorded 
reduced employment growth in January. The civilian 
unemployment rate, at 5.8 percent in January, was un
changed from December. Growth in industrial production 
moderated further in December. Retail sales picked up 
in December, buoyed by improved auto sales, but remained 
below levels reached during the summer. Indicators of 
business capital spending were mixed late in the year.  
Housing starts fell markedly in December, and were down 
somewhat on balance in the fourth quarter from the

-3-



2/9-10/88

average pace in the second and third quarters. The 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit declined 
substantially in November. For October and November 
combined, the deficit rose slightly from the average 
rate in the third quarter, but in real terms the deficit 
was estimated to have narrowed further. The rise in 
consumer prices slowed and producer prices fell in 
late 1987, reflecting declines in energy prices; wage 
trends have shown little change in recent months.  

Most interest rates were down substantially on balance 
since the Committee's meeting in mid-December. In the 
Treasury securities market, long-term yields fell consider
ably more than short-term rates. Broad indexes of stock 
prices rose somewhat on balance over the intermeeting 
period in still relatively volatile trading. The trade
weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar in terms of 
the other G-10 currencies declined further in the second 
half of December but recovered after the turn of the year 
and has increased moderately on balance since the December 
meeting.  

Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened substantially in 
January after slowing over November and December. For 
1987 as a whole, expansion of M2 fell considerably below 
the lower end of the range established by the Committee 
for the year, while growth of M3 was at the lower end of 
its range. Growth of M1 surged in January following two 
months of declines. For the year 1987, M1 growth was 
marginally below that of nominal GNP, and expansion in 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was at the midpoint of 
the Committee's monitoring range for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price 
stability over time, promote growth in output on a sustain
able basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these objectives, 
the Committee at this meeting established growth ranges 
of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988.  
The monitoring range for growth in total domestic non
financial debt was set at 7 to 11 percent for the year.

-4-



2/9-10/88

With respect to M1, the Committee again decided not 

to establish a specific target for 1988. The behavior of 
this aggregate in relation to economic activity and prices 
has become very sensitive to changes in interest rates, 

among other factors, as evidenced by sharp swings in its 
velocity in recent years. Consequently, the appropriateness 
of changes in M1 this year will continue to be evaluated in 

the light of the behavior of its velocity, developments in 
the economy and financial markets, and the nature of 
emerging price pressures.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the slightly 
reduced degree of pressure on reserve positions sought 
in recent days. The Committee agrees that the current 
more normal approach to open market operations remains 
appropriate; still sensitive conditions in financial 
markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook may 
continue to call for some flexibility in operations.  
Taking account of conditions in financial markets, 
somewhat lesser reserve restraint or somewhat greater 
reserve restraint would be acceptable depending on the 
strength of the business expansion, indications of 
inflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange 
markets, as well as the behavior of the monetary aggre
gates. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected 
to be consistent with growth in both M2 and M3 over the 
period from November through March at annual rates of 
about 6 to 7 percent. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 
Operations that reserve conditions during the period 
before the next meeting are likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 4 to 8 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on March 29, 1988.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


