














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 28, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 

in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 28, 1989 at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 

Corrigan, Vice Chairman 

Angell 

Guffey 

Heller 

Johnson 
Keehn 

Kelley 
LaWare 

Melzer 

Seger 
Syron

Messrs. Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, 
respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Scheld, 
Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account



3/28/89

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Stone, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia 

Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco, Cleveland, Philadelphia, 
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Cook, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond 

Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the 

election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open 

Market Committee for the period commencing March 1, 1989, and ending 

December 31, 1989, had been received and that those individuals had executed 

their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
James H. Oltman, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Richard F. Syron, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, with 
Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 
as alternate; 

Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with 
W. Lee Hoskins, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 
as alternate; 

Thomas C. Melzer, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, with 
Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 
as alternate; 

Roger Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, with 
Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
as alternate

- 2 -



3/28/89 - 3 

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market 

Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors at the 

first meeting of the Committee after December 31, 1989, with the understanding 

that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the 

Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have 

any official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 

Alan Greenspan Chairman 
E. Gerald Corrigan Vice Chairman 

Donald L. Kohn Secretary and Economist 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Gary P. Gillum Deputy Assistant Secretary 
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. General Counsel 
Ernest T. Patrikis Deputy General Counsel 
Michael J. Prell Economist 
Edwin M. Truman Economist 

Anatol B. Balbach, Richard G. Davis, 
Thomas E. Davis, David E. Lindsey, 
Alicia H. Munnell, Larry J. Promisel, 
Karl A. Scheld, Charles J. Siegman, 
Thomas D. Simpson, and Lawrence Slifman Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected 

to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjourn

ment of the first meeting of the Committee after December 31, 1989.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for 

Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the under

standing that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's note: Advice was subseqently received 
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.



3/28/89

Secretary's note: On March 13, 1989, the continuing 
rules, regulations, authorizations, and other instruments 
of the Committee listed below had been distributed with 
the advice that, in accordance with procedures approved 
by the Committee, they were being called to the Committee's 
attention before the March 28 organization meeting to 
give members an opportunity to raise any questions they 
might have concerning them. Members were asked to so 
indicate if they wished to have any of the instruments 
in question placed on the agenda for consideration at 
this meeting, and no such requests were received.  
Accordingly, all of the instruments remained in effect 
in their existing forms.  

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

3. Resolutions providing for the continued operation of the 
Committee and for certain actions by the Reserve Banks 
during an emergency.  

4. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open 
Market Account.  

5. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal 
Reserve Banks.  

7. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability of 
Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

8. Agreement with the U.S. Treasury to Warehouse Foreign 
Currencies.

9. Program for Security of FOMC Information.

- 4 -



3/28/89

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 28, 1989 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations 
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange 
maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or 
the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement; 
provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the 
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action 
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be 
increased or decreased by more than $6.0 billion during the period com
mencing with the opening of business on the day following such meeting and 
ending with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or 
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, 
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount 
rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at 
the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of 
goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out 
of the storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 
aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable

- 5 -



3/28/89

limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided 
that in the event Government securities or agency issues covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement 
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the 
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the event bankers 
acceptances covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, 
they shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold 
in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks participating 
in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted through a Federal 
Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee may specify from 
time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign and 
international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Govern
ment securities to such foreign and international accounts on the bases 
set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements providing for the resale by 
such accounts of those securities within 15 calendar days on terms com
parable to those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) 
for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, 
subject to the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in 
paragraph l(c), repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency 
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements 
between its own account and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the pro
visions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 

shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 28, 1989 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent 
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and 
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity 
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time:

- 6 -



3/28/89

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form of 
cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open market at 
home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury, with the 
U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the Gold 
Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other international financial 
institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars 
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, 
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be 
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that time 
was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, 
specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $12.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in all 
foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net posi
tions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign 
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus out
standing contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements 
with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) 
for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of 12 months 
with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of 
Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the approval 
of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:

- 7 -



3/28/89

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1(A) above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment 
return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose of 
adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings, 
transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market 
exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks 
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating 
arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign 
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself 
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to 
the Committee.

- 8 -



3/28/89

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 

considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall be 
in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 
maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide 
investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government 
securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements 
for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman 
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such other 
member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of 
members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board Members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee 
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the 
Manager for Foreign Operations, for the purposes of reviewing recent or 
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other 
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any member 
of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information 
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials 
of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.

- 9 -



3/28/89

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below was 

reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 

Reaffirmed March 28, 1989 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at 

countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates 

for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with the IMF 

Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 

foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 

and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 

currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 

particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 

Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 

Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United 
States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities; 

and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 

in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under the 

IMF Aticle IV.

- 10 -



3/28/89

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed March 28, 1989 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction 
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account, shall be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearance with the Committee, the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations 
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to the 
Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or 
$600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, 
or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap 
drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading 
in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in the System's 
net position in that currency might be less than the limits specified in lB.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange
ment.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with 
the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the Chair
man, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is 
not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall 
open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most 
recent regular meeting of the Committee.  

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.

- 11 -



3/28/89 - 12 

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 7-8, 1989, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System Open Market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 8 through March 27, 1989, were ratified 

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and agency obligations during the period February 8 through 

March 27, 1989, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $6 billion to $8 billion the 

dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

May 16, 1989.  

With Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that activity in the nonfarm economy has expanded 
appreciably further in the current quarter. After 
strong gains in the fourth quarter, total nonfarm 
payroll employment rose markedly further in January 
and February. The civilian unemployment rate fell 
considerably to 5.1 percent in February. Industrial 
production was unchanged in February after rising 
substantially over the previous several months. After 
a weather-related surge in January, housing starts 
fell in February to a level somewhat below their 
average in the fourth quarter. Growth in consumer 
spending moderated in January and February. Recent 
indicators of business capital spending suggest a



3/28/89

rebound after a decline in the fourth quarter. The 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was larger in 
the fourth quarter than in the third quarter; the 
preliminary estimate of the deficit for January was 
smaller than the average for the fourth quarter. The 
latest information on prices suggests some pickup in 
inflation from recent trends.  

Interest rates in both short- and long-term 
markets have risen considerably since the Committee 
meeting in early February. On February 24 the Federal 
Reserve Board approved an increase in the discount 
rate from 6-1/2 to 7 percent. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies rose somewhat on 
balance over the intermeeting period.  

Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in February and 
apparently picked up further in March; over the first 
quarter such expansion was about in line with 
Committee expectations. M1 appears to have declined 
marginally since December.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in February 
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 
percent and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1988 to the fourth 
quarter of 1989. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 6-1/2 to 
10-1/2 percent for the year. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, develop
ments in the economy and financial markets, and 
progress toward price level stability.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of indications of inflationary pressures, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign

- 13 -



3/28/89 - 14 -

exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat 
greater reserve restraint would, or slightly lesser 
reserve restraint might, be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from March through June at annual 
rates of about 3 and 5 percent, respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 8 to 12 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 16, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


