














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 7-8, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 7, 1989, at 3:00 p.m. and 

continuing on Wednesday, February 8, 1989, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Heller 
Hoskins 
Johnson 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Parry 
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and 
Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis, 
Lindsey, Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1. Attended Wednesday session only.



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
2 3 

Messrs. Hooper, Madigan, and Stockton, Assistant 
Directors, Divisions of International Finance, Monetary 
Affairs, and Research and Statistics, respectively, 
Board of Governors 

2 3 3 
Messrs. Brayton, Duca, and Rosine, Economists, Divisions of 

Research and Statistics, Monetary Affairs, and Research 
and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors 

Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 
Board Members, Board of Governors 

Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 
Board Members, Board of Governors 

Mr. Gillum, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Division 
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Burger and McNees, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston, 
respectively 

Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting, notice 
had been received of the election of Richard F. Syron 
as an alternate member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee for the period January 1, 1989 through 
February 28, 1989, and Mr. Syron had executed his 
Oath of Office.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 13-14, 1988, were 

approved.  

2. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
of the economic outlook.  

3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary 
and debt aggregates.



-3-

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period December 14, 1988, through February 7, 1989, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period December 14, 

1988, through February 7, 1989, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Wednesday session.  

With Mr. Hoskins dissenting, the following longer-run policy for 

1989 was approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at this meeting reaffirmed 
its decision of late June to lower the ranges for 
growth of M2 and M3 to 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 
7-1/2 percent, respectively, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 
1989. The monitoring range for growth of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 6-1/2 to 10
1/2 percent for the year. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, 
developments in the economy and financial markets, 
and progress toward price level stability.  

With Messrs. Hoskins and Parry dissenting from the operational 

paragraph on policy implementation in the period immediately ahead, the 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that, apart from the direct effects of the drought, 
economic activity has continued to expand at a fairly 
vigorous pace. After strong gains in the fourth 
quarter, total nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply



-4-

in January, including a sizable increase in manu
facturing. The civilian unemployment rate, at 5.4 
percent in January, remained in the lower part of the 
range that has prevailed since the early spring of last 
year. Industrial production rose appreciably further in 
December and January. Housing starts declined somewhat 
in December but were up substantially on balance in the 
fourth quarter. Consumer spending advanced considerably 
in the fourth quarter, in part reflecting stronger sales 
of durable goods. Indicators of business capital 
spending suggest some weakening in recent months. The 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was slightly 
larger on average in October and November than in the 
third quarter. The latest information on prices 
suggests little change from recent trends, while wages 
have tended to accelerate.  

The federal funds rate and Treasury bill rates have 
risen since the Committee meeting in mid-December; other 
short-term interest rates are generally unchanged to 
somewhat lower. Bond yields have declined somewhat. In 
foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of 
the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies rose 
substantially over the intermeeting period.  

M2 and M3 weakened appreciably in January, espe
cially M2. For the year 1988, M2 expanded at a rate a 
little below, and M3 at a rate around, the midpoint of 
the ranges established by the Committee. M1 has changed 
little on balance over the past several months; it grew 
about 4-1/4 percent in 1988. Expansion of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt appears to have moderated 
somewhat in 1988 to a pace around the midpoint of the 
Committee's monitoring range for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at this meeting reaffirmed its 
decision of late June to lower the ranges for growth of 
M2 and M3 to 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, 
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1988 
to the fourth quarter of 1989. The monitoring range for 
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 
6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent for the year. The behavior of 
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, developments 
in the economy and financial markets, and progress 
toward price level stability.



-5

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account 
of indications of inflationary pressures, the strength 
of the business expansion, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve 
restraint would, or slightly lesser reserve restraint 
might, be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from 
December through March at annual rates of about 2 and 
3-1/2 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for 
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the 
period before the next meeting are likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 7 to 11 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday March 28, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


