














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 18-19, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Monday, December 18, 1989, at 1:00 p.m. and continued 

on Tuesday, December 19, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Melzer 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis , Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1. Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of November 14, 
1989 meeting.  

2. Attended Tuesday session only.



-2-

Messrs. Coyne and Winn,3 Assistants to the Board, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 
Board Members, Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors, 

Messrs. Brayton, Gagnon, Ms. Rehm, Messrs. Small, and 
Tryon, Economists, Divisions of Research and Statistics, 
International Finance, Research and Statistics, 
Monetary Affairs, and International Finance, 
respectively, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland, 
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 14, 1989, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 14, 1989, through December 18, 1989, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1.D. of the Authorization for Foreign 

Currency Operations was amended to raise from $20 billion to $21 billion 

the dollar limit in System Account holdings of foreign currencies.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period November 14, 

1989, through December 18, 1989, were ratified.  

3. Attended Monday session only.  
4. Attended Tuesday session covering discussion and action to adopt 

domestic policy directive.  
5. Left meeting before discussion and action to adopt the domestic 

policy directive.



With Messrs. Angell and Melzer dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is expanding slowly in the 
current quarter. Total nonfarm payroll employment has 
increased at a reduced pace on average over the past 
several months, with declines continuing in the 
manufacturing sector. The civilian unemployment rate 
edged up to 5.4 percent in November. Industrial 
production rose slightly in November after a decline 
in October resulting from strike activity and other 
disruptions. Nominal retail sales excluding motor 
vehicles strengthened in November, but continued weak 
sales of vehicles held total retail sales for the 
month to a level that was little changed from the 
third-quarter average. Housing starts fell in 
November but for the October-November period were up 
somewhat on average from their third-quarter level.  
Indicators of business capital spending suggest a 
weakening in expenditures after a substantial increase 
earlier in the year. The preliminary data indicate 
that the nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
widened appreciably in October from an upward revised 
September rate. Broad measures of inflation suggest 
that prices have risen more slowly on balance since 
midyear, partly reflecting sharp reductions in energy 
prices, but the latest data on labor compensation 
suggest no significant change in prevailing trends.  

Interest rates have changed little on balance 
since the Committee meeting on November 14. In 
foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of 
the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies 
declined substantially over the intermeeting period, 
with a particularly pronounced depreciation against 
the German mark and related European currencies in the 
last week of the period.  

M2 continued to grow fairly briskly in November, 
largely reflecting strength in its retail deposit 
components; M2 has expanded this year at a pace near 
the midpoint of the Committee's annual range. Growth 
of M3 picked up in November but has remained more 
restrained than that of M2, as assets of thrift 
institutions and their associated funding needs



apparently continued to contract; for the year to 
date, M3 has grown at a rate a little above the lower 
bound of the Committee's annual range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July 
reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February 
for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 
7-1/2 percent, respectively, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1990, on a tentative basis, 
the Committee agreed in July to use the same ranges as 
in 1989 for growth in each of the monetary aggregates 
and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to 
the fourth quarter of 1990. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, develop
ments in the economy and financial markets, and 
progress toward price level stability.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.  
Taking account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve 
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting 
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are 
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from November through March at annual 
rates of about 8-1/2 and 5-1/2 percent respectively.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.



-5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday-Wednesday, February 6-7, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


