














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 22, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 22, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Guffey 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Melzer 
Seger 
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and 
San Francisco, respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Smith, Assistant Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Hendricks and Monhollon, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Richmond, 
respectively 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, 
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectively 

Ms. Lovett and Messrs. McNees and Meyer, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Boston, and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 5-6, 1989, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period July 6, 1989, through August 21, 1989, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved, as part of a multi

lateral bridge financing for Mexico, a special reciprocal currency 

arrangement of $125 million with the Bank of Mexico. This facility 

supplements the regular $700 million arrangement with the Bank of Mexico 

specified in paragraph 2 of the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations. The Committee delegated to Chairman Greenspan authority to 

give final clearance for actual drawings on these facilities, subject to 

his determination that the appropriate terms and conditions had been met.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period July 6, 1989, 

through August 21, 1989, were ratified.  

1. Left meeting after action to approve special reciprocal currency 
arrangement with the Bank of Mexico.



With Mr. Guffey dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity has continued to expand at a 
moderate pace in recent months. In July, total 
nonfarm payroll employment rose appreciably further 
after a large advance in June, and the civilian 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, remained close to 
its average level in earlier months of the year.  
Industrial production edged higher in July, continuing 
the slower growth observed since the beginning of the 
year. Retail sales have grown at a moderate pace in 
recent months. Housing starts rose slightly further 
in July following a large gain in June. Recent 
indicators of business capital spending suggest slower 
growth after the substantial increase in the first 
half of the year. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade 
deficit narrowed considerably in June and for the 
second quarter as a whole was about unchanged from a 
substantially reduced average value in the first 
quarter. Partly reflecting reductions in energy 
prices, increases in consumer prices moderated in June 
and July. The latest wage data suggest no change in 
prevailing trends.  

Interest rates show mixed changes on balance 
since the Committee meeting on July 5-6. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies has risen 
on balance over the intermeeting period.  

M2 and M3 grew markedly in July, lifting 
expansion of M2 thus far this year to around the lower 
end of the Committee's annual range, and keeping M3 
somewhat above the lower bound of the Committee's 
range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July 
reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February 
for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 
7-1/2 percent, respectively, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. The



monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1990, on a tentative basis, 
the Committee agreed in July to use the same ranges as 
in 1989 for growth in each of the monetary aggregates 
and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to 
the fourth quarter of 1990. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, develop
ments in the economy and financial markets, and 
progress toward price level stability.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint might or slightly lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from June through September at annual 
rates of about 9 and 7 percent, respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 7 to 11 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, October 3, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

SECRETARY'S NOTES: 

Effective September 19, 1989, the Committee 
approved an increase from $5 billion to $10 
billion in the amount of eligible foreign 
currencies that the Federal Reserve would be 
prepared to warehouse for the U.S. Treasury or



-5

the Exchange Stabilization Fund for periods of 
up to 12 months. All the members voted to 
approve this action except for Mr. Johnson who 
abstained.  

With Messrs. Angell and Johnson dissenting, 
the Committee approved, effective September 25, 
1989, an increase from $18 billion to $20 
billion in the limit on the System's overall 
open position in all foreign currencies 
specified in paragraph 1D of the Authorization 
for Foreign Currency Operations.


