














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 3, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 3, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Melzer 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and 
San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, Ms. Munnell, 
Messrs. Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, 
and Slifman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, 
Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, 
Cleveland, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis, 
respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 22, 1989, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period August 22, 1989, through October 2, 1989, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period August 22, 

1989, through October 2, 1989, were ratified.  

With Mr. Guffey and Ms. Seger dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity continued to expand at a 
moderate pace in the third quarter. In July and 
August, total nonfarm payroll employment rose 
appreciably despite the depressing effect of strike 
activity. The civilian unemployment rate remained 
around 5-1/4 percent. Industrial production picked up 
in August, mainly because of a rebound in auto 
assemblies and coal mining. Consumer spending has 
registered larger gains in recent months, reflecting 
in part a surge in auto sales. Housing starts in July 

1. Entered meeting prior to discussion of current monetary policy.  
2. Left meeting prior to discussion of current monetary policy.



-3-

and August were slightly above their second-quarter 
average. Indicators of business capital spending 
suggest somewhat slower growth in the third quarter 
after the substantial increase in the first half of 
the year. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
recorded a further decline in July relative to June 
and to the average for the second quarter as a whole.  
Sharp reductions in energy prices over the summer 
months damped increases in consumer prices and 
contributed to declines in producer prices. The 
latest wage data suggest no change in prevailing 
trends.  

Interest rates generally show small mixed changes 
on balance since the Committee meeting on August 22.  
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value 
of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies 
fell after the release of the G-7 statement on 
September 23; on balance, the dollar depreciated 
somewhat over the intermeeting period.  

M2 grew fairly briskly in August and evidently 
also in September, lifting its expansion thus far this 
year to somewhat above the lower end of the 
Committee's annual range. M3 grew at a substantially 
reduced pace in this period, as assets of thrift 
institutions and their associated funding needs 
apparently contracted further; for the year to date, 
M3 has grown at a rate around the lower bound of the 
Committee's annual range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July 
reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February 
for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 
7-1/2 percent, respectively, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1990, on a tentative basis, 
the Committee agreed in July to use the same ranges as 
in 1989 for growth in each of the monetary aggregates 
and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to 
the fourth quarter of 1990. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, develop
ments in the economy and financial markets, and 
progress toward price level stability.



-4-

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint might or slightly lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from September through December at 
annual rates of about 6-1/2 and 4-1/2 percent, 
respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 
Operations that reserve conditions during the period 
before the next meeting are likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 7 to 11 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, November 14, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


