














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 16, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 16, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Guffey 
Heller 
Johnson 
Keehn 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Melzer 
Seger 
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, 
and San Francisco, respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Scheld, 
Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Thomson, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, 
Dallas, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. Sniderman, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland 

Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 28, 1989, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period March 28, 1989, through May 15, 1989, were 

ratified.  

With Mr. LaWare dissenting, the Committee approved an increase 

from $12.0 billion to $15.0 billion in the limit on the System's overall 

open position in all foreign currencies contained in paragraph lD of the 

Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations. This action was effective 

immediately.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period March 28, 1989, 

through May 15, 1989, were ratified.  

With Mr. Melzer dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to



execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that the rate of economic growth has slowed in recent 
months. Gains in total nonfarm payroll employment 
moderated substantially in March and April, and 
employment in manufacturing was about unchanged over 
the two months. The civilian unemployment rate rose 
considerably to 5.3 percent in April. Industrial 
production increased in April after declining on 
balance in the preceding two months. Growth in 
consumer spending has slowed considerably in recent 
months. Housing starts declined further in April.  
Recent indicators of business capital spending show a 
rebound after a decline in the fourth quarter. The 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was smaller on 
average in January and February than in the fourth 
quarter. Broad measures of prices have risen somewhat 
more rapidly in 1989, with a significant contribution 
from sharp increases in energy prices.  

Interest rates have declined considerably since 
the Committee meeting in late March. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies rose 
further on balance over the intermeeting period.  

Growth of M2 and M3 was sluggish in April, 
primarily because of a sizable decline in transactions 
balances. Through April, expansion of M2 has been at 
a rate below the Committee's range for the year, while 
growth of M3 has been in the lower portion of its 
range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in February 
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 
percent and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1988 to the fourth 
quarter of 1989. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 6-1/2 to 
10-1/2 percent for the year. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of movements in their velocities, develop
ments in the economy and financial markets, and 
progress toward price level stability.



In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of indications of inflationary pressures, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat 
greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve 
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting 
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are 
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from March through June at annual 
rates of about 1-1/2 and 4 percent, respectively.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation 
if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations 
that reserve conditions during the period before the 
next meeting are likely to be associated with a 
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 
8 to 12 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Wednesday-Thursday, July 5-6, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


