














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 5-6, 1989 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, July 5, 1989, at 3:00 p.m., and continuing 

on Thursday, July 6, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Guffey 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Melzer 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, 
and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1. Attended Thursday session only.



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
2 

Mr. Wajid, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Danker, 3 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
Mr. Mahoney, 3 Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
Mr. Teplin, 3 Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, Lang, and Rosenblum, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San 
Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Ms. Lovett and Mr. McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

Ms. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Atlanta 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 16, 1989, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period May 16, 1989, through July 5, 1989, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period May 16, 1989, 

through July 5, 1989, were ratified.  

2. Attended Thursday session only.  
3. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the Committee's 

discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives 
for monetary and debt aggregates.



By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $6 billion to $8 

billion the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings 

of U.S. Government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting 

period ending August 22, 1989.4 

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken at the 
Thursday session.  

By unanimous vote, the following ranges for growth in the broader 

aggregates and nonfinancial debt for 1989 were approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting 
the ranges it had established in February for growth 
of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 
percent, respectively, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 
percent for the year.  

With Mr. Keehn dissenting, the following longer-run policy for 

1990 was approved by the Committee: 

For 1990, on a tentative basis, the Committee 
agreed to use the same ranges as in 1989 for 
growth in each of the monetary aggregates and 
debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to 
the fourth quarter of 1990. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated 
in the light of movements in their velocities, 
developments in the economy and financial 
markets, and progress toward price level 
stability.  

4. Subsequently, available members of the Committee, or their 
alternates, unanimously approved a further increase of $2 billion, to 
$10 billion, in the intermeeting limit, effective July 31, 1989.  
Messrs. Heller and LaWare were absent and did not vote. Messrs. Boykin 
and Oltman voted as alternates for Messrs. Melzer and Corrigan, 
respectively.



With Ms. Seger dissenting from the operational paragrah on policy 

implementation in the period immediately ahead, the Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with 

the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting tends 
to confirm earlier indications that economic growth 
has slowed this year. Gains in total nonfarm payroll 
employment have moderated substantially in recent 
months, but the civilian unemployment rate, at 5.2 
percent in May, remained close to its average level in 
earlier months of the year. Industrial production 
increased on balance in April and May at about the 
reduced rate experienced earlier in the year. Growth 
in consumer spending has weakened considerably this 
year. Housing starts declined slightly further in 
May. Recent indicators of business capital spending 
suggest a substantial additional increase in the 
second quarter after a rebound in the first quarter.  
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit narrowed in 
April from a substantially reduced average value in 
the first quarter. Broad measures of prices have 
risen more rapidly this year than in 1988, reflecting 
sharp increases in energy and food prices.  

Interest rates have fallen since the Committee 
meeting on May 16, with the largest declines generally 
occurring in long-term markets. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies rose sharply 
earlier in the intermeeting period but subsequently 
more than retraced that rise in often volatile 
trading.  

M2 and M3 declined in May, primarily because of 
sizable reductions in transaction and other liquid 
balances arising from the clearing of unusually large 
tax payments; data through mid-June point to a rebound 
in these measures of money. Thus far this year, ex
pansion of M2 has been at a rate below the Committee's 
annual range, while growth of M3 has been around the 
lower bound of the Committee's range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these



objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting 
the ranges it had established in February for growth 
of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 
percent, respectively, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1990, on a tentative basis, 
the Committee agreed to use the same ranges as in 
1989 for growth in each of the monetary aggregates and 
debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to the 
fourth quarter of 1990. The behavior of the monetary 
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light 
of movements in their velocities, developments in the 
economy and financial markets, and progress toward 
price level stability.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.  
Taking account of indications of inflationary 
pressures, the strength of the business expansion, the 
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments 
in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, 
somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from June through September at annual 
rates of about 7 percent. The Chairman may call for 
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager 
for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during 
the period before the next meeting are likely to be 
associated with a federal funds rate persistently 
outside a range of 7 to 11 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held 

on Tuesday, August 22, 1989.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


