














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 27, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 27, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Hoskins 
Johnson 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Mr.  

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Rosenblum, Siegman, 
Simpson, and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Smith, Assistant Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Bowen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis 

Messrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Scheld, 
and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City, 
New York, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Fieleke, Judd, Ms. Lovett, and Mr. Meyer, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, 
San Francisco, New York, and Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 6-7, 1990, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 7, 1990, through March 26, 1990, 

were ratified.  

With Messrs. Angell, Hoskins, and LaWare dissenting, paragraph 1.D 

of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations was amended to raise 

from $21 billion to $25 billion the dollar limit on the System's overall 

open position in all foreign currencies.  

With Messrs. Angell, Hoskins, and LaWare dissenting, the Committee 

approved an increase in the amount of eligible foreign currencies that the 

Federal Reserve would be prepared to warehouse for the U.S. Treasury and 

1. Attended portion of meeting devoted to discussion of foreign 
currency operations.



the Exchange Stabilization Fund from $10 billion to as much as $15 billion, 

effective March 27, 1990.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period February 7, 

1990, through March 26, 1990, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1.A of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $8 billion to $12 billion 

the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period ending 

May 15, 1990.  

With Messrs. Boykin and Hoskins dissenting, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by 

the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
some pickup in the expansion of economic activity from 
the sluggish rate in the fourth quarter. Total non
farm payroll employment increased sharply in January 
and February after growing at a reduced pace on 
average in previous months; a surge in the service
producing sector and a weather-related rebound in 
construction were only partly offset by a net decline 
in manufacturing. The civilian unemployment rate 
remained at 5.3 percent. In February, production in 
the manufacturing sector retraced its large January 
decline, reflecting a swing in the production of motor 
vehicles. Consumer spending has been affected in 
recent months by fluctuations in expenditures for 
motor vehicles and energy-related items but on balance 
has expanded at a relatively slow pace; outlays for 
goods have been weak while expenditures for services 
have remained strong. Unusually mild weather con
tributed to a higher level of housing starts in 
January and February. Business capital spending, 
adjusted for inflation, appears to have turned up 
after a decline in the fourth quarter, reflecting a 
pickup in expenditures on motor vehicles and aircraft.  
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit widened in 
January from its low December rate but remained at



-4-

roughly its fourth-quarter average. Consumer prices 
rose more rapidly over January and February, only 
partly as a result of increases in prices of food and 
energy.  

Most short- and intermediate-term interest rates 
have risen a little since the Committee meeting on 
February 6-7; rates in long-term debt markets show 
mixed changes over the period. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies rose over the 
intermeeting period; much of the appreciation of the 
dollar was against the yen.  

Growth of M2 and M3 picked up considerably in 
February, reflecting strength in transaction and other 
liquid accounts; partial data for March suggested some 
slowing from the February pace.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in February 
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 
percent and 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth 
quarter of 1990. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 5 to 9 
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary 
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light 
of progress toward price level stability, movements in 
their velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve 
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting 
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are 
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from March through June at annual 
rates of about 6 and 4 percent respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it



-5

appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday May 15, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


