














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 15, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 15, 1990, at 2:00 p.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Hoskins 
Johnson 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Prell, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Rolnick, Siegman, Simpson, 
and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell, 
Mr. Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, 
Richmond, Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Mr. Cox, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 27, 1990, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period March 27, 1990, through May 14, 1990, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period March 27, 1990, 

through May 14, 1990, were ratified.  

With Mr. Hoskins dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is continuing to expand 
moderately. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
increased more slowly in March and April after sharp 
advances earlier in the year; its average growth thus 
far this year has been above that in the second half 
of 1989, in part because of the hiring of temporary 
workers for the census. In April, the civilian 
unemployment rate moved up to 5.4 percent. Industrial 
production declined in April, reflecting what appears 
to be a temporary cutback in the manufacture of motor 
vehicles. Consumer spending has been sluggish on 
balance in recent months; outlays for goods have been



weak while expenditures for services have remained 
strong. Business spending for equipment has been 
rising, but construction activity, both residential 
and nonresidential, appears to have weakened after a 
temporary boost early in the year. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit narrowed somewhat in January 
and February from its average rate in the fourth 
quarter. Consumer prices continued to rise at a 
faster pace in March than in 1989; producer prices 
were down somewhat further in April, reflecting 
additional unwinding of the earlier surge in prices of 
food and energy. The latest data on employment costs 
suggest some deterioration in underlying trends.  

Short-term interest rates have declined a little 
on balance since the Committee meeting on March 27, 
while rates in long-term debt markets have risen 
slightly over the period. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies declined con
siderably over the intermeeting period.  

Growth of M2 slowed in April and that of M3 
remained relatively weak. Through April, expansion of 
M2 and M3 was a little above the midpoint and around 
the lower end, respectively, of the ranges established 
by the Committee for 1990.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in February 
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 
percent and 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth 
quarter of 1990. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 5 to 9 
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary 
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light 
of progress toward price level stability, movements in 
their velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve



restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting 
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are 
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from March through June at annual 
rates of about 4 and 3 percent respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Monday-Tuesday July 2-3, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


