














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 2, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 2, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Hoskins 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and 
Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Broaddus, T. Davis, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Messrs. Judd, McNees, and Miller, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Ms. Ann Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market 
Operations, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 21, 1990, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period August 21, 

1990, through October 1, 1990, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Angell, Boykin, Hoskins, and Ms. Seger dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until 

otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity expanded at a slow pace in the 
third quarter. The recent large increase in oil 
prices has boosted key measures of inflation and 
eroded real personal income; however, data available 
thus far provide only limited evidence of a retarding 
effect on production and aggregate spending. Total 
nonfarm payroll employment declined in July and 
August, reflecting layoffs of temporary census 
workers; employment in the private sector changed 
little over the two months. The civilian unemployment 
rate edged up to 5.6 percent in August. Consumer 
spending appeared to be about unchanged in real terms



-3-

over July and August but was at a level significantly 
above the average for the second quarter. Advance 
indicators of business capital spending point to some 
softening in investment in coming months. Residential 
construction weakened further in August. The nominal 
U.S. merchandise trade deficit increased sharply in 
July from the low rate in June. Markedly higher oil 
prices contributed to substantial increases in 
consumer and producer prices in August; excluding 
energy and food items, consumer inflation has picked 
up from the second-quarter rate. Data on labor costs 
suggest no improvement in underlying trends.  

In short-term debt markets, Treasury bill rates 
have fallen somewhat since the Committee meeting on 
August 21, while rates on private market instruments 
are little changed. In the bond markets, most rates 
have edged lower on balance over this period. The 
trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies has declined 
slightly further on balance from the low level reached 
at the time of the August meeting.  

M2 and M3 expanded at appreciably faster rates in 
August; available data for September suggest continued 
strength in M2 and some slowing in the growth of M3.  
More rapid expansion of Ml and money market funds has 
contributed to the greater strength in the broad 
aggregates over the two months. Through September, 
expansion of M2 was estimated to be a little below the 
middle of the Committee's range for the year and 
growth of M3 in the lower portion of its range.  
Expansion of total domestic nonfinancial debt appears 
to have been near the midpoint of its monitoring 
range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July 
reaffirmed the range it had established in February 
for M2 growth of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990.  
The Committee in July also retained the monitoring 
range of 5 to 9 percent for the year that it had set 
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt. With 
regard to M3, the Committee recognized that the on
going restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
had depressed its growth relative to spending and 
total credit more than anticipated. Taking account of 
the unexpectedly strong M3 velocity, the Committee



decided in July to reduce the 1990 range to 1 to 5 
percent. For 1991, the Committee agreed on pro
visional ranges for monetary growth, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991, 
of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent 
for M3. The Committee tentatively set the associated 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991.  
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price 
level stability, movements in their velocities, and 
developments in the economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from September through December at 
annual rates of about 4 and 2 percent respectively.  
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday November 13, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


