














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 6-7, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 6, 1990, at 2:30 p.m. and was 

continued on Wednesday, February 7, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Boehne 
Mr. Boykin 
Mr. Hoskins 
Mr. Johnson 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Ms. Seger 
Mr. Stern 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis , Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel, 
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and 
Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account

1. Attended Wednesday session only.



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Reinhart and Wilcox, Economists, Divisions of 

Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics, 
respectively, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, Scheld, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, 
Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of 

the election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee for the period commencing January 1, 1990, and ending 

December 31, 1990, had been received and the named individuals had executed 

their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
James H. Oltman, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 
with Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond, as alternate; 

W. Lee Hoskins, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with 
Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
as alternate; 

Robert H. Boykin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with 
Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 
as alternate; 

2. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary 
and debt aggregates.



-3

Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, with 
Robert T. Parry, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open 

Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of their 

successors at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31, 1990, 

with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance of their 

official connection with the Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve 

Bank, they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee: 

Alan Greenspan Chairman 
E. Gerald Corrigan Vice Chairman 

Donald L. Kohn Secretary and Economist 
Normand R. V. Bernard Assistant Secretary 
Gary P. Gillum Deputy Assistant Secretary 
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. General Counsel 
Ernest T. Patrikis Deputy General Counsel 
Michael J. Prell Economist 
Edwin M. Truman Economist 

John M. Davis, Richard G. Davis, 
Richard W. Lang, David E. Lindsey, 
Larry J. Promisel, Arthur J. Rolnick, 
Harvey Rosenblum, Charles J. Siegman, 
Thomas D. Simpson, and David J. Stockton, Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until 

the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after December 31, 

1990.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager 

for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the 

understanding that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory 

to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.



Secretary's note: Advice was subsequently received 
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.  

Secretary's note: On January 18, 1990, the continuing 
rules, regulations, authorizations, and other instruments 
of the Committee listed below had been distributed with 
the advice that, in accordance with procedures approved 
by the Committee, they were being called to the 
Committee's attention before the February 6-7 organiza
tion meeting to give members an opportunity to raise any 
questions they might have concerning them. Members were 
asked to indicate if they wished to have any of the 
instruments in question placed on the agenda for con
sideration at this meeting. The only requests related to 
those under item 3 below, "Resolution of FOMC to provide 
for the continued operation of the Committee during an 
emergency" and "Resolution of FOMC authorizing certain 
actions by Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency".  
Accordingly, all of the other instruments (items 1, 2, 
and 4 through 9 below) remained in effect in their 
existing forms.  

1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the System 
Open Market Account.  

2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

3. Resolution of FOMC to provide for the continued 
operation of the Committee during an emergency; 
Resolution of FOMC authorizing certain actions by 
Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency.  

4. Resolution relating to examinations of the System 
Open Market Account.  

5. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of 
Federal Reserve Banks.  

7. Rules of Organization, Rules Regarding Availability 
of Information, and Rules of Procedure.  

8. Memorandum on Agreement with the U.S. Treasury to 
Warehouse Foreign Currencies.

9. Program for Security of FOMC Information.



By unanimous vote, paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $6 billion to 

$8 billion the limit on intermeeting changes in System account holdings 

of U.S. government and federal agency securities. With this amendment, 

the authorization reads as follows: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
Amended February 6, 1990 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obliga
tions of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States in the open market, from or to securities 
dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery 
basis, for the System Open Market Account at market prices, and, for 
such Account, to exchange maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency 
securities with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to allow them 
to mature without replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of 
U. S. Government and Federal agency securities held in such Account 
(including forward commitments) at the close of business on the day of a 
meeting of the Committee at which action is taken with respect to a 
domestic policy directive shall not be increased or decreased by more 
than $8.0 billion during the period commencing with the opening of 
business on the day following such meeting and ending with the close of 
business on the day of the next such meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery 
basis, for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market 
discount rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine 
months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current 
shipment of goods between countries or within the United States, or (2) 
arise out of the storage within the United States of goods under 
contract of sale or expected to move into the channels of trade within a 
reasonable time and that are secured throughout their life by a 
warehouse receipt or similar document conveying title to the underlying 
goods; provided that the aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at 
any one time shall not exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and.interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account



of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase 
of such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or 
less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying 
reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual 
dealers; provided that in the event Government securities or agency 
issues covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in 
the market or transferred to the System Open Market Account; and 
provided further that in the event bankers acceptances covered by any 
such agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to 
be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System 
Open Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks 
participating in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted 
through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee 
may specify from time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign 
and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to 
sell U. S. Government securities to such foreign and international 
accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements 
providing for the resale by such accounts of those securities within 15 
calendar days on terms comparable to those available on such trans
actions in the market; and (b) for New York Bank account, when 
appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to the conditions 
imposed on purchases and sales of securities in paragraph 1(c), 
repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency securities, and to 
arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements between its own 
account and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Bank.  
Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the provisions of this 
paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed February 6, 1990 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the 
extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive 
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in 
conformity with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue 
from time to time:



A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open 
market at home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S.  
Treasury, with the U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by 
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary 
authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other 
international financial institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A 
above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw 
dollars under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 
below, provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding 
at that time was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of 
exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not 
exceeding $21.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position 
in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of 
net positions in individual currencies. The net position in a single 
foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, 
plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding 
contracts for future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of 
these elements with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" 
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a 
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and 
Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity:



-8-

Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 

Regular 700 
Special 125 * 

Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

* Facility with maturity date of February 15, 1990.  

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1.A above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an invest
ment return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the purpose 
of adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap 
drawings, transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at 
non-market exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central 
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making 
operating arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of 
foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not 
commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the 
Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings 
concerning the administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board 
of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for 
review and approval to the Committee.



5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall 
be in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining 
to maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to 
provide investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S.  
Government securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under 
agreements for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs 
shall be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the 
Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman 
and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of 
Governors, and such other member of the Board as the Chairman may 
designate (or in the absence of members of the Board serving on the 
Subcommittee, other Board Members designated by the Chairman as 
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, 
his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at the 
request of any member, or at the request of the Manager for Foreign 
Operations, for the purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated 
operations and of consulting with the Manager on other matters relating 
to his responsibilities. At the request of any member of the 
Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations 
shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and 
information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary 
and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit 
pertinent information on System foreign currency operations to 
appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3.G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks, dated January 1, 1944.



-10-

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below 

was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
Reaffirmed February 6, 1990 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed 
at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market 
exchange rates for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior 
consistent with the IMF Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign 
exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other 
countries and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the 
United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary 
authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under 
the IMF Article IV.



-11-

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed February 6, 1990 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and 
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the 
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency 
Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for 
Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, shall be guided by the 
following procedural understandings with respect to consultations and 
clearance with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the 
Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant to such 
clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the 
Subcommittee (or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that 
consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time 
available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's 
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on 
any day or $600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the 
Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in.a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 
million, or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment 
of swap drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of 
trading in a particular currency by the System, even though the change 
in the System's net position in that currency might be less than the 
limits specified in 1.B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap 
arrangement.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee 
(or with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that 
consultation with the full Committee is not feasible in the time 
available, or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that 
consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time 
available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's 
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since 
the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.



-12-

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap 
arrangement.  

3. The.Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, 
and about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Resolution of Federal Open Market 

Committee to provide for the continued operation of the Committee during 

an emergency and the Resolution of the Federal Open Market Committee 

authorizing certain actions by Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency 

were amended to read as follows: 

RESOLUTION OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONTINUED OPERATION OF 

THE COMMITTEE DURING AN EMERGENCY 
Amended February 6, 1990 

In the event of a national security emergency, if the Secretary 
or Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee (or in the 
event of the unavailability of both of them, the Secretary or Acting 
Secretary of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) 
certifies that as a result of the emergency the available number of 
regular members and regular alternates of the Federal Open Market 
Committee is less than seven, all powers and functions of the said 
Committee shall be performed and exercised by, and authority to exercise 
such powers and functions is hereby delegated to, an Interim Committee, 
subject to the following terms and conditions: 

Such Interim Committee shall consist of: seven members, 
comprising each regular member and regular alternate of the Federal Open 
Market Committee then available, together with an additional number, 
sufficient to make a total of seven, which shall be made up in the 
following order or priority from those available: (1) each alternate at 
large (as defined below); (2) each President of a Federal Reserve Bank 
not then either a regular member or an alternate; (3) each First Vice 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank; provided that (a) within each of 
the groups referred to in clauses (1), (2), and (3) priority of 
selection shall be in numerical order according to the numbers of the 
Federal Reserve Districts, (b) the President and the First Vice 
President of the same Federal Reserve Bank shall not serve at the same 
time as members of the Interim Committee, and (c) whenever a regular 
member or regular alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee or a 
person having a higher priority as indicated in clauses (1), (2), and 
(3) becomes available he shall become a member of the Interim Committee 
in the place of the person then on the Interim Committee having the 
lowest priority. The Interim Committee is hereby authorized to take 
action by majority vote of those present whenever one or more members



-13-

thereof are present, provided that an affirmative vote for the action 
taken is cast by at least one regular member, regular alternate, or 
President of a Federal Reserve Bank. The delegation of authority and 
other procedures set forth above shall be effective only during such 
period or periods as there are available less than a total of seven 
regular members and regular alternates of the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  

As used herein the term "regular member" refers to a member of 
the Federal Open Market Committee duly appointed or elected in 
accordance with existing law; the term "regular alternate" refers to an 
alternate of the Committee duly elected in accordance with existing law 
and serving in the absence of the regular member for whom he was 
elected; and the term "alternate at large" refers to any other duly 
elected alternate of the Committee at a time when the member in whose 
absence he was elected to serve is available.  

RESOLUTION OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE AUTHORIZING 
CERTAIN ACTIONS BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS DURING AN EMERGENCY 

Amended February 6, 1990 

The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes each 
Federal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions set forth below 
during and following a national security emergency when such Federal 
Reserve Bank finds itself unable after reasonable efforts to be in 
communication with the Federal Open Market Committee (or with the 
Interim Committee acting in lieu of the Federal Open Market Committee) 
or when the Federal Open Market Committee (or such Interim Committee) is 
unable to function. Action(s) under this authorization will be taken by 
a Federal Reserve Bank only after reasonable efforts have been made to 
consult with the Chairman of the Committee or if the latter is not 
available with the Vice Chairman of the Committee or if both the 
Chairman and the Vice Chairman are not available, with whatever member 
of the Board of Governors may be available to serve as Acting Chairman 
as provided for by the Committee's Rules of Organization. In addition, 
to the extent feasible, the action(s) should be coordinated with other 
Reserve Banks with which the Reserve Bank is able to communicate.  

(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light of economic 
conditions and the general credit situation then prevailing (after 
taking into account the possibility of providing necessary credit 
through advances secured by direct obligations of the United States 
under the last paragraph of section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such 
Federal Reserve Bank may purchase and sell obligations of the United 
States for its own account, either outright or under repurchase 
agreement, from and to banks, dealers or other holders of such 
obligations.  

(2) Such Federal Reserve Bank may engage in operations of the types 
specified in the Committee's authorization for System foreign currency 
operations when requested to do so by an authorized official of the U.S.  
Treasury Department; provided, however, that such Bank shall take all



-14-

steps practicable at the time to insure as far as possible that, in 
light of the information available on other System foreign currency 
operations, its own operations do not result in the aggregate in 
breaching any of the several dollar limits specified in the 
authorization.  

Authority to take the actions set forth shall be effective 
only until such time as the Federal Reserve Bank is able again to 
establish communications with the Federal Open Market Committee (or the 
Interim Committee), and such Committee is then functioning.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 18-19, 1989, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period December 19, 1989, through February 6, 

1990, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

December 19, 1989, through February 6, 1990, were ratified.  

With Ms. Seger and Messrs. Hoskins and Stern dissenting, the 

following longer-run policy for 1990 was approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at this meeting established 
ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent respectively, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990.  
The monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt was set at 5 to 9 percent for the year.  
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price 
level stability, movements in their velocities, and 
developments in the economy and financial markets.



With Ms. Seger and Messrs. Boykin and Hoskins dissenting from 

the operational paragraph on policy implementation in the period 

immediately ahead, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized 

and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute 

transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is continuing to expand despite 
weakness in the industrial sector. Total nonfarm 
payroll employment increased substantially in January 
after growing at a reduced pace on average in previous 
months; a surge in the service-producing sector and a 
weather-related rebound in construction were only 
partly offset by a large decline in the manufacturing 
sector. The civilian unemployment rate was unchanged 
at 5.3 percent. Partial data suggest that industrial 
production in January was appreciably below its 
average in the fourth quarter. Adjusted for 
inflation, strong gains in consumer spending on 
services in the fourth quarter offset declines in 
consumer purchases of goods, especially motor 
vehicles. Unusually cold weather depressed housing 
starts appreciably in December, and residential 
construction in the fourth quarter was little changed 
from its third-quarter level. Business capital 
spending, adjusted for inflation, declined in the 
fourth quarter as a result of lower expenditures on 
motor vehicles and strike activity in the aircraft 
industry; spending on other types of capital goods was 
strong, however, and new orders for equipment picked 
up toward the end of the year. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit widened in October-November 
from the third-quarter rate. Consumer prices had 
risen somewhat more rapidly toward the end of 1989, 
and prices of food and energy apparently increased 
substantially further in January. The latest data on 
labor compensation suggest no significant change in 
prevailing trends.  

Interest rates have risen in intermediate- and 
long-term debt markets since the Committee meeting on 
December 18-19; in short-term markets, the federal 
funds rate has declined, and other short-term rates 
show mixed changes over the period. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined 
further over the intermeeting period; most of the



-16-

depreciation was against the German mark and related 
European currencies, and there was little change 
against the yen.  

Growth of M2 slowed in January, almost entirely 
reflecting a drop in transaction deposits. Growth of 
M3 also slowed in January as assets of thrift institu
tions and their associated funding needs apparently 
continued to contract. For the year 1989, M2 expanded 
at a rate a little below the middle of the Committee's 
annual range, and M3 grew at a rate slightly below the 
lower bound of its annual range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter
national transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at this meeting established 
ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent respectively, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990.  
The monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt was set at 5 to 9 percent for the year.  
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price 
level stability, movements in their velocities, and 
developments in the economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve 
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting 
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are 
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from December through March at annual 
rates of about 7 and 3-1/2 percent respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.



-17-

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Wednesday, March 27, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary 

Secretary's note: Effective February 16, 1990, 
available members of the Committee approved a 
recommendation by the Manager for Domestic 
Operations to relax temporarily some of the 
constraints that apply to collateralized System 
loans of government securities to primary dealers.  
This action was taken to facilitate the orderly 
liquidation of the government securities position 
of a troubled primary dealer in such obligations.  
In accordance with usual practice, all securities 
loans would continue to be collateralized by U.S.  
government obligations of greater current market 
value.  

Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan, 
Corrigan, Angell, Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, 
Johnson, Kelley, and Stern. Votes against this 
action: None. Absent and not voting: Mr. LaWare 
and Ms. Seger.  

The temporary liberalization of securities 
lending terms was terminated effective March 13, 
1990.


