














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 21, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 21, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Hoskins 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lindsey, 
Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and 
Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond 

Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Scheld, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, Kansas City, 
and Chicago, respectively 

Messrs. Fieleke, Meyer, Miller and Ms. White, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and New York, 
respectively 

Ms. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Atlanta 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 2-3, 1990, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period July 3, 1990, 

through August 20, 1990, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is continuing to expand at a 
relatively slow pace. After a sizable rise in May and 
June, total nonfarm payroll employment registered a 
large decline in July, much but not all of which 
reflected layoffs of temporary census workers. The 
civilian unemployment rate rose to 5.5 percent in 
July, just above the narrow range that had prevailed 
for an extended period. Industrial production was 
unchanged in July after rising appreciably in the 
second quarter. Retail sales rose considerably on 
balance over June and July after declines in earlier 
months. Available indicators point to a sluggish 
trend in business capital spending. Residential



-3-

construction weakened further in July. The nominal 
U.S. merchandise trade deficit narrowed sharply in 
June; for the second quarter, the trade deficit was 
substantially reduced from its first-quarter rate.  
Consumer prices rose appreciably further in June and 
July, while producer prices were about unchanged over 
the two months. The latest data on labor costs 
suggest no improvement in underlying trends. Crude 
oil prices have risen sharply over the last several 
weeks.  

Short-term interest rates have fallen somewhat 
since the Committee meeting on July 2-3, while rates 
in bond markets have risen appreciably, as oil prices 
have increased. The trade-weighted foreign exchange 
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 
currencies declined considerably over the intermeeting 
period.  

M2 grew slowly in June and July, while M3 was 
little changed; available data for August suggest a 
partial rebound in both aggregates. Growth of M2 and 
especially of M3 has been damped by the continuing 
contraction of deposits at thrift institutions 
resulting from the restructuring of the thrift 
industry. Through July, expansion of both M2 and M3 
was estimated to be in the lower portions of their 
respective ranges for 1990. Expansion of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt appears to have been near 
the midpoint of its monitoring range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July 
reaffirmed the range it had established in February 
for M2 growth of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990.  
The Committee in July also retained the monitoring 
range of 5 to 9 percent for the year that it had set 
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt. With 
regard to M3, the Committee recognized that the on
going restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
had depressed its growth relative to spending and 
total credit more than anticipated. Taking account of 
the unexpectedly strong M3 velocity, the Committee 
decided in July to reduce the 1990 range to 1 to 5 
percent. For 1991, the Committee agreed on pro
visional ranges for monetary growth, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991, 
of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent



for M3. The Committee tentatively set the associated 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991.  
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price 
level stability, movements in their velocities, and 
developments in the economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from June through September at annual 
rates of about 4 and 2-1/2 percent respectively. The 
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it 
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that 
reserve conditions during the period before the next 
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal 
funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 
percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday October 2, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


