














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 2-3, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Monday, July 2, 1990, at 3:10 p.m., and was continued 

on Tuesday, July 3, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Hoskins 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman, 
Simpson, and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

1. Mr. Boehne entered this meeting after the action to approve the 
minutes for the May meeting.  

2. Attended Tuesday session only.



Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Danker, Chief, Banking and Money Market Analysis 

Section, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Feinman and Krane, Economists, Divisions of 
Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics, 
respectively, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
San Francisco, Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Mr. Cook, Ms. Lovett, and Mr. McNees, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, and 
Boston, respectively 

Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 15, 1990, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period May 15, 1990, 

through July 2, 1990, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken on 
Tuesday, July 3.  

With Ms. Seger dissenting, the following ranges for growth of M2 

and M3 and nonfinancial debt in 1990 were approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the 
range it had established in February for M2 growth of 3 
to 7 percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 

3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary 
and debt aggregates.



to the fourth quarter of 1990. The Committee also 
retained the monitoring range of 5 to 9 percent for the 
year that it had set for growth of total domestic 
nonfinancial debt. With regard to M3, the Committee 
recognized that the ongoing restructuring of thrift 
depository institutions had depressed its growth 
relative to spending and total credit more than 
anticipated. Taking account of the unexpectedly strong 
M3 velocity, the Committee decided to reduce the 1990 
range to 1 to 5 percent.  

With Ms. Seger and Mr. LaWare dissenting, the following ranges 

for growth of M2 and M3 and nonfinancial debt in 1991 were approved by 

the Committee: 

For 1991, the Committee agreed on provisional 
ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991, of 2-1/2 
to 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3. The 
Committee tentatively set the associated monitoring 
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt at 
4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is continuing to expand but at 
a relatively slow pace. Total nonfarm payroll employ
ment has increased at a much reduced rate in recent 
months. Nevertheless, the civilian unemployment rate 
has remained in a narrow range for an extended period 
and was 5.3 percent in May. Industrial production 
increased substantially in May, largely reflecting a 
rebound in the manufacture of motor vehicles.  
Consumer spending has been sluggish in recent months; 
outlays for goods have declined while expenditures for 
services have increased at a slower pace. Business 
capital spending appears to have slackened a bit in 
the spring after a pickup earlier in the year.  
Residential construction has fallen to a relatively 
low level in recent months. The nominal U.S.



-4-

merchandise trade deficit narrowed in April from its 
average rate in the first quarter. Partly reflecting 
an unwinding of the earlier jump in prices of food and 
energy, consumer prices rose at a slower rate in April 
and May, while producer prices were unchanged over the 
two months. The latest data on wages suggest no 
improvement in underlying trends.  

Short-term interest rates have changed little on 
balance since the Committee meeting on May 15, while 
rates in long-term debt markets have declined somewhat 
over the intermeeting period. The trade-weighted 
foreign exchange value of the dollar in terms of the 
other G-10 currencies.was somewhat higher over much of 
the period but declined late in the period to a level 
slightly below that prevailing at the time of the May 
meeting.  

M2 and M3 declined in May; available data for 
June suggest a partial rebound in M2 and little change 
in M3. Growth of M2 and especially of M3 has been 
damped by the continuing contraction of deposits of 
thrift institutions resulting from the restructuring 
of the thrift industry. Through June, expansion of M2 
was estimated to be in the lower portion of its range 
for 1990 and growth of M3 somewhat below its range for 
the year. Expansion of total domestic nonfinancial 
debt appears to have been at the midpoint of its 
monitoring range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting 
the range it had established in February for M2 growth 
of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990. The Committee 
also retained the monitoring range of 5 to 9 percent 
for the year that it had set for growth of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt. With regard to M3, the 
Committee recognized that the ongoing restructuring of 
thrift depository institutions had depressed its 
growth relative to spending and total credit more than 
anticipated. Taking account of the unexpectedly 
strong M3 velocity, the Committee decided to reduce 
the 1990 range to 1 to 5 percent. For 1991, the 
Committee agreed on provisional ranges for monetary 
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1990 to 
the fourth quarter of 1991, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent 
for M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3. The Committee 
tentatively set the associated monitoring range for



growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt at 4-1/2 to 
8-1/2 percent for 1991. The behavior of the monetary 
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light 
of progress toward price level stability, movements in 
their velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking 
account of progress toward price stability, the 
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of 
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic.financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the 
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve 
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth 
of M2 and M3 over the period from June through 
September at annual rates of about 3 and 1 percent 
respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee 
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic 
Operations that reserve conditions during the period 
before the next meeting are likely to be associated 
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range 
of 6 to 10 percent.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday August 21, 1990.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


