














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 18, 1990 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 18, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Boehne 
Boykin 
Hoskins 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Seger 
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, 
and Boston, respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman, 
Simpson, and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors 
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Scheld, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco, Kansas City, New York, Chicago, 
and Atlanta, respectively 

Mr. McTeer, Senior Vice President, Baltimore Branch 

Messrs. Goodfriend and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis, 
respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 13, 1990, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period November 13, 

1990, through December 17, 1990, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph 1.A of the Authorization for Domestic 

Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $8 billion to $14 billion 

the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System Account holdings of U.S.  

government and federal agency securities for the intermeeting period 

through February 6, 1991.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive:



The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
appreciable weakening in economic activity. Total 
nonfarm payroll employment fell sharply further in 
November, reflecting widespread job losses that were 
especially pronounced in manufacturing and construc
tion; the civilian unemployment rate rose to 5.9 
percent. Industrial output declined markedly in 
October and November, in part because of sizable 
cutbacks in the production of motor vehicles. Retail 
sales were weak in real terms in October and November; 
real disposable income has been reduced not only by a 
decrease in total hours worked but also by the effects 
of higher energy prices. Advance indicators of 
business capital spending point to considerable 
softening in investment in coming months. Residential 
construction has declined substantially further in 
recent months. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade 
deficit widened in October from its average rate in 
the third quarter as non-oil imports rose more sharply 
than exports. Increases in consumer prices moderated 
in November largely as a result of a softening in oil 
prices. The latest data on labor costs suggest some 
improvement from earlier trends.  

Most interest rates have fallen appreciably since 
the Committee meeting on November 13. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies rose 
slightly on balance over the intermeeting period.  

M2 was about unchanged on balance over October 
and November after several months of relatively 
limited expansion, while M3 declined slightly in both 
months. From the fourth quarter of 1989 through 
November, expansion of M2 was estimated to be in the 
lower half of the Committee's range for the year and 
growth of M3 near the lower end of its range.  
Expansion of total domestic nonfinancial debt appears 
to have been near the midpoint of its monitoring 
range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable 
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July 
reaffirmed the range it had established in February 
for M2 growth of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990.  
The Committee in July also retained the monitoring 
range of 5 to 9 percent for the year that it had set 
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt. With



regard to M3, the Committee recognized that the on
going restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
had depressed its growth relative to spending and 
total credit more than anticipated. Taking account of 
the unexpectedly strong M3 velocity, the Committee 
decided in July to reduce the 1990 range to 1 to 5 
percent. For 1991, the Committee agreed on pro
visional ranges for monetary growth, measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991, 
of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent 
for M3. The Committee tentatively set the associated 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991.  
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue 
to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price 
level stability, movements in their velocities, and 
developments in the economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the 
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, 
taking account of a possible change in the discount 
rate. Depending upon progress toward price stability, 
trends in economic activity, the behavior of the 
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign 
exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly 
greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser 
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the inter
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions 
are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 
over the period from November through March at annual 
rates of about 4 and 1 percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday-Wednesday, February 5-6, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


