














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
December 17. 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 17, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Lindsey 
Mr. Mullins 
Mr. Parry 
Ms. Phillips 

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. Beebe, Lindsey, Promisel, Scheld, 
Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Messrs. Lang, 
Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, 
New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Messrs. Frydl, Goodfriend, and McNees, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, and 
Boston, respectively 

Mr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Effective January 6, 1992, William J. McDonough was selected 

by unanimous vote to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the 

capacity of Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market 

Account, on the understanding that his selection was subject to his 

being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

Secretary's Note: Advice was subsequently received that the 
selection indicated above was satisfactory to the board of 
directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 5, 1991, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period November 5, 1991, through December 16, 

1991, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the renewal for one 

year of the System's reciprocal currency arrangement with the 

Netherlands Bank, including a modification relating to the interest 

rate on drawings initiated by the System.



By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

November 5, 1991, through December 16, 1991, were ratified.  

With Mr. LaWare dissenting, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting continues 
to portray a sluggish economy and a depressed state of 
business and consumer confidence. Total nonfarm pay
roll employment fell sharply in November; however, the 
average workweek in the private nonfarm sector edged up 
and the civilian unemployment rate remained at 6.8 
percent. Industrial production fell in November, 
partly reflecting a sizable drop in motor vehicle 
assemblies. Consumer spending has been soft on balance 
in recent months. Real outlays for business equipment 
appear to be rising slowly, and nonresidential con
struction has continued to decline. Housing starts 
were appreciably higher on average in October and 
November than in the third quarter. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit widened slightly further in 
September; the deficit in the third quarter was sub
stantially larger than in the second quarter. Wage and 
price increases have continued to trend downward.  

Interest rates have declined appreciably since the 
Committee meeting on November 5. The Board of 
Governors approved a reduction in the discount rate 
from 5 to 4-1/2 percent on November 6. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined 
further over the intermeeting period; the dollar 
depreciated primarily against the mark and other 
European currencies.  

Expansion in M2 and M3 edged up in November from a 
slow pace in October; the slightly faster growth re
flected a strengthening in the most liquid components 
of the aggregates. For the year through November, 
expansion of both M2 and M3 is estimated to have been 
at the lower ends of the Committee's ranges.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had estab
lished in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth



quarter of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt also was maintained at 
4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. For 1992, on a 
tentative basis, the Committee agreed in July to use 
the same ranges as in 1991 for growth in each of the 
monetary aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992. With 
regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the 
ongoing restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
would continue to depress the growth of this aggregate 
relative to spending and total credit. The behavior of 
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated 
in the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the 
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for 
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and 
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, 
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve 
restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period 
from November through March at annual rates of about 3 
and 1-1/2 percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, February 4-5, 1992.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


