














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
August 20, 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 20, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Mullins 
Mr. Parry 

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, 
Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Hoenig, and 
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis. Cleveland, 
Kansas City, Kansas City, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Messrs. McNees, Meyer, and Miller, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, 
and Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on July 2-3, 1991, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period July 3, 1991, through August 19, 1991, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

July 3, 1991, through August 19, 1991, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting has been 
mixed, but it suggests on balance that economic 
activity is expanding at a moderate pace. The 
unemployment rate fell slightly to 6.8 percent in July, 
but total nonfarm payroll employment edged down and the 
average workweek posted a sharp decline. Industrial 
production rose appreciably further in July. Consumer 
spending has increased considerably in recent months, 
led by sizable gains in expenditures for motor 
vehicles. New orders for nondefense capital goods 
point to little change in spending for business 
equipment over the near term, and nonresidential 
construction remains weak. Housing starts rose further 
in June and July. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade 
deficit declined in June, and its average for the 
second quarter was somewhat below the rate in the first



quarter. Increases in consumer prices have been small 
in recent months.  

Over the intermeeting period prior to August 19, 
market interest rates declined appreciably and the 
trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the 
other G-10 currencies depreciated somewhat. Sub
sequently, in the wake of events in the Soviet Union, 
Treasury bill rates fell somewhat further and the 
dollar rebounded sharply against many European 
currencies.  

M2 contracted in July after several months of slow 
growth and M3 fell further. For the year through July, 
expansion of M2 and M3 has been near the lower ends of 
the Committee's ranges.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had estab
lished in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth 
quarter of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt also was maintained at 
4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. For 1992, on a 
tentative basis, the Committee agreed in July to use 
the same ranges as in 1991 for growth in each of the 
monetary aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992. With 
regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the 
ongoing restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
would continue to depress the growth of this aggregate 
relative to spending and total credit. The behavior of 
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated 
in the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending 
upon progress toward price stability, trends in 
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve 
restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with a resumption of growth of M2 and M3 in



-4

the weeks ahead; but in view of the declines already 
posted since June, the Committee anticipates that M2 
would be little changed and M3 would be down at an 
annual rate of about 1 percent over the period from 
June through September.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 1, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


