














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 2-3, 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 2, 1991, at 2:30 p.m. and was 

continued on Wednesday, July 3, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Keehn 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, 
and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Slifman, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Danker and Mr. Brady, 1 Section Chiefs, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Oliner, Senior Economist, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division 
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Lovett, Messrs. Lang, 
Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, 
New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston 

Messrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 14, 1991, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period May 14, 1991, through July 2, 1991, were 

ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period May 14, 1991, 

through July 2, 1991, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken on 
Wednesday, July 3, 1991.  

By unanimous vote, the following broad policy statement and the 

ranges for growth of M2 and M3 and nonfinancial debt in 1991 were approved 

by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will foster 
price stability and promote sustainable growth in 
output. In furtherance of these objectives, the 

1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary 
and debt aggregates.



-3-

Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it 
had established in February for growth of M2 and 
M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, 
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991. The monitor
ing range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 4-1/2 to 
8-1/2 percent for the year.  

With Messrs. Angell and Black dissenting, the following 

tentative ranges for growth of M2 and M3 and nonfinancial debt in 1992 

were approved by the Committee: 

For 1992, on a tentative basis, the Committee 
agreed to use the same ranges as in 1991 for 
growth in each of the monetary aggregates and 
debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to 
the fourth quarter of 1992. With regard to M3, 
the Committee anticipated that the ongoing 
restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
would continue to depress the growth of this 
aggregate relative to spending and total credit.  
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

By unanimous vote, except for the dissents by Messrs. Angell 

and Black from the decision relating to the monetary growth ranges for 

1992, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity has begun to recover from the 
recent recession. The unemployment rate rose to 6.9 
percent in May, but total nonfarm payroll employment 
edged up and the average workweek posted a sizable 
gain. Manufacturing output has risen in recent months, 
led by appreciable increases in assemblies of motor 
vehicles. Consumer spending has been bolstered in part 
by an upturn in personal income. An increase in orders 
points to a firming in demand for business equipment, 
but nonresidential construction remains weak. Housing



starts rose over April and May. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit in April was somewhat below 
the average rate in the first quarter. Increases in 
consumer prices have been small in recent months.  

Most interest rates have risen slightly since the 
Committee meeting on May 14. The trade-weighted value 
of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies 
increased substantially on balance over the inter
meeting period.  

M2 grew at a moderate pace over May and June, 
while M3 changed little. For the year thus far, ex
pansion of M2 and M3 has been in the middle portion of 
the Committee's ranges.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee re
affirmed at this meeting the ranges it had established 
in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 
percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, measured from 
the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 
1991. The monitoring range for growth of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt also was maintained at 4-1/2 
to 8-1/2 percent for the year. For 1992, on a tenta
tive basis, the Committee agreed to use the same ranges 
as in 1991 for growth in each of the monetary aggre
gates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992. With regard to M3, 
the Committee anticipated that the ongoing restruc
turing of thrift depository institutions would continue 
to depress the growth of this aggregate relative to 
spending and total credit. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending 
upon progress toward price stability, trends in 
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve 
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be 
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from June 
through September at annual rates of about 5-1/2 and 3 
percent, respectively.



-5

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, August 20, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


