














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 26, 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 26, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Keehn 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, 
and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Promisel, 
Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division 
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, 
Ms. Munnell, and Mr. Rosenblum, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, 
and Dallas, respectively 

Ms. White, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 5-6, 1991, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 6, 1991, through March 25, 1991, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period February 6, 

1991, through March 25, 1991, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity weakened further in the opening 
months of 1991. In February, total nonfarm payroll 
employment fell sharply further, especially in manu
facturing, and the civilian unemployment rate rose to 
6.5 percent. Industrial output also declined markedly 
again in February, with cutbacks evident in a wide 
range of industries. Advance indicators point to



further weakness in business fixed investment in coming 
months, notably in nonresidential construction. On the 
other hand, after declining considerably in previous 
months, retail sales turned up in February; consumer 
sentiment appears to have rebounded sharply in recent 
weeks. Housing starts jumped in February, retracing a 
sizable decline in January but remaining at a low 
level. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
increased somewhat in January but was considerably 
below its average rate in the fourth quarter. Energy 
prices fell substantially further in January and 
February, but prices of other consumer goods and 
services rose more rapidly than in preceding months.  
Wage increases have moderated in recent months.  

Short-term interest rates have declined slightly 
since the Committee meeting on February 5-6. In 
longer-term markets, rates on Treasury bonds have risen 
appreciably, owing at least in part to heightened 
expectations of a recovery in U.S. economic activity.  
Risk premiums on corporate debt instruments have 
declined, and stock prices have moved up considerably 
on balance. The trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies increased very 
sharply over the intermeeting period.  

Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened substantially in 
February, reflecting rapid expansion in liquid retail 
deposits; partial data suggest appreciable further 
growth in March.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote a resumption of sustainable growth 
in output, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in February 
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth 
quarter of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 
8-1/2 percent for the year. With regard to M3, the 
Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring of 
thrift depository institutions would continue to 
depress its growth relative to spending and total 
credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.



In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending 
upon progress toward price stability, trends in 
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve 
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be 
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March 
through June at annual rates of about 5-1/2 and 3-1/2 
percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, May 14, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


