














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 5-6, 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 5, 1991, at 2:30 p.m. and was 

continued on Wednesday, February 6, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Keehn 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Parry 
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, 
and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, 
and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2-

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Rosine, Senior Economist, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Fisher, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, and 
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia, 
Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston 

Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of 

the election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal 

Open Market Committee for the period commencing January 1, 1991, and ending 

December 31, 1991, had been received and the named individuals had executed 

their oaths of office.  

The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 

E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with 
James H. Oltman, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, as alternate; 

Robert P. Black, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 
with Richard F. Syron, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston, as alternate; 

Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with 
W. Lee Hoskins, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 
as alternate; 

Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with 
Thomas C. Melzer, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 
as alternate; 

1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committe's discussion 
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary 
and debt aggregates.



-3

Robert T. Parry, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 
with Roger Guffey, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, as alternate.  

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open 

Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of their 

successors at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31, 1991, 

with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance of their 

official connection with the Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve 

Bank, they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal 

Open Market Committee: 

Alan Greenspan Chairman 
E. Gerald Corrigan Vice Chairman 

Donald L. Kohn Secretary and Economist 
Normand R. V. Bernard Deputy Secretary 
Joseph R. Coyne Assistant Secretary 
Gary P. Gillum Assistant Secretary 
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. General Counsel 
Ernest T. Patrikis Deputy General Counsel 
Michael J. Prell Economist 
Edwin M. Truman Economist 

John H. Beebe, J. Alfred Broaddus, Jr., 
Richard G. Davis, David E. Lindsey, 
Larry J. Promisel, Karl A. Scheld, 
Charles J. Siegman, Thomas D. Simpson, 
Lawrence Slifman, and Sheila L. Tschinkel Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until 

the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after December 31, 

1991.  

By unanimous vote, Peter D. Sternlight and Sam Y. Cross were 

selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities of 

Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager 

for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, respectively, on the 

understanding that their selection was subject to their being satisfactory 

to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.



Secretary's note: Advice subsequently was received 
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory 
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.  

Secretary's note: On January 25, 1991, the continuing 
rules, regulations, authorizations, and other instruments 
of the Committee listed below had been distributed with 
the advice that, in accordance with procedures approved 
by the Committee, they were being called to the 
Committee's attention before the February 5-6 organiza
tion meeting to give members an opportunity to raise any 
questions they might have concerning them. Members were 
asked to indicate if they wished to have any of the 
instruments in question placed on the agenda for con
sideration at this meeting. Two requests for review 
related to items 1 and 2 below: "Rules Regarding 
Availability of Information" and "Agreement with the 
U.S. Treasury to Warehouse Foreign Currencies".  
Accordingly, all of the other instruments (items 3 
through 10 below) remained in effect in their existing 
forms.  

1. Rules Regarding Availability of Information.  

2. Agreement with the U.S. Treasury to Warehouse 
Foreign Currencies.  

3. Procedures for allocation of securities in the 
System Open Market Account.  

4. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal 
Reserve Bank as agent to operate the System Account 
in case the New York Bank is unable to function.  

5. Resolution of FOMC to provide for the continued 
operation of the Committee during an emergency; 
Resolution of FOMC authorizing certain actions by 
Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency.  

6. Resolution relating to examinations of the System 
Open Market Account.  

7. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in 
Federal agency issues.  

8. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of 
Federal Reserve Banks.  

9. Rules of Organization and Rules of Procedure.

10. Program for Security of FOMC Information.



By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed February 5, 1991 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most 
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee: 

(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities, including securities 
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obliga
tions of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency 
of the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers 
and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
System Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to 
exchange maturing U. S. Government and Federal agency securities with the 
Treasury or the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without 
replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of U. S. Government 
and Federal agency securities held in such Account (including forward 
commitments) at the close of business on the day of a meeting of the 
Committee at which action is taken with respect to a domestic policy 
directive shall not be increased or decreased by more than $8.0 billion 
during the period commencing with the opening of business on the day 
following such meeting and ending with the close of business on the day 
of the next such meeting; 

(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or to 
acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the 
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at market discount rates, 
prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up to nine months at the 
time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the current shipment of goods 
between countries or within the United States, or (2) arise out of the 
storage within the United States of goods under contract of sale or 
expected to move into the channels of trade within a reasonable time and 
that are secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or similar 
document conveying title to the underlying goods; provided that the 
aggregate amount of bankers acceptances held at any one time shall not 
exceed $100 million; 

(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations that are direct 
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any 
agency of the United States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types 
authorized for purchase under 1(b) above, from dealers for the account 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase 
of such securities, obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or 
less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying 
reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual 
dealers; provided that in the event Government securities or agency



issues covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer 
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the 
market or transferred to the System Open Market Account; and provided 
further that in the event bankers acceptances covered by any such 
agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be 
held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.  

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal 
Reserve Banks to lend U. S. Government securities held in the System Open 
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to banks 
participating in Government securities clearing arrangements conducted 
through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as the Committee 
may specify from time to time.  

3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, 
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign 
and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account, to 
sell U. S. Government securities to such foreign and international 
accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph 1(a) under agreements 
providing for the resale by such accounts of those securities within 15 
calendar days on terms comparable to those available on such trans
actions in the market; and (b) for New York Bank account, when 
appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed 
on purchases and sales of securities in paragraph 1(c), repurchase 
agreements in U. S. Government and agency securities, and to arrange 
corresponding sale and repurchase agreements between its own account and 
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Bank. Transactions 
undertaken with such accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may 
provide for a service fee when appropriate.  

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency 

Operations shown below was reaffirmed: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed February 5, 1991 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the 
extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive 
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in 
conformity with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue 
from time to time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form 
of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open 
market at home and abroad, including transactions with the U. S.  
Treasury, with the U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by



Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary 
authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other 
international financial institutions: 

Austrian schillings 
Belgian francs 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Pounds sterling 
French francs 
German marks 
Italian lire 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Netherlands guilders 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to 
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A 
above.  

C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw 
dollars under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 
below, provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement 
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding 
at that time was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of 
exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.  

D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies 
not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position 
in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of 
net positions in individual currencies. The net position in a single 
foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, 
plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding 
contracts for future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these 
elements with due regard to sign.  

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" 
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a 
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among 
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and 
Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew such 
arrangements on maturity:



Amount of arrangement 
(millions of dollars 

Foreign bank equivalent) 

Austrian National Bank 250 
National Bank of Belgium 1,000 
Bank of Canada 2,000 
National Bank of Denmark 250 
Bank of England 3,000 
Bank of France 2,000 
German Federal Bank 6,000 
Bank of Italy 3,000 
Bank of Japan 5,000 
Bank of Mexico 700 
Netherlands Bank 500 
Bank of Norway 250 
Bank of Sweden 300 
Swiss National Bank 4,000 
Bank for International Settlements: 

Dollars against Swiss francs 600 
Dollars against authorized European 

currencies other than Swiss francs 1,250 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed 
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred 
for review and approval to the Committee.  

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 
1.A above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, 
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an 
investment return on System holdings of foreign currencies, or for the 
purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with 
swap drawings, transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken 
at non-market exchange rates.  

4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central 
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making 
operating arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of 
foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit 
itself to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal 
Open Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the 
administration of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors 
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and 
approval to the Committee.  

5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as practicable, 
considering needs for minimum working balances. Such investments shall 
be in liquid form, and generally have no more than 12 months remaining to 
maturity. When appropriate in connection with arrangements to



provide investment facilities for foreign currency holdings, U. S.  
Government securities may be purchased from foreign central banks under 
agreements for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.  

6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall 
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the 
Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman 
and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of 
Governors, and such other member of the Board as the Chairman may 
designate (or in the absence of members of the Board serving on the 
Subcommittee, other Board Members designated by the Chairman as 
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his 
alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at the request 
of any member, or at the request of the Manager for Foreign Operations, 
for the purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated operations and of 
consulting with the Manager on other matters relating to his 
responsibilities. At the request of any member of the Subcommittee, 
questions arising from such reviews and consultations shall be referred 
for determination to the Federal Open Market Committee.  

7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed 
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 

B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning 
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on 
policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; 

C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and 
information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary 
and Financial Policies.  

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent 
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate 
officials of the Treasury Department.  

9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency 
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3.G(1) of the 
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign 
Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.



-10-

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below 

was reaffirmed: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
Reaffirmed February 5, 1991 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed 
at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange 
rates for the U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with 
the IMF Article IV, Section 1.  

2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign 
exchange.  

B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected 
foreign central banks and with the Bank for International Settlements.  

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries 
and with international monetary institutions.  

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 

A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for 
currencies.  

B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in 
particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund.  

C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the 
Committee.  

4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the 
United States Treasury; 

B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary 
authorities; and 

C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States 
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under 
the IMF Article IV.



-11-

By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 

Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
Reaffirmed February 5, 1991 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and 
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the 
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency 
Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager for 
Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account, shall be guided by the 
following procedural understandings with respect to consultations and 
clearance with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the 
Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant to such 
clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.  

1. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with 
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's 
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on any 
day or $600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the 
Committee.  

B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the 
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150 
million, or $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment 
of swap drawings.  

C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of 
trading in a particular currency by the System, even though the change in 
the System's net position in that currency might be less than the limits 
specified in 1.B.  

D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the 
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap 
arrangement.  

2. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall clear with the Committee 
(or with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation 
with the full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with 
the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the 
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's 
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since 
the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.



-12-

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger 
of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap 
arrangement.  

3. The Manager for Foreign Operations shall also consult with the Sub
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System, and 
about any operations that are not of a routine character.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved for public comment a 

number of technical amendments to its Rules Regarding Availability of 

Information with a comment period to end March 15, 1991.  

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved a decrease in the 

amount of eligible foreign currencies that the Federal Reserve would be 

prepared to warehouse for the U. S. Treasury and the Exchange Stabiliza

tion Fund from $15 billion to $10 billion, effective February 5, 1991.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting 

of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 18, 1990, were 

approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

December 18, 1990, through February 5, 1991, were ratified.  

With Mr. Forrestal dissenting, the following longer-run policy 

for 1991 was approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote a resumption of sustainable growth 
in output, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at this meeting established 
ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 
percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter, 
of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for the year. With regard to M3, the 
Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring 
of thrift depository institutions would continue to



-13-

depress its growth relative to spending and total 
credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

By unanimous vote (with Mr. Forrestal dissenting from the 

decision on the growth ranges for 1991), the Federal Reserve Bank of New 

York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the 

Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance 

with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
further weakening in economic activity. Total nonfarm 
payroll employment fell sharply further in December 
and January, reflecting widespread job losses that 
were especially pronounced in manufacturing and 
construction; the civilian unemployment rate rose to 
6.2 percent in January. Industrial output declined 
markedly in the fourth quarter, in part because of 
sizable cutbacks in the production of motor vehicles, 
and partial data suggest a further drop in January.  
Consumer spending has remained soft. Advance 
indicators of business capital spending point to 
considerable weakness in investment in coming months.  
Residential construction has declined substantially 
further in recent months. The nominal U.S. merchan
dise trade deficit narrowed in November, as the value 
of imports declined more than that of exports; the 
average deficit for October and November exceeded that 
for the third quarter. Increases in consumer prices 
moderated and producer prices changed little in 
November and December, largely as a result of a 
softening in energy prices. The latest data suggest 
some further deceleration in wages and overall labor 
costs.  

Short-term interest rates have fallen consider
ably since the Committee meeting on December 18, while 
rates in longer-term markets are unchanged to down 
slightly. The Board of Governors approved a reduction 
in the discount rate from 7 to 6-1/2 percent on 
December 18 and a further reduction to 6 percent on 
February 1. In foreign exchange markets, the trade
weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other 
G-10 currencies has declined somewhat on balance over 
the intermeeting period.



-14-

Growth of M2 remained sluggish in December and 
January; expansion of M3 picked up in January from the 
very slow pace of recent months. For the year 1990, 
M2 and M3 expanded at rates in the lower portions of 
the Committee's ranges for the year. Expansion of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt appears to have been 
near the midpoint of its monitoring range for the 
year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote a resumption of sustainable growth 
in output, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at this meeting established 
ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 
percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter 
of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of total 
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for the year. With regard to M3, the 
Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring 
of thrift depository institutions would continue to 
depress its growth relative to spending and total 
credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending 
upon progress toward price stability, trends in 
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve 
restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of both M2 and M3 over the 
period from December through March at annual rates of 
about 3-1/2 to 4 percent.



-15

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday, March 26, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary




