














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
October 1. 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 1, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Forrestal 
Mr. Keehn 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Mullins 
Mr. Parry 

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Scheld, Simpson, Slifman, 
and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, 
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick, and 
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia, 
Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting, notice 
had been received of the election of Thomas M. Hoenig 
as alternate member of the Federal Open Market 
Committee for the period October 1, 1991 through 
December 31, 1991, and Mr. Hoenig had executed 
his Oath of Office.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 20, 1991, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

August 20, 1991, through September 30, 1991, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting has been 
mixed, but it suggests on balance that economic 
activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Total 
nonfarm payroll employment changed little over July and 
August, and the civilian unemployment rate was 6.8 
percent in both months. Employment in manufacturing 
continued to advance in August, and industrial 
production posted a further rise after several months 
of sizable gains. Consumer spending increased 
considerably on balance in July and August. Recent 
data on orders and shipments of nondefense capital



goods point to a small increase in real outlays for 
business equipment, but nonresidential construction has 
remained weak. Housing starts rose only slightly 
further in July and August after increasing appreciably 
on balance since January. The nominal U.S. merchandise 
trade deficit widened substantially in July and was 
considerably above its average rate in the second 
quarter. Increases in consumer prices have been small 
in recent months, owing to declines in food and energy 
prices.  

Most interest rates have declined further since 
the Committee meeting on August 20. The Board of 
Governors approved a reduction in the discount rate 
from 5-1/2 to 5 percent on September 13. The trade
weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other 
G-10 currencies fell sharply over the intermeeting 
period; much of the drop retraced the previous run-up 
associated with the attempted coup in the Soviet Union 
that began shortly before the August Committee meeting.  

After contracting in July, M2 was about unchanged 
in August and September. M3 declined further in July 
and August and is indicated to have changed little in 
September. For the year thus far, expansion of M2 and 
M3 has been at the lower end of the Committee's ranges.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had estab
lished in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth 
quarter of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt also was maintained at 
4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. For 1992, on a 
tentative basis, the Committee agreed in July to use 
the same ranges as in 1991 for growth in each of the 
monetary aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth 
quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992. With 
regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the 
ongoing restructuring of thrift depository institutions 
would continue to depress the growth of this aggregate 
relative to spending and total credit. The behavior of 
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated 
in the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.



In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending 
upon progress toward price stability, trends in 
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve 
restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period 
from September through December at annual rates of 
about 3 and 1-1/2 percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, November 5, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


