














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 14, 1991 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 14, 1991, at 2:00 p.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Black 
Forrestal 
Keehn 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Mullins 
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, 
and Minneapolis, respectively

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Scheld, 
Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division 
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Lang, 
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick, and Rosenblum, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, New York, 
Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas, 
respectively 

Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the meeting of 

the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 26, 1991, were approved.  

The Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account, made 

by the Board's Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems as 

of the close of business on October 31, 1990, was accepted.  

By unanimous vote, amendments to the Committee's Rules Regarding 

Availability of Information were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in government 

securities and federal agency obligations during the period March 26, 1991, 

through May 13, 1991, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following 

domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting provides 
mixed signals regarding the course of economic 
activity, which had weakened appreciably further 
earlier in the year. Following sharp decreases in 
previous months, total nonfarm payroll employment fell



somewhat further in April; the civilian unemployment 
rate edged down to 6.6 percent. Industrial output 
changed little in April after declining markedly in 
earlier months. Retail sales were about unchanged in 
April and are now indicated to have risen somewhat in 
March. Advance indicators continue to point to 
weakness in business fixed investment in coming months.  
Housing starts were down in March, partly offsetting a 
sizable advance in February, but sales of new and 
existing homes continued to rise. The nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade deficit declined in February and its 
January-February rate was considerably below the 
average rate in the fourth quarter. Producer and 
consumer prices were little changed over March and 
April, partly reflecting further reductions in energy 
prices.  

Short-term interest rates have declined since the 
Committee meeting on March 26, while bond yields have 
changed little. The Board of Governors approved a 
reduction in the discount rate from 6 to 5-1/2 percent 
on April 30. The trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies showed little change 
on balance over the intermeeting period.  

Growth of M2 and M3 weakened in April; for the 
year thus far, expansion of M2 has been at the midpoint 
of the Committee's range, while growth of M3 has been 
in the upper half of its range.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price 
stability, promote a resumption of sustainable growth 
in output, and contribute to an improved pattern of 
international transactions. In furtherance of these 
objectives, the Committee at its meeting in February 
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth 
quarter of 1991. The monitoring range for growth of 
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 
8-1/2 percent for the year. With regard to M3, the 
Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring of 
thrift depository institutions would continue to 
depress its growth relative to spending and total 
credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.



In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending 
upon progress toward price stability, trends in 
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary 
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and 
domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve 
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be 
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March 
through June at annual rates of about 4 and 2 percent, 
respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be 

held on Tuesday-Wednesday, July 2-3, 1991.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


