














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
October 6, 1992 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 6, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Hoenig 
Mr. Jordan 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Lindsey 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Mullins 
Ms. Phillips 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell, 
Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, and 
Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market 
Account 

Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations



Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Broaddus, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum 
Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Judd and Sniderman, and Ms. White, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco 
Cleveland, and New York, respectively 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on August 18, 1992, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period August 18, 1992, through October 5, 1992, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

August 18, 1992, through October 5, 1992, were ratified.  

With Messrs. Jordan, LaWare, Lindsey, and Melzer dissenting, 

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, 

until otherwise directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in 

the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy 

directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is expanding at a subdued pace.  
Total nonfarm payroll employment declined somewhat 
further in September, but the civilian unemployment 
rate edged down to 7.5 percent. Industrial production 
is estimated to have declined appreciably since July.  
Real personal consumption expenditures appear to have 
risen moderately in the third quarter. Data on housing 
have been mixed, but on balance they continue to 
suggest a gradual uptrend in housing expenditures.  
Recent data on orders and shipments of nondefense 
capital goods indicate slower growth in outlays for 
business equipment, while expenditures for non
residential construction have been weak. The nominal 
U.S. merchandise trade deficit widened somewhat in July 
from its average rate in the second quarter. Incoming 
data on wages and prices suggest that inflation is 
slowing.



Short-term interest rates have declined somewhat, 
while longer-term rates are about unchanged since the 
Committee meeting on August 18. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies fluctuated widely 
over the intermeeting period but ended the period 
higher on balance.  

Expansion of M2 and M3 resumed in August, though 
at fairly slow rates, and limited growth appears to 
have continued in September. Through September both 
aggregates were estimated to have grown at rates 
somewhat below the lower ends of the ranges established 
by the Committee for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting on June 30-July 1 reaffirmed the ranges it had 
established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth 
quarter of 1992. The Committee anticipated that 
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases 
could persist in the second half of the year. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1993, the Committee on a 
tentative basis set the same ranges as in 1992 for 
growth of the monetary aggregates and debt measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter 
of 1993. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the 
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for 
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and 
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, 
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve 
restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period 
from September through December at annual rates of 
about 2 and 1 percent, respectively.



-4

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, November 17, 1992.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


