














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
June 30-July 1. 1992 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 30, 1992, at 2:30 p.m. and was 

continued on Wednesday, July 1, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Hoenig 
Mr. Jordan 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Lindsey 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Mullins 
Ms. Phillips 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Siegman, and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 

Mr. Rosine,1 Senior Economist, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Clouse,1 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Ms. Lovett, Messrs.  
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of San Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, 
New York, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and 
Atlanta, spectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston 

Mr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on May 19, 1992, 

were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

May 19, 1992, through June 29, 1992, were ratified.  

Secretary's Note: The following actions were taken on 
Wednesday, July 1, 1992.  

By unanimous vote, the following broad policy statement and 

the ranges for growth of M2 and M3 and nonfinancial debt in 1992 were 

approved by the Committee: 

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will foster 
price stability and promote sustainable growth in 
output. In furtherance of these objectives, the 
Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it 
had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 
of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, 
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992. The Committee 
anticipated that developments contributing to 

1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion 
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary 
and debt aggregates.



unusual velocity increases could persist in the 
second half of the year. The monitoring range for 
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was 
maintained at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year.  

With Ms. Phillips and Mr. Jordan dissenting, the following 

tentative ranges for growth of M2 and M3 and nonfinancial debt in 1993 

were approved by the Committee: 

For 1993, the Committee on a tentative basis 
set the same ranges as in 1992 for growth of the 
monetary aggregates and debt measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of 
1993. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

With Messrs. LaWare and Melzer dissenting from the opera

tional paragraph on policy implementation in the period immediately 

ahead, and Ms. Phillips and Mr. Jordan dissenting from the decision 

relating to the monetary growth ranges for 1993, the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise directed 

by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in 

accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting 
continues to suggest that economic activity is 
expanding at a moderate pace. Total nonfarm 
payroll employment increased somewhat further in 
May, but a surge in job seekers led to a sizable 
rise in the civilian unemployment rate to 7.5 
percent. Industrial production rose appreciably 
further in May, partly reflecting continued 
recovery in motor vehicle assemblies. Growth in 
consumer spending has slackened after a sharp 
advance earlier this year. Although sales of new 
homes declined in May, single-family housing starts 
rebounded to a level close to the first-quarter 
pace. Recent data on orders and shipments of 
nondefense capital goods indicate appreciable 
increases in outlays for business equipment, and 
the trend of building contracts points to some



slowing of the decline in nonresidential 
construction. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade 
deficit increased in April and was sustantially 
above its average rate in the first quarter.  
Incoming data on retail prices and labor costs 
suggest that inflation is slowing.  

Most interest rates have changed little since 
the Committee meeting on May 19. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies 
declined further over the intermeeting period.  

M2 and M3 changed little in May and appear to 
have contracted in June; both retail and large
denomination time deposits continued to run off 
rapidly. Through June, expansion of the two 
aggregates was somewhat below the lower ends of the 
ranges established by the Committee for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will foster 
price stability and promote sustainable growth in 
output. In furtherance of these objectives, the 
Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it 
had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 
of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, 
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992. The Committee 
anticipated that developments contributing to 
unusual velocity increases could persist in the 
second half of the year. The monitoring range for 
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was 
maintained at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year.  
For 1993, the Committee on a tentative basis set 
the same ranges as in 1992 for growth of the 
monetary aggregates and debt measured from the 
fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of 
1993. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the 
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain 
the existing degree of pressure on reserve 
positions. In the context of the Committee's long
run objectives for price stability and sustainable 
economic growth, and giving careful consideration 
to economic, financial, and monetary developments, 
slightly greater reserve restraint might or



slightly lesser reserve restraint would be 
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period 
from June through September at annual rates of 
about 2 and 1/2 percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, August 18, 1992.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


