














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
December 22. 1992 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 22, 1992, at 8:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Hoenig 
Mr. Jordan 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Lindsey 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Mullins 
Ms. Phillips 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Broaddus, 1/ Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Siegman, and Stockton, Associate 
Economists 

Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market 
Account 

Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic 
Operations 

1/ President-elect.



Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, Scheld, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Chicago, and 
Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Goodfriend, McNees, and O'Driscoll, Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Boston, and Dallas, respectively 

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on November 17, 

1992, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

November 17, 1992, through December 21, 1992, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity has been rising appreciably in 
the current quarter. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
has increased slightly since September, and the average 
workweek has moved higher. The civilian unemployment 
rate fell further in November to 7.2 percent. Indus
trial production posted solid gains in October and 
November. Retail sales increased.sharply in October 
and rose further in November. Residential construction 
activity appears to have increased from the third
quarter pace. Indicators of business fixed investment 
have been mixed recently, but on balance they suggest 
further growth. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade 
deficit narrowed somewhat in October from its average 
rate in the third quarter. Recent data on wages and 
prices suggest on balance a possible slowing in the 
trend toward lower inflation.



Changes in short-term interest rates have been 
mixed since the Committee meeting on November 17 while 
bond yields have edged lower. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies was essentially 
unchanged on balance over the intermeeting period.  

Over the course of recent months, M2 has expanded 
at a moderate pace, while M3 has continued to expand at 
a very slow rate. More recently, both aggregates have 
weakened somewhat. Both appear to have grown at rates 
a little below the lower ends of the ranges established 
by the Committee for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting on June 30-July 1 reaffirmed the ranges it had 
established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth 
quarter of 1992. The Committee anticipated that 
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases 
could persist in the second half of the year. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1993, the Committee on a 
tentative basis set the same ranges as in 1992 for 
growth of the monetary aggregates and debt measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter 
of 1993. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the 
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for 
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and 
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, 
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve 
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be 
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with M2 growing at a rate of around 1-1/2 percent and 
M3 about unchanged in the period from November through 
March.



-4

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, February 2-3, 1993.  

The meeting adjourned.  

Secretary


