














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
August 18. 1992 

Minutes of Actions

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Ms.  
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman 
Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Angell 
Hoenig 
Jordan 
Kelley 
LaWare 
Lindsey 
Melzer 
Mullins 
Phillips 
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open.Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively

Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mattingly, General Counsel 
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Prell, Economist 
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, 
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Siegman, 
Simpson, and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Guynn, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Ms. Lovett, Messrs. Rolnick, 
Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, 
New York, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Mr. Meyer, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on June 30-July 1, 

1992, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, William J. McDonough, Margaret L. Greene, 

and Joan E. Lovett, were selected to serve at the pleasure of the 

Committee in the capacities of Manager of the System Open Market 

Account, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations, and Deputy Manager for 

Domestic Operations, respectively, on the understanding that their 

selection was subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York. This action was effective October 1, 1992.  

Secretary's Note: Advice was subsequently received 
that the selections of the Manager 
and Deputy Managers indicated above 
were satisfactory to the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York.  

By unanimous vote, Section 5 of the Committee's Rules of 

Organization was amended to read as follow: 

Section 5--Manager and Deputies 

The Committee selects a Manager of the System Open Market 
Account, a Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations, and a Deputy 
Manager for Foreign Operations. All of the foregoing shall be 
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee 
to execute open market transactions for such Account, and all 
shall serve at the pleasure of the Committee. The Manager or his 
Deputies keep the Committee informed on market conditions and on 
transactions they have made and render such reports as the 
Committee may specify.



By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period June 30, 1992, through August 17, 1992, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

June 30, 1992, through August 17, 1992, were ratified.  

With Messrs. LaWare and Melzer dissenting, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and directed, until otherwise 

directed by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System 

Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
that economic activity is continuing to expand at a 
subdued pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
rebounded in July after declining in June, and the 
civilian unemployment rate edged down to 7.7 percent.  
Manufacturing output was unchanged in July, but overall 
industrial production was boosted by a higher level of 
mining and utility output. Retail sales increased 
moderately in July. Permits issued for the con
struction of new housing units rose slightly in July, 
but housing starts fell. Recent data on orders and 
shipments of nondefense capital goods indicate further 
increases in outlays for business equipment, while 
nonresidential construction has remained soft. The 
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit in April-May was 
substantially above its average rate in the first 
quarter. Incoming data on wages and prices suggest 
that inflation is slowing.  

Interest rates have declined considerably since 
the Committee meeting on June 30-July 1. The Board of 
Governors approved a reduction in the discount rate 
from 3-1/2 to 3 percent on July 2. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies declined further 
over the first several weeks of the intermeeting 
period, but it has stabilized more recently.  

M2 and M3 contracted somewhat further in July.  
Through July, both aggregates were appreciably below 
the lower ends of the ranges established by the 
Committee for the year.



The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting on June 30-July 1 reaffirmed the ranges it had 
established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent respectively, 
measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth 
quarter of 1992. The Committee anticipated that 
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases 
could persist in the second half of the year. The 
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non
financial debt also was maintained at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for the year. For 1993, the Committee on a 
tentative basis set the same ranges as in 1992 for 
growth of the monetary aggregates and debt measured 
from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter 
of 1993. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will 
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress 
toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and 
financial markets.  

In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the 
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for 
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and 
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, 
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve 
restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period 
from June through December at annual rates of about 
2 and 1/2 percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, October 6, 1992.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


