














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
May 19. 1992 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 19, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Hoenig 
Mr. Jordan 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Lindsey 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Mullins 
Ms. Phillips 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of.Richmond, 
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, 
Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Ms. Lovett, Messrs.  
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
San Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York, 
Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta, 
respectively 

Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston 

Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on March 31, 

1992, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

March 31, 1992, through May 18, 1992, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, paragraph l.A of the Authorization for 

Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $8 billion 

to $10 billion the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System 

Account holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities for 

the intermeeting period through July 1, 1992.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive: 

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
on balance that economic activity is expanding at a 
moderate pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment 
increased somewhat in April, and the civilian unemploy
ment rate edged down to 7.2 percent. Industrial



production rose appreciably further in April partly 
reflecting some further recovery in motor vehicle 
assemblies. A rebound in retail sales in April about 
offset the decline in March. Single-family housing 
starts fell considerably for a second month in April.  
Recent data on orders and shipments of nondefense 
capital goods indicate appreciable increases in outlays 
for business equipment, and building contracts point to 
some slowing of the decline in nonresidential 
construction. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade 
deficit in January-February was somewhat below its 
average rate in the fourth quarter. Incoming data on 
prices and labor costs suggest little change from 
recent trends.  

Most interest rates have fallen since the 
Committee meeting on March 31. In foreign exchange 
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in 
terms of the other G-10 currencies declined on balance 
over the intermeeting period.  

M2 and M3 contracted in March and April; and 
expansion in transactions balances, which had accounted 
for much of the growth in the broader aggregates over 
previous months, slowed markedly. Through April, 
expansion of M2 was slightly above and that of M3 was 
slightly below the lower ends of the ranges established 
by the Committee for the year.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting in February established ranges for growth of M2 
and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, 
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 
to the fourth quarter of 1992. The monitoring range 
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set 
at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. With regard to 
M3, the Committee anticipated that the ongoing 
restructuring of depository institutions would continue 
to depress the growth of this aggregate relative to 
spending and total credit. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.



In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the 
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for 
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and 
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, 
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve 
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be 
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent 
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from April 
through June at annual rates of about 2-1/2 and 1-1/2 
percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, June 30-July 1, 1992.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


