














































Minutes of Actions


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
March 31, 1992 

Minutes of Actions 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in 

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 

Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.  

PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Angell 
Mr. Hoenig 
Mr. Jordan 
Mr. Kelley 
Mr. LaWare 
Mr. Lindsey 
Mr. Melzer 
Mr. Mullins 
Ms. Phillips 
Mr. Syron 

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, 
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Prell, Economist 
Mr. Truman, Economist 

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, 
Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations, 
System Open Market Account



-2

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, 
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rosenblum, Scheld, and 
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia, 
Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively 

Messrs. Fieleke, Judd, and Miller, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, San Francisco, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting, notice 
had been received that Mr. Jerry L. Jordan, 
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 
had executed his Oath of Office as member of the 
Federal Open Market Committee for the period 
March 10, 1992 through December 31, 1992.  

By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the 

meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 4-5, 

1992, were approved.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in foreign 

currencies during the period February 5, 1992, through March 30, 1992, 

were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, System open market transactions in 

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period 

February 5, 1992, through March 30, 1992, were ratified.  

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was 

authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to 

execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the 

following domestic policy directive:



The information reviewed at this meeting suggests 
a strengthening in domestic final spending, although 
industrial production and overall employment do not 
appear to have picked up correspondingly. Retail sales 
registered large gains in January and February, with 
data on inventories, which are available through 
January, showing some offsetting decline in that month.  
Single-family housing starts increased substantially 
further in January and February. Recent data on orders 
and shipments of nondefense capital goods indicate an 
increase in outlays for business equipment, but non
-residential construction has remained in a steep 
decline. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit 
narrowed slightly in January and was essentially 
unchanged from its average rate in the fourth quarter.  
Industrial production rose considerably in February, 
partly reflecting an upturn in motor vehicle 
assemblies, but was little changed on balance over the 
first two months of the year. Total nonfarm payroll 
employment rebounded in February from a large decline 
in January. With the labor force growing appreciably 
in recent months, the civilian unemployment rate has 
risen to 7.3 percent. Wage and price increases have 
continued to trend downward.  

Most interest rates have risen appreciably since 
the Committee meeting on February 4-5. In foreign 
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the 
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies increased 
substantially over the intermeeting period.  

Growth of M2 and M3 accelerated in February, but 
M2 appears to have leveled off and M3 to have declined 
in March. Much of the growth in the broader aggregates 
over recent months has been accounted for by a surge in 
transactions balances.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary 
and financial conditions that will foster price sta
bility and promote sustainable growth in output. In 
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its 
meeting in February established ranges for growth of M2 
and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, 
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 
to the fourth quarter of 1992. The monitoring range 
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set 
at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. With regard to 
M3, the Committee anticipated that the ongoing re
structuring of depository institutions would continue 
to depress the growth of this aggregate relative to 
spending and total credit. The behavior of the 
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of progress toward price level stability, 
movements in their velocities, and developments in the 
economy and financial markets.



In the implementation of policy for the immediate 
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing 
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the 
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for 
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and 
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, 
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve 
restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint 
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The 
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be 
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period 
-from March through June at annual rates of about 3-1/2 
and 1-1/2 percent, respectively.  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would 

be held on Tuesday, May 19, 1992.  

The meeting adjourned.

Secretary


