








FRB: FOMC Minutes--May 18, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of May 18, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C.,  on Tuesday, May 18,  1993,  at  9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Small,1 Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, and Goodfriend, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Richmond, respectively
Ms. Browne, Mr. Judd, and Mses. Rosenbaum and White,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
San Francisco, Atlanta, and New York, respectively
Mr. Eberts, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
1. Attended portion of meeting relating to a report on a study
entitled "Operating Procedures and the Conduct of Monetary Policy:
Conference Proceedings," edited by Marvin Goodfriend and David
Small. This two-volume study has been designated Working Studies 1,
Parts 1 and 2, of the Federal Reserve Board's Finance and Economic
Discussion Series.
By unanimous vote, the minutes for the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on March 23, 1993, were approved.
The Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments in foreign exchange markets and on System transactions in
foreign currencies during the period March 23, 1993, through May 17,
1993. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market
transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations
during the period March 23, 1993, through May 17, 1993. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
pace of the economic expansion had slowed in recent months. Business
outlays for durable equipment had remained strong, but consumer
spending had been quite sluggish, reflecting limited gains in
employment and real labor income and diminished optimism about near-term economic prospects. Additionally, U.S. exports continued to be
constrained by the disappointing performance of the major foreign
industrial economies. Available data indicated relatively modest
growth in payroll employment and industrial production over recent
months. Despite the considerable slack in the economy, increases in
wages and prices had been appreciably larger thus far in 1993 than in
the second half of last year.
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose only slightly on
balance over March and April after registering sizable increases in
the first two months of the year. Strong job gains in the services
industry, notably in business and health services, were offset in
considerable measure by job losses in manufacturing and construction
in March and April. In manufacturing, reductions in payrolls were
widespread, with particularly large declines at manufacturers of
transportation equipment. Construction employment recovered only
partially in April from the weather-related decline in March. The
civilian unemployment rate remained at 7.0 percent.
Industrial production, after having posted solid gains in
previous months, was little changed in March and April. Part of the
recent sluggishness reflected a decline in utility output following a
weather-related runup in February, but manufacturing output also grew
more slowly. In the transportation industry, motor vehicle assemblies
edged down and production of civilian aircraft remained weak over
March and April. Elsewhere, the output of consumer goods other than
motor vehicles was about unchanged, and the continuing strength in the
computer industry contrasted with sluggish production of other types
of business equipment. Total utilization of industrial capacity
changed little over the two months.
Retail sales increased substantially in April, reversing the
weather-related decline in March; automotive dealers reported large
sales gains in April, and expenditures at other retail outlets
retraced part of the March decrease. For the year to date, however,
retail sales had been lackluster after the strong increases of the
latter part of 1992. Housing starts picked up in April; both single-family and multifamily starts rebounded from weather-depressed March
levels.
Business fixed investment advanced further during the first
quarter of 1993, with another sizable rise in outlays for equipment
outweighing continued weakness in nonresidential construction.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods during the first quarter were
paced by another sharp increase in shipments of office and computing
equipment. By contrast, business spending for transportation
equipment generally exhibited little strength; although sales of heavy
trucks continued to trend up, outlays for complete aircraft apparently
edged down further. Recent data on orders for nondefense capital
goods other than aircraft suggested further expansion in business
spending for equipment in the near term. Nonresidential construction
activity was mixed in the first quarter. Office construction declined
considerably further in response to the depressing effects of a
continuing overhang of unoccupied space. On the other hand, building
activity in the public utilities sector continued to trend up, and the
construction of commercial structures other than office buildings
increased for a second consecutive quarter.
Business inventories appeared to have risen in the first
quarter. Manufacturing inventories expanded in both February and
March after a series of declines that began early in the fall; much of
the recent advance occurred in the durable goods sector, where shipments were strong, and the ratio of inventories to shipments fell for
manufacturing as a whole. Wholesale inventories increased appreciably
in March. However, the inventory-to-sales ratio for the sector moved
up only slightly, and it remained near the low end of its range over
the past two years. In the retail sector, available data indicated
that inventories rose appreciably over January and February but that
the inventory-to-sales ratio remained in the narrow range that had
prevailed over the preceding year.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit in February was
unchanged from its January level, reflecting little change in total
exports and total imports. For January-February combined, however,
the trade deficit was slightly below its average level for the fourth
quarter, with both exports and imports down considerably from their
fourth-quarter levels. Much of the drop in exports reflected a
reversal of an earlier, largely transitory runup in aircraft and
automotive products. The decline in imports was spread across all
major trade categories; imports of aircraft and miscellaneous
industrial supplies dropped appreciably, and imports of consumer goods
fell further. Recent indicators pointed to further weakness in
economic activity in continental Europe and Japan through the first
quarter. Elsewhere, the recovery in the United Kingdom appeared to be
firming, and growth continued at a modest pace in Canada.
Producer prices of finished goods rose more rapidly in March
and April, partly as a result of sharp increases in the prices of
finished energy goods in March and in the prices of finished foods in
April. Excluding the food and energy components, producer prices
advanced over the first four months of 1993 at a faster pace than in
1992. At the consumer level, the increase in prices of nonfood, non-energy items over the March-April period was smaller than the outsized change over the first two months of the year; nevertheless,
averaging over the first four months of the year, the rate of increase
in consumer prices was higher than in 1992. The deceleration of labor
costs also appeared to have stalled in 1993. Average hourly earnings
of production or nonsupervisory workers had grown more rapidly thus
far this year than in 1992, and total hourly compensation of private
industry workers rose at a faster pace in the first quarter of 1993
than in any quarter of last year.
At its meeting on March 23, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
associated with this directive were expected to be consistent with a
resumption of moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the second quarter.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Expected levels of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing were
raised during the period in anticipation of some increase in seasonal
borrowing. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was near or a little
above expected levels, except for a surge at the end of the first
quarter, and the federal funds rate remained close to the 3 percent
level that had prevailed for an extended period.
Short-term interest rates changed little over the period
since the March meeting. Long-term rates rose considerably early in
the period when a sharp increase in average hourly earnings and some
upward pressure on commodity prices sparked fears among market
participants of a buildup in inflation pressures. Subsequently,
despite growing doubts about the fate of the deficit reduction
program, bond yields declined in response to a series of more
favorable readings on price behavior and to indications of a slowing
of the economic expansion. Adverse news about consumer and producer
prices rekindled inflation concerns late in the period, and bond rates
once again moved higher. On balance, most long-term market rates rose
somewhat over the period. Despite unexpectedly favorable earnings
reports for many firms, major indexes of stock prices were narrowly
mixed over the period.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined somewhat on
balance over the intermeeting period. The dollar depreciated
considerably more against the Japanese yen than against the German
mark. A variety of factors contributed to the dollar's weakness,
including indications of renewed sluggishness in U.S. economic
activity, diminished prospects for a fiscal stimulus package, and
market perceptions over much of the intermeeting period of limited
official support for concerted actions to support the dollar against
the yen. After falling to a historical low against the yen in late
April, the dollar tended to stabilize following Treasury Secretary
Bentsen's clarification of the Administration's exchange rate policy
and intervention purchases of dollars against yen in a coordinated
operation. Later in the period, the dollar rose somewhat against
European currencies as the outlook for economic activity in Europe
became more pessimistic.
M2 contracted slightly on balance over March and April,
while M3 was unchanged over the two months; both monetary aggregates
increased substantially in early May. Much of the weakness in M2 over
the March-April period owed to a smaller volume of nonwithheld tax
payments in April of this year that reduced the need for a buildup in
deposits to fund these payments. Abstracting from this temporary
depressant, weak underlying growth in M2 continued to reflect the
relatively attractive returns available on capital market instruments
such as bond and stock mutual funds, which experienced heavy inflows
during the two-month period. Total domestic nonfinancial debt
expanded somewhat further through March.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested
that economic activity would grow at a moderate pace and that such
growth would foster a gradual reduction in margins of unemployed labor
and capital. The projection continued to incorporate the essential
elements of the Administration's fiscal package, excluding that
portion of the short-run stimulus initiative that seemed unlikely to
be enacted by the Congress. Although the outlook for fiscal policy
now seemed somewhat more contractionary than earlier, the sizable
declines in long-term interest rates that had occurred in recent
months were expected to support substantial additional gains in
business and residential investment. Moreover, the increasingly
favorable financial environment associated with expected further
easing of credit supply constraints and the ongoing strengthening of
balance sheets would tend to buttress private spending on housing,
consumer durables, and business equipment. Increases in export demand
would be damped in the near term by the continuing weakness in the
economies of the major industrialized countries. The persisting slack
in resource utilization was expected to be associated with a return to
more subdued price increases after a spurt earlier in the year.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic conditions, the members focused with some concern on the
evidence of a slower economic expansion and a higher rate of inflation
since late 1992. While recent indicators of economic activity were
disappointing, the expansion nonetheless appeared to have sustainable
momentum and the members generally viewed moderate growth in line
with, or perhaps a bit below, their February forecasts as a reasonable
expectation. At the same time, several emphasized that the outlook
was subject to substantial uncertainty stemming to an important extent
from the unsettled course of legislation aimed at reducing the federal
deficit. Members expressed particular concern about the rise in
various measures of inflation over the past several months. The
increase seemed to reflect temporary factors and a worsening in inflationary expectations rather than any significant change in economic
fundamentals. Accordingly, it was premature in the view of many
members to conclude that the inflationary trend had tilted upward.
Even so, higher inflation expectations, if sustained, would be
detrimental to economic performance, and the risks of an uptrend in
inflation clearly had increased.
In their review of business developments across the nation,
members continued to report uneven conditions ranging from apparently
moderate gains in some parts of the country to mixed or marginally
declining activity in others. Business confidence had deteriorated
in many areas and firms were trimming or putting on hold new or
expanded spending programs pending a resolution of federal tax and
spending proposals, including prospective health care reform, and the
outcome of proposed tax legislation in some states as well. Cautious
business attitudes were reflected in continuing efforts to constrain
costs and to hold down or reduce employment levels, notably of
permanent workers in light of the large non-wage costs associated with
full-time workers. Accordingly, while some job growth was occurring,
especially outside major firms and the defense sector, business firms
generally appeared disposed to continue to meet increases in demand
through overtime work and temporary workers, and members anticipated
that such attitudes were likely to persist in the absence of a major
improvement in business confidence.
As reflected in the available data for the national economy,
anecdotal reports from around the country suggested generally lackluster retail sales over the first four months of the year. To an
extent, this development probably involved some retrenchment in
consumer spending following an unsustainable surge during the latter
part of 1992. In some parts of the country, unusually severe weather
conditions also had served to hold down retail sales earlier this year
and recovery from that slowdown had tended to be limited thus far,
especially outside the automotive sector. Looking ahead, the members
continued to anticipate that consumer spending would provide moderate
support for a sustained economic expansion.
Despite the cautious business attitudes about the economic
outlook, spending for business equipment had continued to help
maintain the expansion. Encouraged in part by relatively low interest
rates, receptive financial markets, and the more aggressive lending
policies of some depository institutions, many firms were upgrading
equipment to reduce costs and improve their product offerings.
Concurrently, however, numerous firms reported that they were holding
off on making major new investment commitments and in some cases were
revising down earlier expansion plans in light of prevailing economic
uncertainties, notably those generated by the current legislative
debate about federal taxes and spending. Nonresidential construction
remained uneven and on the whole relatively subdued across the nation.
The construction of new office structures was likely to stay depressed
in much of the country as overcapacity continued to be worked down,
but members saw indications of some strengthening in industrial and
commercial building activity and in public works projects in some
areas.
Turning to the outlook for the nation's trade balance, some
members referred to quite gloomy assessments from business contacts
and other sources regarding current economic conditions in a number of
major industrial nations and the associated prospect of little or no
growth in U.S. exports to such countries. While total U.S. exports
might continue to expand, reflecting sizable gains in some parts of
the world, imports probably would grow at a somewhat faster pace,
given moderate expansion in domestic demand in line with the members'
expectations. At the same time, members expressed concern about the
potential impact of growing protectionist sentiment on current trade
negotiations and on the longer-run outlook for domestic industries and
parts of the country that relied on foreign trade.
With regard to the inflation situation, members commented
that it remained difficult to find a satisfactory explanation for the
faster-than-projected increases in price measures thus far this year.
Although temporary anomalies seemed to be involved, including
measurement problems and special factors boosting some prices, higher
inflation expectations also might have been playing a key role. The
latter seemed to have intensified in the last month or two, perhaps as
a result of growing concerns that significant deficit-reduction
legislation might not be enacted. Strong competitive pressures in
many markets, including competition from foreign producers, still
appeared to be restraining or precluding price increases by many
business firms, but efforts to raise prices seemed to be encountering
somewhat less resistance recently than earlier in the economic
expansion. Some price increases appeared to be associated with the
earlier surge in demand, and in the case of one key industry higher
prices had been facilitated by the implementation of import
restrictions. The downtrend in labor compensation inflation also
seemed to have stalled in recent months. Against this background, a
considerable degree of uncertainty surrounded the outlook for
inflation and the members differed to some extent with regard to the
most likely outcome. A number of members, while they did not rule out
the possibility of a more favorable result, stressed the risk that a
faster rate of inflation might well tend to be sustained. Others gave
more emphasis to the still considerable slack in labor and product
markets and to the restrained growth in broad measures of money and
credit. In this view, an inflation rate in the quarters ahead more in
line with their earlier forecasts was still a reasonable expectation
even though the average rate for the year as a whole was likely to be
higher than they had forecast at the start of the year.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, many of the members commented that recent price and wage
developments were troubling but did not point persuasively at this
juncture toward an extended period of higher inflation. In light of
underlying economic and financial conditions, the upturn in inflation
expectations and the somewhat quickened pace of inflation might well
prove to be temporary. The economy was expanding, but the pace had
slowed in recent months. On the other hand, the potential for a
sustained increase in the rate of inflation could not be dismissed.
Waiting too long to counter any emerging uptrend in inflation or
further worsening in inflationary expectations would exacerbate
inflationary pressures and require more substantial and more disruptive policy moves later. Indeed, in one view sensitive commodity
prices and other key measures of inflation already indicated the need
for a prompt move toward restraint, especially in the context of the
Committee's objective of fostering progress toward price stability.
However, the other members all supported a proposal to maintain an
unchanged degree of pressure on reserve positions at this time.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, the members
took account of a staff analysis that pointed to a considerable pickup
in the growth of M2 and M3 over the months of May and June. Such
strengthening, which appeared to have emerged in early May, was
associated in part with the reversal of earlier tax-related
distortions and with a surge in prepayments of mortgage-backed
securities. Monetary growth was expected to revert to a more modest
pace over subsequent months, and the members recognized that in any
event the interpretation of monetary growth rates needed to be
approached with considerable caution in a period when traditional
relationships of such growth to aggregate measures of economic
performance were not reliable. In present circumstances, M2 and M3 no
longer seemed to be good barometers of underlying liquidity, which
appeared to be ample. One member expressed the view that the
relatively robust growth of M1 and reserves served as a better
indicator of the thrust of monetary policy than did the broader
monetary aggregates.
In the view of a majority of the members, wage and price
developments over recent months were sufficiently worrisome to warrant
positioning policy for a move toward restraint should signs of
intensifying inflation continue to multiply. In addition to new
information on prices and costs, such signs could include developments
in markets affected by inflation psychology, such as those for bonds,
foreign exchange, and sensitive commodities, all of which would need
to be monitored carefully. These members supported a directive that
incorporated a greater predilection to tighten than to ease over the
intermeeting period. Given the special nature of current inflation
concerns and attendant uncertainties, however, the Committee agreed
with a proposal by the Chairman that an intermeeting consultation
would be appropriate in the event that a tightening move were to be
contemplated during this period. If a policy tightening action were
not needed, an asymmetric directive would nonetheless underscore the
Committee's concern about recent inflation readings and its judgment
that a policy to encourage progress toward price stability would
promote sustained economic growth. In the event that a tightening
action became necessary, such action could help to moderate
inflationary expectations, with positive implications over time for
long-term interest rates and the performance of the economy. Monetary
policy would still be stimulative after a modest tightening move in
that such a move would leave short-term interest rates close to or
even below their year-ago levels in real terms, given the interim rise
in inflation.
Some members preferred to retain a directive that did not
incorporate a presumption about the likely direction of a change in
policy, if any, during the intermeeting period. They were concerned
that adopting a biased directive might prove to be an overreaction to
temporary factors and to a short-lived upturn in inflationary
sentiment that was not warranted by underlying economic conditions.
They noted that, if called for by intermeeting developments, a move
toward restraint could be implemented from a symmetric directive.
More fundamentally, they believed that the circumstances surrounding
the recent performance of the economy and the uncertainties about
price developments suggested the need for considerable caution before
any policy tightening was implemented and that such a policy move
should be carried out only in the light of information that pointed
clearly to the emergence of higher inflation. Nonetheless, all but
one of these members could accept an asymmetric directive on the
understanding that the Committee would have a chance to discuss any
possible policy action.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but two
of the members indicated that they preferred or could accept a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that included a bias toward possible firming
of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater reserve restraint would be acceptable or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with appreciable growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over the second quarter.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the economic expansion has slowed in recent
months. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose only
slightly over March and April after registering sizable
increases earlier in the year, and the civilian
unemployment rate remained at 7.0 percent. Industrial
production was little changed in March and April after
posting solid gains in previous months. Retail sales
increased substantially in April but were about
unchanged on balance for the year to date. Housing
starts picked up in April. Incoming data on orders and
shipments of nondefense capital goods suggest a further
brisk advance in outlays for business equipment, while
nonresidential construction has remained soft. The
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit in January-February was slightly below its average level in the
fourth quarter. Increases in wages and prices have
been appreciably larger this year than in the second
half of 1992.
Short-term interest rates have changed little
since the Committee meeting on March 23 while bond
yields have risen somewhat. In foreign exchange
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in
terms of the other G-10 currencies declined somewhat
on balance over the intermeeting period.
After contracting during the first quarter, M2 was
unchanged in April while M3 turned up; both aggregates
increased substantially in early May. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt expanded somewhat further through
March.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in February established ranges for growth of
M2 and M3 of 2 to 6 percent and 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1992
to the fourth quarter of 1993. The Committee expects
that developments contributing to unusual velocity
increases are likely to persist during the year. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for
the year. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with appreciable growth in the broader
monetary aggregates over the second quarter.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
Corrigan, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, McTeer,
Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: Messrs. Angell
and Boehne.
Mr. Angell dissented because he believed that the persisting
indications of rising inflation and the related deterioration in
inflationary psychology called for a prompt move to tighten monetary
policy. In his view, low real interest rates, a very steep yield
curve, a surprisingly weak exchange value of the dollar along with the
confirming price behavior of inflation-sensitive commodities such as
gold underscored the need for Committee action to signal the System's
continuing commitment to the eventual achievement of price stability.
In his opinion, progress toward lower inflation was not likely in 1993
and 1994 in the absence of a monetary policy that was sufficiently
restrictive to check inflationary expectations. He added that history
demonstrated that a monetary policy focused primarily on developments
in the real economy ran the risk of waiting too long to counter a
worsening in inflationary expectations and thus requiring more
substantial and possibly more disruptive policy changes later.
Mr. Boehne supported a steady policy course, but he
dissented because he objected to a directive that was biased toward
tightening. Although recent developments suggested that inflation
would be somewhat higher and real growth somewhat lower during the
year than had been expected earlier, he did not believe recent data
indicated a fundamental shift in the outlook for inflation or the
economy. He was concerned that adopting a biased directive might
prove to be an overreaction to temporary factors affecting the
inflation rate and inflationary sentiment. In his view, underlying
economic conditions did not point toward an extended period of higher
inflation. While the pace of economic growth conceivably could
quicken, it seemed just as likely that the tempo of business and
consumer spending could diminish in the face of uncertainty about the
stance of fiscal policy, particularly with regard to potential tax
increases. Given these uncertainties, he had a strong preference for
keeping an open mind about possible Committee action during the
intermeeting period and, accordingly, favored a balanced policy
directive.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, July 6-7, 1993.
The meeting adjourned at 1:50 p.m.
Normand Bernard
Deputy Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
