








FRB: FOMC Minutes--November 16, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of November 16, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 16, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan. Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate
Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn,1 Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Beebe, Ms. Browne, Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis,
Dewald, Goodfriend, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Boston, Cleveland, Kansas City,
St. Louis, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
1. Attended portion of meeting on the review of FOMC practices
with regard to recording and transcribing FOMC meeting
discussions and the release of information about such
discussions.
By unanimous vote, the minutes for the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on September 21, 1993, were approved.
The Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account,
conducted by the Board's Division of Reserve Bank Operations and
Payment Systems as of the close of business on April 30, 1993, was
accepted.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets during the period since the September
meeting. There were no open market transactions in foreign currencies
for System account during this period, and thus no vote was required
of the Committee.
By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the renewal for
further periods of one year of the System's reciprocal currency
("swap") arrangements with foreign central banks and the Bank for
International Settlements. The amounts and maturity dates of these
arrangements are indicated in the table that follows:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of $ equivalent)
Term
(months)
Maturitydate
Austrian National Bank
$ 250.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Bank of England
3,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Bank of Japan
5,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Bank of Mexico
700.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Bank of Norway
250.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Bank of Sweden
300.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Swiss National Bank
4,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Bank for International Settlements --
Swiss francs
600.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
Other authorized European currencies
1,250.0
12 mos.
12/04/93
National Bank of Belgium
1,000.0
12 mos.
12/18/93
Bank of Canada
2,000.0
20 mos.
12/28/93
National Bank of Denmark
250.0
12 mos.
12/28/93
Bank of France
2,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/93
German Federal Bank
6,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/93
Bank of Italy
3,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/93
Netherlands Bank
500.0
12 mos.
12/28/93
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in U.S. government securities and federal agency obligations during
the period September 21, 1993 through November 15. 1993. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
and financial outlook and the formulation of monetary policy for the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested some
strengthening in the expansion of economic activity in recent months.
Consumer spending had picked up: housing activity was quickening; and
business spending for durable equipment had continued to trend higher,
though at a reduced pace. Industrial production, particularly
manufacturing, and employment had posted solid gains. At the same
time, inflation had remained muted, with consumer prices increasing
moderately on balance in recent months and producer prices falling.
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose appreciably in
September and October after declining slightly in August. Although
job gains were widespread in October, a large part of the increase was
in various business services, notably temporary employment agencies.
In other categories, construction employment registered its largest
monthly rise since last spring, and jobs in manufacturing increased
after seven months of declines. The civilian unemployment rate edged
up to 6.8 percent in October.
Industrial production rose sharply in October, with manufacturing more than accounting for the increase. Part of the gain in
manufacturing reflected a further rebound in the output of motor
vehicles and parts. Aside from motor vehicles, however, the production of business equipment was lifted by another surge in office and
computing equipment, and the output of consumer goods was boosted by
strength in furniture and appliances. Utilization of total industrial
capacity rose in October, reaching a level last seen in the fourth
quarter of 1992.
Nominal retail sales were up substantially in October after
changing little in September. Sales in October were boosted by a
turnaround in spending at automobile dealerships and by a surge at
building materials and supply stores. Sales at other types of retail
outlets were mixed. Purchases at general merchandise stores were
brisk. However, sales at apparel outlets and at furniture and
appliance stores edged down after rising strongly for several months,
and the increase in spending at gasoline stations entirely reflected
the effects of the new federal gasoline tax on pump prices. Housing
activity strengthened further in the third quarter. Starts of single-family homes in August and September were at their highest levels in
almost five years; starts of multifamily units also picked up in
September, although construction activity in this sector remained at a
very low level. Sales of new and existing homes moved up further in
the third quarter and were especially strong in September.
Real business capital spending increased in the third
quarter at a considerably slower pace than earlier in the year. The
slowdown largely reflected a smaller rise in spending for producers'
durable equipment, as reduced outlays for aircraft and motor vehicles
more than offset continued strong gains in spending for computing
equipment and other capital goods. Nonresidential construction was
down slightly in the third quarter after a sizable advance over the
first half of the year. Office and industrial building activity
appeared to have bottomed out, but high vacancy rates and declining
property values continued to limit new construction.
Business inventories climbed significantly further in
September; for the third quarter as a whole, however, stocks were
accumulated at a somewhat slower pace than in the first half of the
year. At the retail level, inventories rebounded in September after
declining on balance over July and August. The ratio of inventories
to sales for retailing edged up in September but remained near the low
end of its range over the past year. Inventory accumulation in the
wholesale sector slowed in September after rising substantially in
August: the inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector was unchanged at
the midpoint of its range over the past several years. In
manufacturing, stocks dropped in September after changing little over
the two previous months; with factory shipments up, the stocks-to-shipments ratio for manufacturing as whole fell in September to its
lowest level in recent years.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit declined further
in August, but for July and August combined the deficit was about the
same as its average rate for the second quarter. The value of both
exports and imports was slightly lower in July-August than in the
second quarter. The decline in the value of exports primarily
reflected shortfalls in shipments of aircraft and automotive products,
and the drop in imports was associated with reduced imports of oil and
automotive products. Available data indicated that the performance of
the major foreign industrial economies continued to be mixed.
Economic activity appeared to have remained weak in Japan in the third
quarter and to have stagnated in western Germany after increasing
moderately in the second quarter. On the other hand, the recessions
in France and Italy seemed to have bottomed out, and the economies of
Canada and the United Kingdom to have recovered somewhat further.
Producer prices for finished goods fell in October,
retracing the small increase in September; excluding the effects of
higher prices for finished foods and energy goods, producer prices
were down over the September-October period. Over the twelve-month
period ended in October, producer prices for nonfood, non-energy
finished goods were fractionally higher on balance, the lowest yearly
increase on record for this index, which was introduced in 1973.
Consumer prices rose in October after being unchanged in September,
with the increase partly reflecting the effect of the implementation
of the new federal gasoline tax. For nonfood, non-energy consumer
items, the rise in consumer prices over the twelve months ended in
October was considerably smaller than the rise over the comparable
period ended in October 1992. Labor compensation costs did not show a
comparable downtrend. The increase in hourly compensation for private
industry workers in the third quarter was about the same as in the
second quarter. For the twelve months ended in September, hourly
compensation advanced slightly faster than over the comparable year-earlier period.
At its meeting on September 21, 1993, the Committee adopted
a directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption
about the likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the
intermeeting period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with modest growth of M2 and
M3 over the balance of the year.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged somewhat above
anticipated levels as a result of increased demands for adjustment
credit associated with quarter-end pressures in financial markets and
an unexpected swing in the Treasury balance. The federal funds rate
remained close to 3 percent over the period.
Most other interest rates were up somewhat over the period
since the Committee's September meeting. Treasury bill rates rose in
part because of the Treasury's need to rely more heavily on bill
issuance in a quarter containing a reduced schedule for auctioning
long-term debt. Intermediate- and long-term yields fell in the weeks
following the September meeting and reached twenty-year lows. These
declines were more than reversed subsequently, however, when investors
interpreted incoming data as suggesting stronger economic growth and
credit demands over the intermediate term and a somewhat greater
likelihood of some tightening of monetary policy. Most indexes of
stock market prices posted robust gains early in the intermeeting
period, but these gains subsequently were pared back as interest rates
moved higher.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies appreciated over the
intermeeting period. The strengthening of the dollar, and the
associated rise in U.S. long-term interest rates relative to foreign
rates, reflected both more optimistic expectations for growth in the
United States and more pessimistic assessments for the course of
economic activity in continental Europe and Japan.
M2 registered a relatively strong advance in September, but
growth slowed again in October. The September pickup partly reflected
an unexpected surge in the volatile overnight repurchase agreement
(RP) component of M2. Ml also was strong, but the total of time and
savings deposits continued to decline, apparently in large part
because of the persisting allure of capital market instruments.
Growth of M3 strengthened somewhat more than M2 over the two months,
reflecting a run-up in institution-only money market funds. For the
year through October, M2 and M3 were estimated to have grown at rates
a little above the lower ends of the Committee's ranges for the year.
Total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at a moderate rate in recent
months, and for the year through September it was estimated to have
increased at a rate in the lower half of the Committee's monitoring
range.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested
that economic activity, after advancing relatively strongly in the
fourth quarter, would expand moderately next year, about in line with
the potential rate of economic growth over time, and thus would be
associated with limited, if any, further reductions in margins of
unemployed labor and capital. Consumer spending, which had buoyed
growth recently, was expected to expand at the same pace as incomes
over the year ahead. In addition, fiscal restraint and uncertainty
about other government policies would continue to inhibit the
expansion, and a sluggish acceleration in foreign industrial economies
pointed to only modest improvement in export demand. However,
improving balance-sheet positions and credit supply conditions were
lifting an unusual constraint on spending, and the lower interest
rates would encourage further increases in business fixed investment
and housing construction. The continued slack in labor and product
markets, coupled with some tempering of inflation expectations, was
expected to foster further reductions in wage and price inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of the economic outlook,
members commented that the economic data and anecdotal reports
received since the September meeting had tended to reinforce their
earlier forecasts that moderate economic expansion would be sustained.
After a sluggish performance in the first half of the year, overall
economic activity had picked up somewhat more in the third quarter
than most members had anticipated and available indicators of spending
and production pointed to relatively robust economic growth in the
current quarter. Looking ahead to 1994, the members expected the
expansion to slow somewhat from its apparent pace over the closing
months of this year. Fluctuations in the rate of quarterly GDP growth
undoubtedly would occur, but the economy over the year ahead was
thought likely to continue on a trend of moderate expansion averaging
close to the economy's long-run potential or somewhat higher. Most
members saw the probability of a sharp deviation in either direction
from their current forecasts as relatively remote, though a number
also believed that any deviation was more likely to be in the
direction of somewhat stronger rather than weaker growth. In general,
members expected core inflation to change little or to edge lower next
year, but a few saw some danger of marginally higher inflation.
In their assessment of developments underlying the economic
outlook, members referred to indications in many areas of some
strengthening in business conditions and in related business
sentiment, though economic activity clearly remained sluggish or even
depressed in some parts of the country and overall business attitudes
could still be described as cautious. Current financial conditions,
including the strength in equity markets, reduced intermediate- and
long-term interest rates, and an apparently improving availability of
business credit from financial institutions, provided a favorable
backdrop for further economic expansion. Moreover, businesses and
households had made substantial progress in improving their financial
positions. These factors were seen as reducing downside risks to the
expansion. At the same time, while there were signs of significant
firming in the economic expansion, a number of members observed that
at this point they did not see the usual indications of any near-term
intensification of inflationary pressures such as general increases in
commodity prices, lengthening delivery lead times along with efforts
to increase inventories, and strong growth of credit. Indeed, the
risks of an overheated and inflationary expansion in the near term
seemed quite limited in light of various constraints on the economy
such as those associated with a restrictive fiscal policy and the
continuing weakness in key export markets.
With regard to the outlook for specific sectors of the
economy, a step-up in consumer spending, notably for motor vehicles
and housing-related durable goods, had contributed substantially to
the strengthening of the economic expansion. Indications of improving
consumer confidence, reflected in turn in the growing optimism
expressed by business contacts regarding the outlook for holiday
sales, should help to sustain relatively ebullient consumer spending
through the year-end. Contacts in the motor vehicles industry also
appeared to be relatively optimistic about the prospects for sales of
the new models. The outlook for the consumer sector also was subject
to some constraining influences. Growth in consumer spending had
tended to exceed the expansion in consumer incomes and a number of
members questioned the extent to which the acceleration in such
spending was likely to extend into the new year. The saving rate
already was near the low end of its historic range, at least on the
basis of current estimates, and was unlikely to decline significantly, if at all. Much would depend on consumers' outlook for
employment and incomes. Growing demands should eventually be
translated into faster employment gains, but at this point business
firms continued to resist adding to their workforces despite
increasing sales and many firms were still announcing workforce
reductions. While net gains in employment, including growth
associated with increases in self-employment and new business
formations, were continuing, expansion in jobs and consumer incomes
probably would be at a moderate pace over the year ahead. Against
this background, members generally expected moderate growth in
consumer spending to be maintained, but they did not see such spending
as likely to give extra impetus to growth in economic activity in
1994.
The members anticipated appreciable further expansion in
business investment spending, especially in the context of reduced
interest rates, improved business balance sheets, and ongoing efforts
to improve productivity. Growth in spending for business equipment
probably would continue at a relatively vigorous pace, though perhaps
somewhat below the growth rates experienced in recent quarters, and
other investment activity seemed poised to pick up. In this
connection, several members reported that vacancy rates in commercial
office buildings were declining in some areas and while this
development was not yet being translated into appreciable new
construction, investment funds appeared to be flowing more freely into
commercial real estate. Clear indications of strengthening were
observed in housing construction in many parts of the country and the
outlook for such building activity seemed promising in the context of
reduced mortgage rates and improving consumer sentiment.
Fiscal policy developments, including the effects on
business attitudes of the uncertainties surrounding health care reform
legislation, were likely to continue to inhibit the expansion over the
year ahead. Some members again emphasized the negative effects that
the ongoing retrenchment in defense spending was having on local
economies as well as on the economy more generally. On the taxation
side, the rise in tax liabilities on higher incomes could have an
especially pronounced effect during the early months of next year,
given the retroactive inclusion of 1993 incomes subject to the new
tax, but some members noted that the increased tax payments probably
had been widely anticipated and the negative implications for the
economy might well be less than many observers expected. Nonetheless,
the overall posture of fiscal policy and associated business concerns
about the cost implications of possible future legislation were likely
to be an important factor tending to limit the strength of the
expansion.
Net exports were seen as another constraining factor in the
performance of the economy next year. On the import side, even
moderate expansion in domestic economic activity was likely to
stimulate appreciable further growth in U. S. demands for foreign
goods. At the same time, the prospects for exports to a number of
major industrial countries were not promising, at least for the nearer
term, given lagging economies in Europe and Japan. In this connection
a number of members referred to reports of weak export demand for
specific U.S. products and also noted that an extended coal mining
strike had cut supplies of coal available for export and had induced
some domestic firms to turn to imports to help fill their requirements. On the other hand, some markets for U.S. exports, notably
those in a number of East Asian nations and some Latin American
countries, were likely to continue to experience considerable growth,
thereby mitigating an otherwise fairly gloomy outlook for exports.
With regard to the outlook for inflation over the year
ahead, views did not vary greatly among the members. They ranged from
expectations of some limited progress toward price stability to
forecasts of a marginal increase in the core rate of inflation.
Members who anticipated a relatively favorable inflation performance
tended to underscore the likely persistence of appreciable slack in
labor and other production resources on the assumption that growth in
overall economic activity would remain on a moderate trend in line
with their forecasts. Some also pointed to the absence of
inflationary pressures in most commodity markets, the persistence of
intense competition in local markets across the nation, and the
outlook for relatively subdued increases in labor costs in part
because of ongoing improvements in productivity. Other members gave
more emphasis to the possibility that the economic expansion next
year, especially if it turned out on the high side of the range
encompassing the members' current projections, was more likely to be
associated with some upward pressures on costs and prices. In this
connection, relatively rapid growth in economic activity, should it
persist into the early part of next year, probably would trigger
attempts to raise prices and wages somewhat more rapidly even in the
context of some continuing slack in overall capacity and labor
utilization. At this point, however, there were no significant
indications of accelerating inflation and business contacts around the
nation did not currently see or seem to anticipate increasing
inflationary pressures.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, the members generally agreed that despite various
indications of a pickup in economic growth, the underlying economic
situation and the outlook for inflation had not changed sufficiently
to warrant an adjustment in monetary policy. Looking beyond the
intermeeting period, however, several members commented that the
Committee might well have to consider the need to move from the
currently stimulative stance of monetary policy toward a more neutral
policy posture, should concerns about rising inflationary pressures
begin to be realized. The members recognized the desirability of
taking early action to arrest incipient inflationary pressures before
they gathered strength, especially given the Committee's commitment
not just to resist greater inflation but to foster sustained progress
toward price stability. In appropriate circumstances, a prompt policy
move also might allay market concerns about inflation with favorable
implications for longer-term interest rates and the performance of
interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. The members acknowledged
that current measures of inflation and anecdotal reports from around
the nation did not on the whole suggest an intensification of
inflation at this point. Moreover, the Committee had to be wary of
misleading signals that were inherent in the saw-tooth pattern of
typical economic expansions, and it needed to avoid a policy move that
would incur an unnecessary risk to the expansion, given uncertainties
about the degree to which recent strength in spending would persist.
Most of the members concluded that on balance current economic
conditions warranted a steady policy course and, in light of
prevailing uncertainties, that it would be premature to anticipate any
particular policy change or its timing. As a consequence, the members
also concluded that the currently unbiased instruction in the
directive relating to the direction of possible intermeeting policy
changes should be retained; in any case, significant-changes in the
outlook requiring policy action were viewed as unlikely in the
relatively short period until the next scheduled meeting on December
21. One member expressed the differing view that a less accommodative
policy would be more consistent over time with the Committee's desire
to foster sustained economic expansion and progress toward price
stability. However, this member also felt that a policy tightening
move at this time might be seen as a response to a stronger economy,
rather than an action that clearly was intended to underscore the
Committee's commitment to price stability and therefore would elicit a
favorable response in intermediate and long-term debt markets.
With regard to financial developments bearing on the
economic outlook and the potential need to adjust monetary policy,
members observed that the broader money and credit aggregates had
strengthened somewhat since earlier in the year, though to still
relatively moderate growth rates. Moreover, much of the acceleration
in M2 and M3 could be attributed to special or temporary factors, and
according to a staff analysis growth in these aggregates was likely to
revert to relatively slow rates in coming months, assuming unchanged
reserve conditions. At the same time, growth in M1 and reserves had
remained comparatively rapid and in one view such growth might well be
indicative of an overly stimulative monetary policy that would promote
more inflation over time or at least prove inconsistent with further
disinflation.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated their support of a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions and
that did not include a presumption about the likely direction of any
adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise
by the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
some strengthening in the expansion of economic
activity in recent months. Total nonfarm payroll
employment rose appreciably in September and October,
while the civilian unemployment rate edged up to 6.8
percent in October. Industrial production increased
sharply in October, partly reflecting a continuing
rebound in the output of motor vehicles. Retail sales
were up substantially in October after changing little
in September. Housing activity picked up further in
the third quarter. The expansion of business capital
spending has slowed from a robust pace earlier in the
year. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit in
July-August was about unchanged from its average rate
in the second quarter. Consumer prices have increased
moderately on balance in recent months and producer
prices have fallen.
Most interest rates have increased somewhat since
the Committee meeting on September 21. In foreign
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies
appreciated over the intermeeting period.
Growth of M2 picked up slightly on balance in
September and October, while M3 strengthened to a
somewhat greater extent over the two months. For the
year through October, M2 and M3 are estimated to have
grown at rates a little above the lower end of the
Committee's ranges for the year. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has expanded at a moderate rate in
recent months, and for the year through August it is
estimated to have increased at a rate in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July lowered the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For 1994, the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for 1994. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, McTeer. Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and
Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: None.
The Committee approved a temporary increase of $3 billion, to
a level of $11 billion, in the limit on changes between Committee
meetings in System Account holdings of U.S. government and federal
agency securities. The increase amended paragraph l(a) of the
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations and was effective
for the intermeeting period ending with the close of business on
December 21, 1993.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, McTeer, Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and
Mr. Stern
Votes against this action: None.
Release of Information about FOMC Meetings
At this meeting the Committee considered a number of
alternatives for releasing detailed information on its deliberations
at past and future meetings. Members emphasized that the most
important consideration was the preservation of a deliberative process
that would enable the Committee to arrive at the best possible
monetary policy decisions. Premature release of detailed information,
such as transcripts, would sharply curtail the Committee's ability to
freely discuss evolving economic and financial trends and alternative
policy responses. Moreover, if full transcripts were subject to
release before many years had passed, much vital information obtained
in confidence could not be discussed in meetings and in any event
probably would not be made available by foreign central banks,
business firms, and other sources.
The information for all past meetings and many of the intermeeting telephone consultations was contained in unedited transcripts
that had been preserved by the FOMC Secretariat since March 1976.
Virtually all the tapes from which these transcripts were typed had
been reused to record subsequent meetings and very few tapes currently
existed for meetings prior to September 1993.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, members observed
that the purpose of the transcripts had been to assist the FOMC
Secretariat in the preparation of minutes that reported the economic
and monetary policy discussions and were released after the next
meeting. As a result, the transcripts for past meetings had never
been edited nor had they been checked by meeting participants for
accuracy. It was clear from even a casual perusal that at times the
transcripts failed for various reasons to convey an intelligible
account of members' comments, and on occasion they even misstated the
views that had been expressed. Moreover, most participants at these
meetings had not been aware until recently that the transcripts had
been preserved and that they could at some point be made public.
Their release at this time would represent a sharp break with past
practice and would raise an issue of fairness to participants at
earlier meetings of the Committee.
The members generally agreed that their reservations about
releasing the transcripts could be mitigated through appropriate
safeguards such as withholding particularly sensitive materials and
providing for a considerable lapse of time after Committee meetings.
They noted in this connection that, while there was no legal
requirement to prepare transcripts, the substance of existing
transcripts needed to be preserved in accordance with the Federal
Records Act. With regard to the manner in which the information might
be made public, the Committee considered several alternatives
including making available the unedited transcripts themselves, or
lightly edited versions of the transcripts, or Memoranda of Discussion
comparable to those prepared for meetings prior to late March 1976.
The members expressed varying preferences among these alternatives.
Some proposed that marginal notations be included with raw or edited
transcripts to provide staff explanations or interpretations of
unclear or evidently mistranscribed comments. It was understood that
preparation of edited transcripts and especially Memoranda of
Discussion would require a considerable amount of time and effort
before they would be ready for public release. A majority favored the
release of lightly edited transcripts that would retain all
substantive comments but would allow for grammatical corrections, the
smoothing of some sentences to facilitate the understanding, and the
correction of obvious transcription errors. The editing would be
patterned after that done for Congressional hearings; importantly, no
changes would be made in the substance or the intent of the speakers.
Prior to release to the public, particularly sensitive materials would
be redacted in accordance with the provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act. The Committee agreed that the FOMC Secretariat
should be given responsibility for the editing process and that the
Committee itself would not undertake to review these transcripts. It
was noted in this respect that many former members of the Committee
were no longer available to review their comments and that in any
event the passage of time would make it impossible for members to
recall precisely what they had said or to verify many of their
comments. Accordingly, the edited transcripts could not be regarded
as official records of the Committee.
With respect to the interval between a meeting and release of
a lightly edited transcript, all of the Committee members were
concerned that the absence of a substantial lag would seriously harm
the Committee's ongoing deliberative process. Many also commented
that the absence of a substantial lag would be unfair to meeting
participants who had been unaware that their remarks would be released
and were unable to review the transcripts for accuracy. Various
members argued for lags that ranged from 3 years to 10 years or more,
but a majority felt that a 5-year lag was necessary in order to
prevent harm to the Committee's ongoing deliberations. The other
members indicated that a 5-year lag was acceptable because it
represented a reasonable balance among the various considerations.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the members agreed
unanimously to authorize the preparation of lightly edited transcripts
of past meetings and available telephone conferences since late March
1976 and to release such transcripts to the public five years after
the meetings, subject to the redaction of especially sensitive
materials as authorized by the Freedom of Information Act. It was
understood that the transcripts for the meetings held during 1988
would be edited on a priority basis and released as soon as possible.
Providing copies of unedited transcripts for all past meetings and
available conference calls to the Chairman or staff of the House
Banking Committee in response to a request was not approved by the
Committee.
The members reviewed various options for the release of
information about the Committee's deliberations at future meetings.
These options included continuing the preparation of the minutes in
their current form, which members regarded as providing a complete
account of the substance of the Committee's deliberations. Some urged
that consideration be given to supplementing the minutes with the
prompt release after each meeting of information about Committee
decisions. Among other options considered were an expanded version of
the current minutes, and the release after an appropriate lag of a
lightly edited transcript or a Memorandum of Discussion for each
meeting. The members concluded that the complexity of the issues
reflected in these alternatives warranted further review by the
Committee and accordingly a decision was deferred. It was agreed that
the Committee would continue its discussion of these issues at a
special meeting during December.
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
