








FRB: FOMC Minutes--September 27, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting
of September 27, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 27, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Moskow and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard. Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lindsey, Mishkin,
Promisel, Simpson, Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick,
Rosenblum, and Vander Wilt, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
Kansas City, St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Sniderman, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland
Ms. Krieger, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Secretary's Note: Advice had been received of the election
of Michael H. Moskow by the boards of directors of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Chicago as alternate
member of the Federal Open Market Committee for the period
September 1, 1994, through December 31, 1994, and that he had
executed his oath of office.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on August 16, 1994, were approved.
By unanimous vote, the Committee elected Frederic S. Mishkin
as Associate Economist from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to
serve until the next election at the first meeting of the Committee
after December 31, 1994, with the understanding that in the event of
his discontinuance of his official connection with the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York he would cease to have any official connection with
the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets during the period since the August
meeting. There were no System open market transactions in foreign
currencies during this period, and thus no vote was required of the
Committee.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period August 16, 1994, through September 26, 1994. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
pace of economic expansion remained substantial, though it appeared to
have moderated slightly in recent months. Final sales, especially of
consumer goods, had firmed during the summer months while inventory
investment apparently had slowed after a second-quarter surge.
Manufacturing activity, bolstered by a pickup in production of motor
vehicles, had been rising briskly, and the trend of payroll hiring
remained strong. Increases in broad indexes of consumer and producer
prices had been somewhat larger in recent months, and prices of
materials had remained under considerable upward pressure.
Nonfarm payroll employment advanced appreciably further in
August, though at a somewhat less rapid rate than the average pace in
earlier months of the year. The slowdown in hiring in August was
concentrated in retail trade, where employment was little changed
after large gains in the two prior months, and in construction, where
it fell slightly. In manufacturing, employment was up considerably
after essentially no change in July; while much of the strength was
related to a pickup in the production of motor vehicles, hiring was up
in a number of other industries as well. The average workweek of
production or nonsupervisory workers declined in August from July's
relatively high level, but for the two months combined the average
hours worked was well above the second-quarter level. Both household
employment and the labor force surged in August, and the civilian
unemployment rate was unchanged at 6.1 percent.
Industrial production rose sharply in August after sizable
gains in previous months. The August advance reflected a large increase in manufacturing output that was partly offset by declines in
mining production and electricity generation; much of the strength in
manufacturing resulted from a large rise in the output of motor
vehicles stemming from unusually rapid retooling for the new model
year. Elsewhere in manufacturing, production of office and computing
equipment continued to expand briskly, and output of industrial
equipment was up significantly. Total utilization of industrial
capacity rose further in August from already high levels.
Consumer spending remained on a solid upward trend. Retail
sales rose considerably in August after holding steady in July. Sales
of goods other than motor vehicles registered sizable increases in
both July and August. Sales of motor vehicles, which had been
constrained in recent months by shortages of popular domestic models,
rebounded in August. Housing starts in July and August averaged
slightly less than their second-quarter rate. Single-family starts
had leveled off in recent months after declining earlier in the year;
multifamily starts, though erratic from month to month, had been
drifting higher.
The limited data available for the third quarter suggested
that growth of real business fixed investment, though still strong,
continued to slow from the very rapid pace of 1993. Shipments of
nondefense capital goods declined in July, offsetting much of a large
June advance. However, orders for nondefense capital goods were up
significantly on balance in June and July, pointing to continued brisk
expansion in business spending on durable equipment. Nonresidential
construction activity increased further in July, and permits for such
construction remained on a mild uptrend.
The growth in business inventories slowed markedly in July
after surging in the second quarter. The July deceleration reflected
a sizable reduction in retail inventories, principally automotive and
general merchandise stocks. For the retail sector as a whole, the
inventory-to-sales ratio declined sharply in July to about the middle
of the range seen in recent years. At the wholesale level,
inventories increased substantially, both in July and over the second
quarter, and the overall inventory-to-sales ratio edged up in July
toward the middle of the range for this ratio in recent years.
Inventory investment also picked up in manufacturing, where much of
the July accumulation represented stocks of materials, supplies, and
work-in-progress. The run-up in stocks was accompanied by a drop in
factory shipments, and as a result, the inventory-shipments ratio
recorded an unusually steep rise.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened substantially further in July after a large increase in the
second quarter. The value of exports of goods and services slipped in
July from a relatively high level in June, while the value of imports
in July changed little from June. Economic activity in all of the
foreign G-7 industrial countries except Japan expanded rapidly in the
second quarter, and available indicators suggested that strong growth
continued on average in the third quarter. In Japan, activity
contracted in the second quarter, reflecting weakness in consumption
and business investment; the limited data available for the third
quarter suggested that growth in that country might have resumed.
Consumer prices rose a little faster in July and August than
their average pace for the first half of the year. The recent pickup
in consumer inflation reflected large increases in energy prices as
well as somewhat higher food prices; excluding the food and energy
components, consumer price advances had remained moderate. Prices
rose briskly at the producer level in July and August as prices of
finished energy goods surged and prices of finished foods turned up
after declining over the first half of the year. For items other than
finished foods and energy, the increase over the July-August period
was a little faster than in the first half of the year. Recent data
indicated little change in wage trends. Average hourly earnings of
production or nonsupervisory workers rose in August at about the rate
observed over the previous twelve months.
At its meeting on August 16, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for increasing somewhat the degree of pressure
on reserve positions, taking account of a possible rise in the
discount rate. The Committee did not include in the directive any
presumption about further adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period. Accordingly, the directive stated that in the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
associated with this directive were expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Immediately after the conclusion of the August meeting, the
Board of Governors approved a 1/2 percentage point increase in the
discount rate to a level of 4 percent. The Committee permitted the
full amount of the increase to pass through to interest rates in the
market for reserves, and the federal funds rate rose about 1/2
percentage point to an average of around 4-3/4 percent. As indicated
in an announcement released on the day of the meeting, the Committee
did not anticipate that further policy tightening was likely to be
needed for a time, given the substantial nature of the policy move.
Accordingly, open market operations over the intermeeting period were
conducted with a view to maintaining the less accommodative degree of
pressure on reserve positions implemented just after the August
meeting, and the federal funds rate remained near 4-3/4 percent. In
accordance with the usual cresting of seasonal demands for discount
credit at this time of the year, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
rose over much of the period but began to edge lower subsequently.
Borrowing averaged near anticipated levels.
Most market interest rates were up somewhat on balance since
the August meeting. Short-term rates, which had risen prior to the
meeting in anticipation of a smaller policy move, increased modestly
further after the Federal Reserve tightened and then changed little
over the next several weeks. Subsequently, however, these rates began
to move higher in response to incoming economic data that were seen as
pointing to the potential for greater inflation in the future and
hence to further firming in reserve conditions. Long-term yields fell
following the policy tightening, but these declines were erased within
a few days, and rates later rose noticeably further in response to the
incoming data. Most major indexes of equity prices were up on balance
over the intermeeting period despite price declines near the end of
the period.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies depreciated somewhat over the intermeeting period.
Bearish sentiment toward the dollar in the foreign exchange markets
appeared to be influenced importantly by continuing concerns about
inflation trends in the United States compared with those in other
major industrial countries.
M2 and M3 declined in August after expanding moderately in
July, and data available for September pointed to little further
change in either aggregate. The August decline in M2 reflected
weakness in most of its liquid components that may have been induced
to a considerable extent by the rise, which began early this year, in
the opportunity costs of holding such accounts. The decline in M3 was
associated with a sharp drop in institution-only money funds in
response to the increase in market yields, but the weakness in this
broader aggregate was limited by the brisk issuance of large-denomination time deposits as banks continued to rely on managed
liabilities to fund credit growth. For the year through August, M2
and M3 grew at rates slightly above the lower ends of their respective
ranges for 1994. Total domestic nonfinancial debt continued to expand
at a moderate rate in recent months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth in economic activity would slow appreciably over the next
several quarters, dropping briefly below the rate of increase in the
economy's potential output. According to a staff analysis, the
economy already was operating at its long-run capacity, and the
forecast assumed that monetary policy would not accommodate any
continuing tendency for aggregate demand to expand at a pace that
could foster sustained higher inflation. Growth in consumer
expenditures was projected to moderate next year as spending on
consumer durables lost some momentum in the context of diminishing
pent-up demands, the rise in borrowing costs, and smaller gains in
income. After an extended period of very rapid increases, growth in
business fixed investment also was expected to slow appreciably,
partly reflecting less favorable financial conditions and partly the
slower pace of output growth. Homebuilding would be damped by higher
financing costs, though activity in this sector was expected to remain
well above the depressed levels reached in recent years. With the
economy operating close to its long-run potential, no further
reduction in the core rate of inflation was anticipated over the
forecast horizon. Consumer price inflation was projected to be
elevated over the near term--by some pass-through of the ongoing run-up in materials prices and by higher import prices--before settling
down again.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic conditions, members commented on continuing indications of a
robust expansion in business activity, with output near maximum
sustainable levels. They still viewed significant slowing in the pace
of the expansion as a reasonable expectation, though they acknowledged
that signs of such slowing currently were limited and in particular
that the most recent data indicated a greater probability of somewhat
more strength in aggregate demand than had appeared to be developing
during the late spring and early summer. The policy tightening
actions implemented earlier in the year seemed to have elicited only a
mild response thus far in interest-sensitive sectors of the economy.
However, much of the retarding effects of those actions, including the
recent sizable tightening in August, probably had not yet been felt in
the economy. In light of the strength of aggregate demand and lags in
the effects of policy, the risks of some rise in inflation rates
probably had increased. How large this rise might be or when it might
be reversed was very difficult to predict at this point. However,
indications of a persisting pickup in inflation would be a matter of
considerable concern, and further developments would need to be
monitored with special care in light of the Committee's longstanding
commitment to containing inflation and moving over time toward price
stability to foster the maximum, sustainable performance of the
economy.
In their review of developments across the nation, members
commented on high levels of business activity in many regions and
many of them referred to increasing reports of scarcities of specific
types of labor resources. After softening earlier in many areas,
business conditions appeared to have strengthened in a number of
regions during recent weeks while displaying little change or
continued moderate growth elsewhere. Robust expansion in
manufacturing activity, especially in the motor vehicle and related
industries, was a notable feature of recent business developments. On
the financial side, the overall expansion of credit had remained
moderate, but many members stressed the ready availability of
financing from increasingly aggressive bank lenders. Moreover,
despite higher interest rates, capital markets were providing
continued support to a wide variety of borrowers. The constraints on
the availability of credit and the reluctance of many borrowers to
incur new debt, factors that had tended to retard the recovery during
its earlier stages, had given way to a financial climate that might
even be providing an extra impetus to spending.
With regard to the outlook for activity in key sectors of the
economy, consumer spending had been more buoyant than expected over
recent months and members saw such spending as likely to be reasonably
well maintained. Some moderation in its growth over the quarters
ahead seemed likely, however, as pent-up demands increasingly were
satisfied and housing-related purchases of consumer durables tended to
moderate. Members cited anecdotal evidence of fairly brisk retail
sales in many areas recently and associated optimism among retail
business contacts. Recent survey results indicated that consumer
sentiment remained favorable. Sales of motor vehicles were expected
to continue the improvement noted in August as supply shortages were
met through increased production.
Business fixed investment was viewed as likely to rise
substantially further over the next several quarters, but the rate of
growth had been moderating this year and probably would diminish
further in conjunction with the projected slowing in overall demand.
The expansion in expenditures for business equipment had slowed
considerably this year from an extremely rapid rate in 1993 and could
be expected to moderate somewhat further. At the same time,
nonresidential construction was slowly trending higher as firms facing
capacity constraints sought to expand their production facilities.
The prospects for inventory investment remained a key
uncertainty in the outlook in that developments in this sector could
well have an important bearing on the extent of the anticipated
slowing in the expansion of overall economic activity over the next
few quarters. The surge in inventory investment in the second quarter
clearly was unsustainable, but some members questioned whether the
expected cutback in inventory accumulation would be sizable over the
near term. Continuing strength in new orders and anecdotal reports
did not point to a desire to reduce inventories and suggested that
much of the second-quarter buildup probably had been intended.
Indeed, in the context of increasing backlogs and lagging deliveries
that pointed to growing capacity constraints, many business firms
might seek to build "safety stocks" to avoid supply disruptions that
would interfere with production schedules. At the same time, the
trend toward "just in time" inventory management--even if temporarily
arrested as safety stocks were increased--would help to limit a
potentially excessive buildup in inventories that would present a
threat later to the sustainability of the expansion.
Members cited anecdotal evidence tending to support
statistical indications of some weakening in housing markets and they
generally anticipated that the rise that had occurred in mortgage
interest rates would exert a further damping effect on housing
activity over the year ahead. However, against the background of the
still relatively favorable affordability of housing and the likelihood
of some further pent-up demand, only a moderate drop in overall
homebuilding activity seemed likely.
A number of members expressed the view that the external
sector was likely to contribute to the expansion of domestic economic
activity in light of the depreciation in the value of the dollar and
indications of stronger economic growth in foreign industrial nations.
However, relatively rapid expansion in foreign economic activity would
add to pressures on world commodity prices at least for a time. One
member expressed concern about the potential, albeit uncertain,
effects on the exchange value of the dollar of developments unrelated
to the conduct of monetary policy, such as the ongoing trade
negotiations with Japan and forthcoming elections in Germany.
In their discussion of various factors bearing on the outlook
for inflation, members noted that some measures of inflation had
picked up recently and that many private forecasters anticipated
higher inflation in 1995 than in 1994. The worsening of inflation
could perhaps be viewed as reflecting increasing capacity constraints
in the face of recent growth in overall demand at a pace above the
economy's long-run potential. From this perspective, the future path
of inflation would depend importantly on the extent to which the
expansion in overall activity would in fact abate from an
unsustainable pace. Some members expressed particular concern that if
above-trend growth did not moderate soon, existing inflationary
pressures and inflationary expectations would quickly become more
pronounced and inflation would gather momentum. Thus far, however,
price pressures remained concentrated in the early stages of
production. As evidenced by broad measures of prices and anecdotal
information obtained from numerous business contacts, the pass-through
of the higher costs of materials to the prices of final goods had been
muted in what business executives continued to describe as highly
competitive markets. The ability of business firms to hold down price
increases in turn reflected to a marked degree their successful
efforts to control unit costs through ongoing gains in productivity.
Moreover, with profit margins currently at high levels, business firms
facing competitive market conditions had some leeway to absorb rising
costs. Increasingly tight labor markets in many parts of the country
had not resulted in higher overall wage inflation, but members
reported some upward pressure on the wages of certain categories of
workers in strong demand. One member expressed the view that
continued moderation in price and wage increases also might reflect in
some measure a shift in price and wage-setting behavior attributable
to the credibility of the Committee's anti-inflationary stance in
recent years. A number of members commented that the sluggish to
moderate growth of a wide variety of money and credit measures
provided some assurance that, to date, monetary policy had not laid
the basis for a sustained upturn in inflation. Nonetheless, the
members concluded that the potential for additional inflation remained
substantial and, from a monetary policy standpoint, rendered
especially urgent the ongoing assessment of inflation trends.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the period ahead,
most of the members agreed on the desirability of maintaining a steady
policy course, at least for the near term. In light of the
appreciable tightening of policy approved in August, the members had
anticipated that no further policy change was likely to be required
for a period, and at this juncture they generally continued to feel
that the recent evidence did not warrant an immediate further
tightening. Even so, the ongoing inflow of information on the
performance of the economy continued to indicate a significant
potential for higher inflation down the road, and for many members
this suggested that additional monetary restraint could well be needed
at some time. A key uncertainty in this regard related to the
restraining effects of the policy moves implemented earlier this year;
these actions appeared to have exerted less restraint to date than had
been anticipated, but appreciable lagged effects from those actions--indeed, perhaps a large part of those effects--could still be
expected. At this time, it was extremely difficult to evaluate
whether the earlier tightening moves were exerting a lesser effect
than usual or it simply was more delayed, or whether the members might
have misjudged the underlying strength of the expansion. In the view
of many members, the information that would become available during
the intermeeting period should provide a firmer basis for judging the
course of the economy and the risks of greater inflation. Should
incoming information point to a greater likelihood that price
pressures would intensify, the Committee would need to act promptly
and forcefully to avert an upward ratcheting of inflationary
expectations and actual inflation that would be difficult to reverse.
Consequently, while views differed with regard to the likely need for
some policy tightening over the weeks immediately ahead, the members
generally supported a shift from the symmetry in the August directive
to asymmetry toward restraint. Some members indicated that they could
accept an asymmetric directive, but they expressed misgivings about
the use of such an instruction in the directive because they felt it
was subject to misunderstanding in financial markets and could add to
uncertainty about Committee intentions. One member favored an
immediate move to somewhat greater reserve restraint because the
available evidence in his view already suggested an upturn in
inflationary expectations and the prospect of a significant rise in
inflation.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, a number of
members commented that the behavior of the monetary and credit
aggregates should be taken into account in the evaluation of the
current stance of monetary policy. While various money and related
measures had for many years proved unreliable to a greater or lesser
extent in gauging economic prospects, the weak growth in a wide array
of these measures could not be entirely disregarded as a possible
indicator of the degree of monetary restraint and argued for caution
in implementing any further policy tightening. One member noted,
however, that the slow growth in the narrow measures of reserves and
money followed an extended period of rapid expansion and their recent
weakness might not be indicative of constrained liquidity at this
point. Moreover, the ready availability of bank credit and the
receptivity of financial markets more generally argued that many
borrowers, including small and medium-size businesses, currently had
access to ample financing.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but one
of the members indicated that they could support a directive that
called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that included a bias toward the possible firming of
reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with modest growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over the balance of the year.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the pace of economic expansion, though perhaps
moderating slightly in recent months, remains substantial. Nonfarm payroll employment advanced appreciably further in August, and the civilian unemployment
rate was unchanged at 6.1 percent. Reflecting strength
in motor vehicles, industrial production rose sharply in
August after posting sizable gains in other recent
months, and capacity utilization moved up further from
already high levels. Retail sales were up considerably
in August, boosted by a rebound in sales of durable
goods, including motor vehicles. Housing starts rose in
August but were unchanged from their second-quarter
level. Orders for nondefense capital goods point to a
continued strong expansion in spending on business
equipment; permits for nonresidential construction
remain on a mild uptrend. Inventory accumulation
appears to have moderated recently after surging in the
second quarter. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in
goods and services widened in July from its second-quarter average. Prices of materials have remained
under upward pressure, and increases in broad indexes of
consumer and producer prices have been somewhat larger
in recent months.
On August 16, 1994, the Board of Governors approved
an increase in the discount rate from 3-1/2 to 4
percent, and the Committee agreed that this increase
would be allowed to show through completely to interest
rates in reserve markets. Most market interest rates
are up somewhat on balance since the August meeting.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies depreciated somewhat over the
intermeeting period.
M2 and M3 declined in August after expanding
moderately in July; for the year through August, M2 and
M3 grew at rates slightly above the bottom of their
ranges for 1994. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has
continued to expand at a moderate rate in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price
stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994.
The Committee anticipated that developments contributing
to unusual velocity increases could persist during the
year and that money growth within these ranges would be
consistent with its broad policy objectives. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8 percent for
the year. For 1995, the Committee agreed on tentative
ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995, of 1 to 5
percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee
provisionally set the associated monitoring range for
growth of domestic nonfinancial debt at 3 to 7 percent
for 1995. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward
price level stability, movements in their velocities,
and developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context
of the Committee's long-run objectives for price
stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over the
balance of the year.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley,
LaWare, Lindsey, and Parry and Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Vote against this action: Mr. Broaddus.
Mr. Broaddus dissented because he believed that a prompt move
to somewhat greater monetary restraint was needed at this point. In
his view, the current stance of monetary policy was overly
accommodative in light of the signs of increasing price pressures and
rising inflationary expectations that were associated with the
continuing strength of the economic expansion and high levels of
capacity utilization. In this situation, a delay in implementing some
monetary policy tightening would incur a substantial risk of a further
increase in inflationary expectations and could make it more costly to
achieve the Committee's longer-term anti-inflationary goals.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, November 15, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 1:00 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
