








FRB: FOMC Minutes--July 5-6, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting
of July 5-6, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., beginning on Tuesday, July 5, 1994, at 2:30 p.m. and
continuing on Wednesday, July 6, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, and Melzer, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Conrad and Ms. Minehan, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Boston
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lindsey, Promisel,
Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate
Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Struckmeyer and Ms. Zickler, Assistant
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Oliner,1Senior Economist, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Edwards,1 Economist, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Bennett, Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald,
Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New
York, Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago
respectively
Messrs. Guentner and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Cleveland
respectively
1. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run growth
objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.
Secretary's Note: Advice had been received that Alan S.
Blinder had executed his oath of office as a member of the
Federal Open Market Committee.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on May 17, 1994, were approved.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets and on System open market transactions in
foreign currencies during the period May 17, 1994, to July 5, 1994.
The Committee ratified these transactions.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Broaddus, Forrestal, Kelley,
LaWare, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: Messrs. Jordan and
Lindsey.
Messrs. Jordan and Lindsey dissented from this action,
although they agreed that the foreign exchange transactions conducted
during the intermeeting period were authorized under the Committee's
rules. Their dissents were based on their strong reservations about
the efficacy of sterilized intervention in most circumstances,
including those prevailing during the intermeeting period. In their
view, to the extent that repeated intervention failed to achieve
stated or perceived objectives, questions would tend to arise about
the credibility of monetary policy more generally.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period May 17, 1994, to July 5, 1994. By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity recorded another substantial gain in the second
quarter. Although consumer spending and homebuying apparently had
increased at a slower pace, business spending on durable equipment
remained quite strong and investment in nonresidential structures
rebounded from a weather-depressed level in the first quarter. In
addition, the rate of nonfarm inventory investment evidently had
picked up in the second quarter. Levels of resource utilization had
risen further: factory operating rates were at relatively high levels,
and the slack in labor markets had narrowed considerably over the
first half of the year to what appeared to be very low levels.
Increases in consumer and producer prices had remained moderate in
recent months, but prices of many basic industrial materials had
risen.
Nonfarm payroll employment advanced somewhat less rapidly in
May after the brisk increases of recent months; however, the average
workweek of production and nonsupervisory workers reached its highest
level since 1987. The reduction in job gains was widespread by
sector--including business services; finance, insurance, and real
estate; manufacturing; and construction. Employment in transportation
rebounded, reflecting the end of a Teamsters strike. The civilian
unemployment rate, measured on the new basis introduced in January,
declined sharply in May, to 6.0 percent; the decline might have been
overstated as a result of seasonal adjustment problems, but even after
correcting for these factors, the unemployment rate had fallen sharply
since late 1993.
The rise in industrial production slackened in April and May
after strong first-quarter gains. Much of the slowing was the result
of capacity constraints that prevented normal seasonal increases in
the production of motor vehicles. Growth of output of manufactured
goods other than motor vehicles and parts was at a slightly less
robust pace than in the first quarter but close to the rapid rate seen
in 1993; business equipment and construction supplies continued to be
areas of strength. The overall rate of utilization in manufacturing
stayed at a high level in May, with most major industry groups
operating at or near capacity. In addition to motor vehicles,
capacity constraints were evident in the petroleum products and
nonelectrical machinery industry groups and in some individual product
lines in other industries.
Real personal consumption expenditures fell on balance in
April and May after a strong advance earlier in the year, but the
level of expenditures for the two months combined was a little above
the first-quarter average. The recent slowdown in consumer spending
in large part reflected reduced outlays for motor vehicles. Spending
for durable goods other than motor vehicles increased over April and
May at about the first-quarter pace. Outlays for nondurable goods
were down on balance in April and May, while spending for services in
May more than reversed a small April decline. Housing activity had
rebounded from weather disruptions early in the year to a pace close
to the elevated fourth-quarter rate. Single-family starts edged down
in May after declining substantially in April but were still at a
relatively high level. While the cash-flow affordability of home
ownership had fallen since late last year, it remained at favorable
levels in comparison with recent years. Multifamily starts in May
were at their highest level in more than three years; most of the
pickup occurred in the South, where vacancy rates had declined
recently.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods other than aircraft and
parts posted a further solid gain in May, although the upward trend
appeared to have moderated in recent months. Sales of heavy trucks
also were strong in April and May. Shipments of aircraft declined
sharply in April (latest available data), retracing much of a March
surge. Available data on orders for nondefense capital goods pointed
to a continued strong uptrend in business spending on durable
equipment. Nonresidential construction picked up in April and May
from a weather-depressed slump in the first quarter.
Business inventories increased in April, more than reversing
a March runoff; the overall pace of accumulation remained moderate,
and buildups were largely concentrated in segments of the economy
where market demand was robust. In manufacturing, inventories
increased in April and May after a small drawdown in March. The rise
in stocks was in line with shipments, and the ratio of stocks to
shipments stayed at a very low level. In April (latest available
data), wholesale inventories retraced most of the sizable March
drawdown. The ratio of inventories to sales in this sector remained
below the range that has prevailed in recent years. At the retail
level, inventory stocks again edged higher; the inventory-to-sales
ratio for this sector was well within the range observed over the past
year.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened in April but was little changed from the average for the first
quarter; over the first four months of 1994, the deficit was
significantly larger than that recorded in the fourth quarter of last
year. The value of exports of goods and services was down somewhat in
April, retracing part of a sharp runup in March. The uptrend in
exports since last fall has been led by shipments of machinery,
especially to expanding markets in Asia. The value of imports of
goods and services was about the same in April as in March; increases
in consumer goods, machinery, and oil were offset by declines in other
categories. The economies of all the major foreign industrial
countries expanded in the first quarter of 1994. Growth resumed in
Japan, western Germany, and France, while economic expansion continued
at a healthy pace in the United Kingdom and Canada.
Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices had risen
moderately through the first five months of the year. In May, the
rise in the overall index of consumer prices continued to be held down
by declines in energy prices. Excluding the food and energy
components, the increase in consumer prices in the twelve months
ending in May was smaller than that for the previous twelve months.
Producer prices of finished goods continued to edge lower in May,
reflecting further declines in prices of finished foods and energy
goods. Producer prices for items other than food and energy increased
at a faster rate in May, but the change over the twelve-month period
ending in May was very small. At an earlier stage of processing,
producer prices of crude materials other than food and energy
registered another small decline in May, although the index was
substantially higher in May than a year ago. Furthermore, prices of
many basic industrial materials had remained under upward pressure.
Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers
increased by a larger amount in May than in April, but the rise over
the twelve months ended in May was about the same as in the previous
twelve months.
At its meeting on May 17, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for increasing somewhat the degree of pressure
on reserve positions, taking account of a possible increase in the
discount rate. The directive did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any further adjustment to policy during the
intermeeting period. The directive stated that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater or slightly
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions associated with this directive were
expected to be consistent with modest growth of M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Immediately after the conclusion of the May meeting, the
Board of Governors approved a 1/2 percentage point increase in the
discount rate, to 3-1/2 percent, and the Committee permitted the full
amount of the increase to pass through to interest rates in reserve
markets. Thereafter, open market operations were conducted with a
view to maintaining the less accommodative degree of reserve pressure
sought by the Committee. After the policy change, the federal funds
rate rose 1/2 percentage point, to 4-1/4 percent, and remained at
about that level over the intermeeting period. Adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing trended higher over the intermeeting period,
reflecting the usual seasonal pickup in lending activity, and averaged
close to anticipated levels.
Market interest rates on instruments with more than three-month maturities moved lower immediately following the announcement of
the Committee's action, although some very short-term interest rates
moved up. The commercial bank prime rate also was raised by 1/2
percentage point, to 7-1/4 percent. Market participants apparently
interpreted the policy actions and the accompanying announcement as
signaling that the System would not take further tightening actions as
soon as they had anticipated earlier. Incoming data suggesting
sluggish spending and subdued inflation tended to confirm these market
assessments. Late in the intermeeting period, however, bond yields
retraced these declines, partly in association with a weakening dollar
in foreign exchange markets and rising commodity prices. Most major
indexes of equity prices rose early in the intermeeting period, but
they then moved lower in sympathy with the declines in bond prices and
the dollar and ended the period with small losses.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies fell significantly further on balance over the
intermeeting period. The renewed decline, which began toward the
middle of June, occurred in response to indications of an improved
economic outlook abroad, associated increases in foreign bond yields,
and heightened concerns about possible increases in U.S. inflation.
Developments suggesting less favorable prospects for progress in U.S.
Japanese trade negotiations also tended to strengthen the yen against
the dollar.
The broad monetary aggregates were weaker than the Committee
anticipated at the time of its previous meeting, with both M2 and M3
declining on average over May and June. The declines appeared to be
related in part to the continuing appeal of capital market
instruments. More generally, however, the rise in short-and long-term interest rates since the beginning of 1994, coupled with the
reluctance of banks and other depository institutions to adjust their
offering rates promptly, had produced a widening of the opportunity
costs of holding deposits and had led households to move deposit
monies into direct and indirect holdings of market instruments. For
the year through June, both M2 and M3 were at the bottom of the
Committee's ranges for 1994, and total domestic nonfinancial debt had
expanded at a moderate rate in the lower half of its monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
the economy was operating at a level close to capacity and that the
expansion would slow over the next several quarters to a rate
generally in line with the growth of the economy's potential. To the
extent that aggregate demand tended to expand at a pace that could
foster higher inflation, it would not be accommodated by monetary
policy, and pressures would be generated in financial markets that
would restrain domestic spending. Consumer spending, which had been
increasing faster than household income for some time, was expected to
moderate as smaller gains in employment and income, coupled with
higher interest rates and reductions in the value of household
financial assets, exerted a restraining influence on consumption
patterns. Business fixed investment was projected to continue at a
brisk pace, although growth would be damped somewhat by the expected
deceleration in economic activity, a growing shortfall of corporate
cash flow relative to capital outlays, and higher financing costs.
The effects of higher mortgage interest rates were expected to cause
some slowing in the relatively robust pace of single-family
homebuilding. The restraint on output growth exerted by weak export
demand was expected to diminish because of the lower value of the
dollar and the somewhat faster recovery now projected in economic
activity abroad. The staff analysis suggested that, with the economy
already operating close to its long-run potential, no further
reduction in the core rate of inflation was likely over the forecast
horizon.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the expansion continued
to display considerable momentum, with business activity apparently
still increasing at a pace above the economy's long-run growth
potential. At the same time, indications of some slowing in aggregate
demand had tended to increase over the last few months. The extent of
that slowing remained subject to considerable uncertainty, especially
in light of somewhat disparate data on employment and spending.
Nonetheless, it was generally agreed that, in the context of
appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, some moderation in economic
growth to a pace closer to that of the economy's long-run potential
was a reasonable expectation. Such a slowing seemed necessary to
forestall a buildup of inflation pressures in the view of many
members. A number of members emphasized that remaining margins of
unemployed labor and other production resources, while difficult to
assess, now appeared to be quite limited. Although views differed to
some degree, the members generally concluded that the various factors
affecting the course of inflation were likely to result, on balance,
in little change, or perhaps a small rise, in inflation over the 1994-1995 forecast horizon. Some members regarded the risks of a
significant divergence from their forecasts of economic growth and
inflation as fairly evenly balanced in either direction, but most
believed that those risks were tilted to the upside.
In keeping with the usual practice at meetings when the
Committee considers its long-run objectives for growth of the money
and debt aggregates, the members of the Committee and the Federal
Reserve Bank presidents not currently serving as members provided
specific individual projections of growth in real and nominal GDP, the
rate of unemployment, and the rate of inflation for the years 1994 and
1995. The central tendency of the forecasts of the rate of expansion
in real GDP for 1994 as a whole was 3 to 3-1/4 percent, a little below
the rate of growth estimated for the first half of the year; for 1995,
the projections had a central tendency of 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 percent.
With regard to the expansion of nominal GDP, the forecasts centered on
growth rates of 5-1/2 to 6 percent for 1994 and 5 to 5-1/2 percent for
1995. The projections of more moderate growth in economic activity
were associated with rates of unemployment in a range of 6 to 6-1/4
percent in the fourth quarters of both 1994 and 1995, about the same
as the average unemployment rate in recent months. For the rate of
inflation, as measured by the CPI, the projections had a central
tendency of 2-3/4 to 3 percent for 1994 and 2-3/4 to 3-1/2 percent for
1995; both ranges represented a slight increase from the average rate
over the past year. Favorable developments in the food and energy
sectors, which had held down overall inflation measures over the past
several quarters, were not expected to continue and the drop in the
dollar would be exerting upward pressures on prices in coming
quarters.
Pursuant to a request from the Chairman of the Senate Banking
Committee, the members considered extending their specific forecasts
by an additional year. Many expressed reservations about the
reliability and thus the usefulness of numerical forecasts extending
relatively far into the future. Moreover, they were concerned about
misunderstandings of specific long-range forecasts in relation to the
Committee's goals and the ongoing formulation of monetary policy. The
members concluded that, on balance, the Committee's policy intentions
and expectations would be conveyed more effectively by the Chairman in
his upcoming Congressional testimony through a discussion of the
important factors bearing on trends in economic growth, prices, and
unemployment; the uncertainties involved in projecting such variables;
and the role of monetary policy in achieving desired economic goals.
In the course of their discussion, Committee members noted that the
Administration's medium-term outlook contained reasonable estimates of
the trend growth in output.
In their review of developments in different parts of the
country and sectors of the economy, members referred to indications of
continuing growth in regional business activity ranging from
relatively modest to quite robust across much of the nation; at the
same time, some areas such as California continued to experience
generally stagnant economic conditions. While solid growth seemed to
characterize the overall economy, the members saw increasing signs of
some slowing in many areas. Business and consumer sentiment generally
remained quite positive, although a number of members commented on a
new note of caution among some of their business contacts and some
shaving of industry forecasts for the balance of the year.
Turning to the key consumer sector, members commented on
various indications of some moderation in the growth of expenditures.
Higher interest costs were cited by some business contacts as
constraining purchases of consumer durables, but members also referred
to the negative impact of persisting, highly visible cutbacks in
workforces by some major business firms and of growing consumer debt.
Some members also noted that supply constraints, such as limitations
on the availability of some popular automobile models, had tended to
curb the expansion in sales. Looking ahead, more moderate growth in
consumer spending seemed likely; apart from the direct effects of
higher interest rates on such spending, the prospectively less
ebullient housing sector was likely to retard demands for household
furnishings.
Business fixed investment was thought likely to continue to
provide appreciable stimulus to the expansion, though to a diminishing
extent in the context of slower overall growth in economic activity
and higher financing costs. While spending for equipment was likely
to moderate considerably from the extraordinarily rapid increases
recorded over an extended period, ongoing business efforts to improve
operating efficiencies would probably sustain substantial further
growth in equipment outlays. Nonresidential construction expenditures
were expected to post moderate increases after stagnating earlier; in
this connection, a number of members observed that commercial vacancy
rates were declining in various metropolitan areas and improved demand
for space was likely to generate increased construction activity.
Although higher interest costs could have some restraining effect,
financing for such projects was more readily available than earlier.
The outlook for inventory investment remained uncertain. Some buildup
in inventories was occurring, but business firms were continuing to
resist sizable increases and inventory-to-sales ratios remained at
unusually low levels. Developments that might be expected to foster a
faster buildup, such as some lengthening of order lead times and
rising pressures on capacity in some industries, had not led to the
strengthening in inventory investment that had characterized
comparable stages of previous business cycle expansions.
Members observed that the outlook for exports appeared to
have improved and that foreign trade, on net, probably would make a
small contribution to economic growth over the next several quarters.
Some noted that business contacts were reporting strong foreign demand
for various U.S. products. As members had noted at previous meetings,
the North American Free Trade Agreement appeared to have stimulated
increased trade between Mexico and the United States, although it was
still too early to gauge the extent of this development. More
generally, the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and
a somewhat greater strengthening in the economies of major trading
partners than was expected earlier had enhanced the prospects for
appreciable growth in U.S. exports, and in the view of at least some
members that growth might prove to be considerably greater than was
currently projected.
Members remarked that uncertainties about remaining margins
of slack in the economy, accentuated by the change in the household
employment survey, and about potential levels of economic activity
over the quarters ahead made it particularly difficult to assess the
outlook for inflation. However, based on what seemed to be reasonable
estimates of resource utilization levels and their own projections
that the rate of economic growth would slow to a pace nearer the
economy's growth potential, the members generally concluded that the
rate of inflation, as measured by the CPI, might remain about
unchanged or tilt slightly higher over the forecast horizon. This
conclusion took into account the effects of the decline in the foreign
exchange value of the dollar, the increase in oil prices on world
markets, and the at-least-temporary rise in food prices. Some members
observed that the overall behavior of prices had been somewhat more
favorable than they would have predicted, given the strength of the
expansion and the level of resource utilization. One explanation
could be that increases in overall capacity and productivity stemming
from business restructuring activities and investments in new
equipment and facilities had been greater than expected. Comments
from numerous business contacts around the country continued to
indicate that despite the rising costs of many materials used in the
production process, highly competitive markets rendered it very
difficult or impossible to pass these higher costs through to prices
of finished goods. At the same time, labor compensation increases had
remained subdued despite indications of shortages of some types of
labor in many parts of the country. Exceptions involving sizable wage
increases continued to be cited for some industries, such as
construction and trucking, that were operating at full capacity.
Nonetheless, in the absence of an uptrend thus far in consumer price
inflation and given continuing uncertainties about job prospects
despite large job gains, wage pressures had remained restrained.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth in the monetary and
debt aggregates that it had established in February for 1994 and it
decided on tentative ranges for growth in those aggregates in 1995.
The current ranges set in February for the period from the fourth
quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994 included expansion of
1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3. A monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt had been set at 4 to 8
percent for 1994.
In the Committee's discussion, which as in the past tended to
focus on M2, all the members indicated that they were in favor of
retaining the current ranges for M2 and M3 for 1994 and extending
those ranges on a provisional basis to 1995. In their evaluation of
appropriate growth ranges for 1994, the members anticipated that the
projected moderation in the expansion of nominal GDP and the
likelihood that funds would continue to be diverted from deposits to
higher yielding market instruments would be reflected in relatively
sluggish growth in M2 and M3 and further increases in their velocity--the ratio of nominal GDP to these monetary measures. In the
circumstances, expected growth in M2 and M3 at rates around the lower
end of their ranges would be consistent with the Committee's overall
objective of fostering financial conditions that would promote
sustainable economic growth and contain pressures on prices. Indeed,
that objective might even imply a shortfall from one or both of the
current ranges, but shortfalls could be tolerated and explained if
they reflected greater-than-expected increases in velocity associated
with an acceptable economic performance. While growth of the broad
monetary aggregates might pick up somewhat next year, it probably
would remain damped relative to income. In light of this prospect,
and of the uncertainties about appropriate monetary growth in 1995,
the Committee decided to carry forward the 1994 ranges, subject to a
review early next year. The Committee noted that the current ranges,
which had been reduced greatly over the years, could be viewed as
long-run benchmarks for monetary growth consistent with maximum
sustainable economic expansion in a noninflationary environment, if
there were a return to more normal velocity behavior. The Committee
recognized that considerable uncertainty about the behavior of
velocity was likely to persist and that a broad range of financial and
economic indicators, in addition to the monetary aggregates, would
need to be monitored in determining the appropriate course for
monetary policy.
In their review of the Committee's monitoring range for the
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt, the members agreed that
the current range for 1994 should be retained. This view took into
account staff projections indicating that the debt aggregate was
likely to grow within its present range this year, albeit the lower
half of that range. Considerable sentiment was expressed, however,
for reducing the debt monitoring range for 1995. Debt growth was
expected to remain relatively subdued in association with projections
of a slower rate of expansion in nominal GDP. Lowering the range
would underscore the Committee's view that rapid debt growth, should
it materialize and be sustained, could have adverse implications for
inflation and financial stability. Members emphasized, however, that
action to adjust the debt range did not imply increased Committee
emphasis on the debt aggregate, and most believed that the risks of
any misinterpretation could be minimized by including an appropriate
explanation in the report to Congress.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Committee voted to
reaffirm the ranges for growth of M2 and M3 and the monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt that it had established
in February for 1994. The following statement was approved for
inclusion in the Committee's domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994.
The Committee anticipated that developments contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist
during the year and that money growth within these
ranges would be consistent with its broad policy
objectives. The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8
percent for the year.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan,
Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: None.
For the year 1995, the Committee approved provisional ranges
for M2 and M3 that were unchanged from the 1994 ranges. The Committee
reduced the monitoring range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial
debt by one percentage point from 1994 to a range of 3 to 7 percent.
Accordingly, the Committee voted to incorporate the following
statement regarding the 1995 ranges in its domestic policy directive:
For 1995, the Committee agreed on tentative
ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995, of 1 to
5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3. The
Committee provisionally set the associated monitoring
range for growth of domestic nonfinancial debt at 3 to
7 percent for 1995. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan,
Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: None.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, most members endorsed a proposal to maintain an
unchanged degree of pressure in reserve markets. The economy seemed
to be slowing, although to an uncertain extent. Earlier policy
tightening actions were being reflected in the sluggish behavior of
money and reserves, although the extent of their effects on spending
were still in question. Inflation was a concern, but direct evidence
of additional pressures on costs and prices was quite fragmentary. In
these circumstances, all but one of the members concluded that it
would be prudent for the Committee to assess further developments
before taking any action. One member believed that prompt further
tightening was needed to avert the development of greater inflation.
In the discussion of the near-term course of policy, the
members took account of the substantial weakness of the dollar in
foreign exchange markets over the course of recent weeks. By itself,
the drop in the dollar could put some pressure on resources and
prices. However, the members agreed that these effects needed to be
considered in the context of overall prospects for the economy and
financial markets, and policy should not be focused narrowly on the
dollar alone. In any case, given the negative sentiment in the
foreign exchange markets, the effects on the dollar that would flow
from a small change in policy were uncertain. Ultimately, the most
effective support that monetary policy could provide for the dollar
was to foster the objectives of sustainable economic growth and
progress toward price stability.
With regard to possible changes in policy during the
intermeeting period, a majority favored a change in the intermeeting
instruction in the directive from symmetry to asymmetry toward
restraint. Some of the members indicated that near-term developments
were not likely to call for an adjustment to policy. Nonetheless, the
risk of inflationary momentum in the expansion remained high, given an
economy that appeared to be operating at or very close to full
capacity, and they believed that the probable direction of the next
policy move was likely to be in the direction of restraint. Some
emphasized that such a move should be made promptly in response to
information suggesting a greater potential for inflation. In the view
of many, though not all, members the costs of policy errors were
asymmetrical at this point. The costs of reversing a policy stance
that turned out to be slightly too tight would be limited to somewhat
slower economic growth for a time; the expansion appeared to be so
well established at this juncture that the risks of a greater economic
adjustment were remote. On the other hand, a policy that turned out
to be unduly stimulative would foster greater inflation and
inflationary expectations that probably could be reversed only at the
cost of considerable disruption in financial markets and the economy.
It also was noted that an asymmetric directive would underscore the
Committee's determination to resist greater inflation; the asymmetry
could be viewed as a logical extension of the strategy adopted in
February to move to a policy stance consistent with averting
inflationary pressures in a firmly established expansion.
Some members indicated a preference for retaining a symmetric
directive. These members did not rule out the possible need for
further policy tightening, but they believed that the risks
surrounding current forecasts were about evenly weighted in both
directions. One member expressed strong reservations about the use of
an asymmetric directive on the grounds that such language made
intermeeting changes more likely and in the view of that member
markets reacted more favorably when actions were taken and announced
at regular meetings. However, all those favoring a symmetric
directive with an unchanged policy stance could accept an asymmetric
intermeeting instruction.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but one
of the members indicated that they could support a directive that
called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that included a bias toward the possible firming of
reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater reserve restraint would be acceptable or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with modest growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity recorded another substantial
gain in the second quarter, causing levels of resource
utilization to rise further. Increases in nonfarm
payroll employment have been relatively large on
average in recent months; the civilian unemployment
rate is reported to have declined to 6.0 percent in
May. The rise in industrial production slackened in
April and May, primarily because capacity constraints
prevented normal seasonal increases in the production
of motor vehicles. Growth in consumer spending has
slowed in recent months after very large increases in
February and March. Housing starts have rebounded from
winter disruptions to a pace close to the elevated
fourth-quarter level. Orders for nondefense capital
goods point to a continued strong uptrend in spending
on business equipment, while nonresidential construction has recovered from a weather-depressed level in
the first quarter. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade
in goods and services was larger in April than in March
but about unchanged from the average for the first
quarter. Increases in broad indexes of consumer and
producer prices have remained moderate in recent
months, though prices of many basic industrial
materials have risen.
On May 17, 1994, the Board of Governors approved
an increase in the discount rate from 3 to 3-1/2
percent. Most market interest rates were up slightly
on balance since the May meeting; declines in bond
yields early in the intermeeting period were offset
later by market reactions to a weakening dollar in
foreign exchange markets and rising commodity prices.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies was down significantly further on
balance over the intermeeting period, reflecting a
sizable drop since early June.
M2 and M3 declined on average over May and June;
for the year through June, both M2 and M3 are at the
bottom of their ranges for 1994. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has continued to expand at a moderate
rate in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994.
The Committee anticipated that developments contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist
during the year and that money growth within these
ranges would be consistent with its broad policy
objectives. The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8
percent for the year. For 1995, the Committee agreed
on tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of
1995, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for
M3. The Committee provisionally set the associated
monitoring range for growth of domestic nonfinancial
debt at 3 to 7 percent for 1995. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley,
LaWare, Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: Mr. Broaddus.
Mr. Broaddus dissented because he believed that additional
near-term tightening was necessary to contain inflation. The
tightening actions implemented thus far this year were moderate by
historical standards, and he doubted that they would prove sufficient
to prevent higher inflation given the strength of the economic
expansion, the minimal remaining margins of unemployed labor and other
producer resources, and inflationary expectations that he feared might
already be rising.
Prior to the conclusion of this meeting, the members
discussed the desirability of announcing the outcome of a meeting when
no action to change policy was taken. Views differed on this issue,
but most of the members supported a proposal to provide a brief and
informal indication that the meeting had ended and that there would be
no further announcements. Since early February, a statement had been
released after each meeting, all of which had involved policy changes;
failure to take some step after this meeting to make clear that there
was no change to announce would lead for a time to a heightened degree
of uncertainty. With regard to future announcements, it was
understood that this issue along with other public disclosure
questions would be considered at a later meeting. The Committee's
decision regarding announcements would then be made public.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, August 16, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 12:35 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
