








FRB: FOMC Minutes--November 15, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of
November 15, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 15, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Moskow and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Goodfriend, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, and Simpson and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Brayton, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Pianalto, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Ms. Browne and Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Lang,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Vander Wilt, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on September 27, 1994, were approved.
The Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account,
conducted by the Board's Division of Reserve Bank Operations and
Payment Systems as of the close of business on June 30, 1994, was
accepted.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets and on System open market transactions in
foreign currencies during the period September 27, 1994, through
November 14, 1994. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these
transactions.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period September 27, 1994, through November 14, 1994. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
growth of the economy remained substantial. Consumer spending was
robust, business fixed investment continued on a strong upward trend,
and housing activity had been well sustained despite the increase in
mortgage interest rates over the past year. Business inventory
investment had been brisk since the spring, apparently in response to
the strong growth in final sales. Further sizable gains had been
recorded in industrial production and employment. Increases in labor
compensation were still moderate, although there were some tentative
signs of wage acceleration associated with the further tightening of
labor markets. Prices of many materials continued to move up rapidly,
but broad indexes did not indicate a pickup in consumer inflation.
Nonfarm payroll employment rose appreciably further in
October, with job gains widespread by industry. In the service-producing sector, retail trade posted a particularly large advance
while health and business services continued to record moderate
increases. Manufacturing employment was up in October after having
been unchanged in September; the rise was related partly to continued
job growth in automobile-and construction-related industries, but
payrolls also expanded in a number of other industries, including
textiles, paper, rubber, and plastics. Construction hiring slowed
after a large rise in September. Employment, as measured by the
household survey, increased by more than the labor force in October,
and the civilian unemployment rate edged down to 5.8 percent.
Industrial production increased substantially in October
after having posted appreciable advances on balance in previous
months. Manufacturing output accounted for all of the October rise as
production declined again in the mining and utilities components. In
manufacturing, the pace of motor vehicle assemblies was unchanged, but
production in automotive-related industries was stepped up noticeably
and output of business equipment continued to expand vigorously.
Total utilization of industrial capacity climbed further in October
from already elevated rates.
Consumer confidence remained at a high level, and retail
sales continued to rise rapidly in October. Automotive dealers
reported a large increase in sales, but strength also was evident
elsewhere: Furniture and appliance stores posted another appreciable
gain; apparel outlets registered a brisk rise; and spending at food
and general merchandise stores grew moderately. Housing starts rose
appreciably in September, reaching their highest level of the year.
Sales of new and existing homes were stronger in September, despite
the higher interest rates on both fixed-and adjustable-rate
mortgages that had prevailed since earlier in the year.
Business capital spending remained on a solid uptrend.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods were brisk during the third
quarter, and with orders continuing to exceed shipments, already large
backlogs increased further for most types of business equipment.
Spending for transportation equipment grew at a healthy rate in the
third quarter; purchases of heavy trucks persisted at a very high
level, and spending for motor vehicles picked up after a second-quarter lull. Nonresidential construction activity advanced at a
reduced pace in the third quarter; however, permits for new
construction continued to trend higher.
Business inventory investment apparently continued at a brisk
pace in the third quarter, with much of the accumulation occurring in
types of goods where sales were strong. Manufacturing stocks fell in
September, but for the third quarter as a whole they increased at the
same moderate rate as in the second quarter; the inventory-to-shipments ratio for manufacturing in September remained near the
historical low reached the previous month. At the wholesale level,
inventory accumulation slowed slightly in the third quarter, and the
inventory-to-sales ratio was in the lower end of its range over recent
years. Retail inventories surged in August (latest data available)
after having declined slightly in July. Nonetheless, the inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector remained near the middle of its range
in recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
narrowed in August, but for July and August combined the deficit was
substantially larger than its second-quarter average. The value of
exports of goods and services rebounded in August, with increases
spread widely among automotive products, aircraft, agricultural
products, machinery, and consumer goods. The value of imports also
increased in August, but by a lesser amount than that of exports; much
of the rise reflected greater imports of automotive vehicles from
Canada. Economic activity continued to expand in the major foreign
industrial countries in the third quarter, but growth apparently was
at a more moderate pace than in the first half of the year.
Consumer price inflation remained moderate in September. For
items other than the food and energy components, the increase in
consumer prices over the twelve months ending in September was
slightly smaller than the rise over the previous twelve months. At
the producer level, prices of finished goods declined, largely
reflecting a sharp fall in prices of finished energy goods. Excluding
food and energy items, producer prices edged up in September and had
risen slowly over the twelve months ending in September. At
intermediate stages of processing, prices of many materials, notably
industrial materials, had continued to move up rapidly. Total
compensation of private industry workers rose significantly less over
the four quarters ending in September than over the previous four
quarters, primarily reflecting a sharply smaller increase in benefit
costs. Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory
workers recorded a large gain in September after having expanded
moderately over previous months.
At its meeting on September 27, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions but included a bias toward possible firming
during the intermeeting period. The directive stated that in the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater
reserve restraint would be acceptable or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The
reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting were expected to be
consistent with modest growth of M2 and M3 over the balance of the
year.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. As the need for seasonal credit waned over the period,
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing declined substantially, with actual
borrowing remaining close to anticipated levels. Apart from some
tightness in reserves markets around the end of the third quarter, the
federal funds rate averaged close to 4-3/4 percent.
Most market interest rates rose appreciably over the period
since the September 27 meeting in response to incoming economic data
that generally indicated sustained momentum in final sales and
inventory investment and high levels of aggregate output relative to
the economy's potential. The strong economic data and persisting
upward pressures on prices at earlier stages of production appeared to
heighten concerns among market participants about inflationary
pressures and prospects for even more monetary tightening than had
previously been anticipated. Most major indexes of equity prices were
little changed on balance over the intermeeting period.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies changed little on net over the intermeeting period.
The dollar trended lower over much of the period, apparently
reflecting market perceptions that inflation risks in the United
States were on the rise. In early November, after reaching a new
post-World War II low against the yen and a two-year low against the
mark, the dollar began to recover. The rebound in the value of the
dollar apparently was in part a response to U.S. intervention in
support of the dollar and heightened expectations of further monetary
tightening in the United States.
M2 continued to edge lower in October; the weakness was
concentrated in its more-liquid deposit components, for which
opportunity costs had risen very substantially this year. M3 expanded
at a moderate pace, buoyed by continued rapid growth in large-denomination time deposits issued to finance rapid loan growth and to
counter runoffs of nondeposit sources of funds. For the year through
October, M2 grew at a rate at the bottom of the Committee's range for
1994 and M3 at a rate in the lower half of its range for the year.
Total domestic nonfinancial debt continued to expand at a moderate
rate in recent months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth in economic activity would slow markedly over the next several
quarters and for a period would average less than the rate of increase
in the economy's potential output. In the staff's judgment, the
economy currently was operating at or beyond its long-run capacity,
and the forecast assumed that monetary policy would not accommodate
any continuing tendency for aggregate demand to expand at a pace that
could foster sustained higher inflation. The expansion of consumer
spending was projected to slow considerably in response to diminishing
pent-up demands, higher borrowing costs, and reduced income growth.
Business fixed investment also was anticipated to decelerate
appreciably in the context of smaller increases in sales and less
favorable financial conditions. Homebuilding was expected to be
damped by higher financing costs, although housing activity likely
would remain well above the depressed levels of recent years when
cash-flow affordability had been less favorable. The lower value of
the dollar and the favorable prospects for faster economic recovery
abroad were projected to bolster the demand for U.S. exports. With
the economy having reached or exceeded its long-run potential in the
staff's judgment, wage and price inflation was projected to pick up
for a period before turning down as pressures on productive resources
eased.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented on widespread statistical and
anecdotal indications of considerably greater strength in the business
expansion than they had anticipated earlier, with numerous industries
now operating at or beyond historic, long-run capacity levels. They
saw few signs that growth in aggregate demand might be moderating
toward a more sustainable pace; nonetheless, they continued to view
some slowing as a reasonable expectation as the monetary policy
tightening actions implemented earlier exerted their lagged effects on
interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. At this point, increases
in prices of final goods and services and in wages generally did not
appear to be trending higher, but the members were concerned that
inflation would worsen as the effects of continuing strong demand,
rising production costs, and higher import prices increasingly were
felt in an environment where the utilization of labor and other
producer resources was already at, if not above, sustainable full
employment levels.
The evidence of persisting growth in aggregate demand at a
pace appreciably above that of the economy's long-run potential and of
developing pressures on resources tended to be confirmed by anecdotal
reports of robust business expansion in many parts of the country and
growing difficulties in hiring and retaining some types of labor.
Ongoing cutbacks in some industries, such as defense, were tending to
hold down overall economic activity in a few regions, but all parts of
the country appeared to be experiencing at least modest economic
growth, including California where economic activity now seemed to
have turned up after an extended period of weakness. Sentiment among
retailers and other business contacts was widely reported to be quite
favorable. In addition, some members commented that despite higher
interest rates financial conditions generally remained conducive to
further business expansion. The lending constraints that had tended
to retard the expansion earlier seemed to have given way to
increasingly accommodative loan policies by depository institutions
and ready access to market sources of financing for many business
firms.
In their assessment of the contribution of key sectors of the
economy to the expansion, members commented on the current strength of
consumer spending and also noted that business contacts were
expressing considerable optimism about the prospects for retail sales
over the holiday season. Consumer sentiment, as evidenced by survey
results and retailer comments, appeared to be at a high level. Some
moderation in the growth of consumer spending could be expected to
emerge next year for a variety of reasons, including reduced pent-up
demands and some anticipated slowing in the growth of employment and
consumer incomes. Members also noted that rising interest rates were
likely to damp consumer spending, notably for durable goods, though
there was little evidence of such a development thus far. A projected
softening in housing markets would contribute to slower growth in
demand for housing-related consumer durables.
Expanding sales and favorable profit margins were fostering
strong growth in business fixed investment, and much of the momentum
in this sector probably would carry over into 1995. Some business
contacts reported that they were developing plans for major capital
outlays over coming months. As the year progressed, however, the
increases that had occurred in interest rates, and the possibility of
less receptive financial conditions more generally, should begin to
exert some inhibiting effects on business fixed investment, especially
if profit margins also were to fall in the context of rising labor and
other costs.
With regard to the outlook for housing, members reported that
conditions were somewhat uneven across the country but that for the
nation as a whole rising mortgage rates had had surprisingly little
effect thus far on this typically interest-sensitive sector of the
economy. One reason, it was suggested, was the apparent willingness
of some homebuyers to accept higher mortgage rates at this point
because they expected rates to rise further later. Even so, the
members continued to anticipate some slowdown in housing construction
over coming quarters. Overall construction activity was likely to be
supported to some extent, however, by further gradual gains in
nonresidential construction, notably commercial and industrial
structures, and perhaps some continuing strength in multifamily
housing.
After a surge in the second quarter, inventory investment
remained substantial in the third quarter and appeared to be
continuing at a robust pace in the current quarter. For a variety of
reasons, inventory accumulation might well be relatively brisk for
some period of time, given the favorable sales experience of numerous
business firms and the still quite low levels of inventories relative
to sales. Moreover, with capacity pressures in many industries
leading to some lengthening in delivery times, businesses would tend
to build inventories to support sales and avoid disruptions to
production schedules. Tending to confirm such an assessment were
anecdotal reports suggesting that recent additions to inventories were
largely intended and not the result of disappointing sales. An
inventory buildup at the pace recorded on average in the second and
third quarters would not be sustainable, but inventory investment was
likely to be relatively well maintained over coming months if
aggregate demand were to expand in line with current expectations.
The members generally anticipated that the external sector of
the economy would provide some impetus to the expansion. The recent
depreciation of the dollar and strength in foreign economic activity
could be expected to boost real exports at a time when growth in real
imports was likely to moderate. The resulting improvement in the
nation's net trade position would, however, tend to exacerbate any
tendency for domestic demand to outrun the economy's output potential.
In the Committee's discussion of the outlook for prices,
the members saw considerable potential for higher inflation if growth
in demand and output continued at an unsustainable pace, placing added
pressures on labor and other producer resources. They noted
indications of greater inflation pressures, especially in the rising
prices of many materials used in the production process and the
increasing number of reports of labor shortages. To date, prices of
finished goods and services did not reflect those pressures and
overall wage inflation did not appear to be trending higher. Even so,
at least some modest worsening of inflation seemed quite likely over
the quarters immediately ahead, despite the persistence of strong
competition that continued to limit attempts to raise prices in most
markets. This view seemed to be reinforced by increasing reports of
successful efforts by some business firms to establish and sustain
higher prices and by numerous indications of business plans to raise
prices around year-end or the early part of next year. Other factors
that appeared to have adverse implications for the inflation outlook
included faster increases in import prices, and in the view of at
least some members the prospect of diminishing gains in productivity.
Moreover, as evidenced by the comments of some business contacts and
the behavior of financial markets, inflationary expectations might be
in the process of worsening, though such a development could not be
seen in broad survey results. To what extent such expectations would
become more pervasive and foster greater inflation momentum was very
difficult to gauge at this point. One member suggested that some
further rise in inflation might reflect a typical development in a
maturing cyclical expansion but that such a rise would not necessarily
augur a permanent uptick in inflation or even that progress toward
price stability would not continue to be made over time, provided
appropriate monetary policies were pursued.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members agreed that the current stance of
monetary policy presented unacceptable risks of embedding higher
inflation in the economy. The expansion retained appreciably more
forward momentum and greater inflationary potential than the members
had anticipated, given the policy restraint implemented earlier this
year. The reasons for that outcome remained unclear. Among the
suggested explanations were that the earlier restraint appeared to
have had a less-than-expected effect on current economic conditions
and, in particular, on the more interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy. Some members also suggested that the underlying expansion
was stronger than they had anticipated, and a couple referred to the
possibility that the lingering effects from the accommodative policy
stance maintained through last year were larger than had been
expected. Moreover, additional monetary restraint seemed to be needed
to counteract the stimulative effects on domestic economic activity of
a number of atypical financial developments in a period of rising
interest rates; these included the easing of non-price credit terms by
depository institutions, the ample availability of funds in debt and
equity markets, and the depreciation of the dollar in foreign exchange
markets. The members recognized that monetary policy actions exerted
much of their effects after relatively long lags and that a
substantial portion of the restraint stemming from the earlier policy
actions undoubtedly had not yet been felt in the economy. They
agreed, nonetheless, that monetary policy was still insufficiently
restrictive in light of emerging inflationary signals in the economy.
Views differed to some extent, however, regarding the degree of
additional restraint that might be needed to foster the Committee's
objectives for sustainable, noninflationary economic growth.
A majority of the members believed that an unusually sizable
firming of monetary policy was desirable at this time, and they
endorsed a proposal to tighten reserve conditions in line with a 3/4
percentage point increase in the discount rate that a number of
Federal Reserve Banks had proposed for approval by the Board of
Governors. In this view, the data becoming available in recent months
had suggested considerable resilience and underlying strength in
economic activity and rising risks of greater inflation pressures. A
somewhat aggressive tightening action would improve the prospects for
curbing intensifying inflationary pressures before they gathered
further momentum and would help position the economy on a sustainable
growth path consistent with the economy's long-run potential. The
members acknowledged the difficulty of judging the precise degree of
monetary restraint that would be needed to attain the Committee's
objectives and in particular the risk that further efforts to control
inflation at this juncture might foster greater-than-intended
weakening of the expansion. The Committee could not prejudge how
much, if any, additional monetary restraint might be needed in the
future. That would depend on further developments, but for most
members a sizable move at this point represented the most appropriate
balance among the competing risks. During this discussion, it was
noted that recent developments were having an unsettling effect on
financial markets, and a tightening move of this magnitude might
contribute to market stability by reducing expectations of higher
inflation and a further near-term policy action. Some members also
commented that the action would tend to reinforce the recent
intervention in the foreign exchange markets.
Other members indicated that they preferred a less forceful
policy move at this point, one that would be consistent with the 1/2
percentage point increase in the discount rate that had been proposed
by several Federal Reserve Banks. In their view, substantial further
restraint could be expected from the combined effects of the policy
tightening actions implemented earlier this year and the inevitable
waning of the stimulative effects of policy actions taken in previous
years. While the need for further monetary restraint could not be
ruled out, a more limited policy move at this point could reasonably
be expected in this view to accomplish the greater part or all of the
Committee's anti-inflationary objectives over time and would minimize
the risk of setting policy on an overly restrictive course with
undesired consequences for the business expansion later. Moreover, a
cautious approach could lessen the risk that the Committee's policy
intentions would be misinterpreted, with some resulting damage to
consumer and business confidence and dislocation in financial markets.
Despite their reservations, these members indicated that they could
accept the degree of restraint preferred by the majority because of
the quite small difference in the effects of the alternative moves on
the economy over time.
With regard to possible changes in policy during the period
until the next meeting, a majority of the members favored associating
the more substantial policy adjustment with a symmetric intermeeting
instruction. This preference was based on expectations that a further
policy action was not likely to be called for over the near term,
although a symmetric directive would not prevent an intermeeting
adjustment if near-term developments differed substantially from
expectations. One member expressed the view that the unusually large
move made it especially important to follow a steady policy course for
some period of time and to undertake any further firming only if new
information of a surprisingly strong nature were to be received.
Another member indicated a preference for an asymmetric directive
toward restraint because such a directive would be more consistent
with the likely need in his view for further monetary restraint to
contain inflationary forces in the economy.
At the conclusion of the Committee's policy discussion, all
the members indicated they could support a directive that called for a
significant increase in the degree of pressure on reserve positions,
taking account of a possible increase of 3/4 percentage point in the
discount rate, and that did not include a presumption about the likely
direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the
Committee decided that somewhat greater or somewhat lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
According to a staff analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at
this meeting would be consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the growth of the economy has remained substantial. Nonfarm payroll employment advanced appreciably
further in October, and the civilian unemployment rate
edged down to 5.8 percent. Industrial production
registered a large increase in October after posting
sizable gains on average over other recent months, and
capacity utilization moved up further from already high
levels. Retail sales have continued to rise rapidly.
Housing starts rose appreciably in September. Orders
for nondefense capital goods point to a continued
strong expansion in spending on business equipment;
permits for nonresidential construction have been
trending higher. Inventory accumulation appears to
have continued at a brisk pace in the third quarter.
For July and August combined, the nominal deficit on
U.S. trade in goods and services widened from its
second-quarter average. Prices of many materials have
continued to move up rapidly, but broad indexes of
prices for consumer goods and services have increased
moderately on average over recent months.
Most market interest rates have risen appreciably
since the September meeting. The trade-weighted value
of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies was
essentially unchanged on balance over the intermeeting
period, though it was weaker through much of the
period.
M2 contracted further in October while M3 expanded
at a moderate pace, buoyed by continued rapid growth in
large-denomination time deposits. For the year through
October, M2 grew at a rate at the bottom of the
Committee's range for 1994 and M3 at a rate in the
lower half of its range for the year. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has continued to expand at a moderate
rate in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of
1994. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases could
persist during the year and that money growth within
these ranges would be consistent with its broad policy
objectives. The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8
percent for the year. For 1995, the Committee agreed
on tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of
1995, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for
M3. The Committee provisionally set the associated
monitoring range for growth of domestic nonfinancial
debt at 3 to 7 percent for 1995. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to increase significantly
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions,
taking account of a possible increase in the discount
rate. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater
reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan,
Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, Parry and Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
Secretary's note: The meeting was recessed briefly at this
point and the members of the Board of Governors convened to consider
pending Reserve Bank proposals for increases in the discount rate.
After the conclusion of that meeting, the Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks were informed that the Board of Governors had approved an
increase of 3/4 percentage point in the discount rate, effective
immediately, and the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee then
resumed.
System Foreign Currency Arrangements
The Committee considered the renewal of the System's currency
("swap") arrangements with foreign central banks. These arrangements
normally have one-year maturities and, except for those with the Bank
of Canada and the Bank of Mexico, were due to mature on various dates
in December 1994.
In the course of their review, the members discussed sterilized intervention by the Federal Reserve in the foreign exchange
markets. They generally agreed that in certain circumstances such
intervention serves a useful purpose, such as helping to counter
disorderly market conditions, but it normally would not be expected to
have lasting effects on the foreign exchange value of the dollar in
the absence of other policy adjustments. In the overwhelming number
of instances for more than a decade, the Federal Reserve has participated jointly with the U.S. Treasury in foreign exchange operations.
In the view of most members it seemed advisable to continue that
procedure, especially given the System's responsibilities for the
overall financial health of the economy and ongoing cooperation with
the Treasury regarding the nation's broad financial objectives.
Nonetheless, the apparently limited and temporary effectiveness of
sterilized intervention counseled caution in reliance on such
transactions. Against this background, nearly all the members
believed that the System's reciprocal currency arrangements, which
were a potential source of foreign currencies that might be used for
intervention purposes as well as an ongoing symbol of cooperation with
other participating central banks, should be renewed for another year.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Committee
authorized the renewal for further periods of one year of the System's
reciprocal currency arrangements with twelve foreign central banks and
the Bank for International Settlements. The amounts and existing
maturity dates of the arrangements are indicated in the table that
follows:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of $ equivalent)
Term
(months)
Maturitydate
Austrian National Bank
$ 250.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Bank of England
3,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Bank of Japan
5,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Bank of Mexico
3,000.0
20 mos.
12/15/95
Bank of Norway
250.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Bank of Sweden
300.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Swiss National Bank
4,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Bank for International Settlements --
Swiss francs
600.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
Other authorized European currencies
1,250.0
12 mos.
12/04/94
National Bank of Belgium
1,000.0
12 mos.
12/18/94
Bank of Canada
2,000.0
20 mos.
12/15/95
National Bank of Denmark
250.0
12 mos.
12/28/94
Bank of France
2,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/94
German Federal Bank
6,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/94
Bank of Italy
3,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/94
Netherlands Bank
500.0
12 mos.
12/28/94
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder. Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley,
LaWare, Lindsey, and Parry and Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Vote against this action: Mr. Broaddus.
Mr. Broaddus dissented because he believed that the Federal
Reserve's participation in foreign exchange market intervention
compromises its ability to conduct monetary policy effectively.
Because sterilized intervention cannot have sustained effects in the
absence of conforming monetary policy actions, Federal Reserve
participation in foreign exchange operations risks one of two
undesirable outcomes. First, the independence of monetary policy is
jeopardized if the System adjusts its policy actions to support short-term foreign exchange objectives set by the Treasury. Alternatively,
the credibility of monetary policy is damaged if the System does not
follow interventions with compatible policy actions, the interventions
consequently fail to achieve their objectives, and the System is
associated in the mind of the public with the failed operations. In
these circumstances, he did not view renewal of the existing swap
lines as desirable because they are used primarily to facilitate
market intervention.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, December 20, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 2:05 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
