








FRB: FOMC Minutes--March 28, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of March 28, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,  on Tuesday, March 28,  1995  at  9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms.  Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Hunter, Lindsey,
Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman, Slifman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Goodfriend, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and
Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Cleveland respectively
Messrs. Kos and Judd, and Ms. Rosenbaum, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
San Francisco, and Atlanta respectively
Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on January 31-February 1, 1995, were
approved.
By unanimous vote, responsibility for making decisions on
appeals of denials by the Secretary of the Committee for access to
Committee records was delegated under the provisions of 271.4(d) of
the Committee's Rules Regarding Availability of Information to Ms.
Phillips and, in her absence, to Ms. Yellen.
By unanimous vote, the Committee elected Thomas C. Baxter,
Jr. as Deputy General Counsel from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, and William C. Hunter as Associate Economist from the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, to serve until the next election at the first
meeting of the Committee after December 31, 1995, with the
understanding that in the event of the discontinuance of their
official connection with the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
Chicago respectively, they would cease to have any official connection
with the Federal Open Market Committee.
On January 12, 1995, the continuing rules, regulations, and
other instruments of the Committee had been distributed with the
advice that, in accordance with procedures approved by the Committee,
they were being called to the Committee's attention to give members an
opportunity to raise any questions they might have concerning them.
Members were asked to indicate if they wished to have any of
the instruments in question placed on the agenda, and no requests for
substantive consideration were received. Apart from the updating of
the Manager's title, all of the instruments identified below remained
in effect in their existing forms:
1. Federal Open Market Committee Rules.
Rules of Organization;
Rules of Procedure;
Rules Regarding Availability of Information;
Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve Banks;
Procedures for Allocation of Securities in the System Open
Market Account;
Resolution to Provide for the Continued Operation of the
Committee During an Emergency;
Resolution Authorizing Certain Actions by Federal Reserve
Banks During an Emergency;
Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Operations in
Federal Agency Issues.
2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal Reserve Bank as
agent to operate the System Account in case the New York Bank is
unable to function.
3. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open Market
Account.
4. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve
Banks.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market
Operations shown below was reaffirmed.
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
Reaffirmed March 28, 1995
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out
the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including
securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States in the open market, from
or to securities dealers and foreign and international accounts
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash,
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market
Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange maturing
U.S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement;
provided that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal
agency securities held in such Account (including forward commitments)
at the close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at
which action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $8.0 billion during
the period commencing with the opening of business on the day
following such meeting and ending with the close of business on the
day of the next such meeting;
(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery
basis, for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at
market discount rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up
to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the
current shipment of goods between countries or within the United
States, or (2) arise out of the storage within the United States of
goods under contract of sale or expected to move into the channels of
trade within a reasonable time and that are secured throughout their
life by a warehouse receipt or similar document conveying title to the
underlying goods; provided that the aggregate amount of bankers
acceptances held at any one time shall not exceed $100 million;
(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States, and prime bankers
acceptances of the types authorized for purchase under l(b) above,
from dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, obligations, or
acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates that, unless
otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, shall be determined
by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the
volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the
event U.S. Government securities or agency issues covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred
to the System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the
event bankers acceptances covered by any such agreement are not
repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be held by the
Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs
the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S. Government securities held in
the System Open Market Account to Government securities dealers and to
banks participating in Government securities clearing arrangements
conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as
the Committee may specify from time to time.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments
for foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open
Market Account, to sell U.S. Government securities to such foreign and
international accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph l(a) under
agreements providing for the resale by such accounts of those
securities within 15 calendar days on terms comparable to those
available on such transactions in the market: and (b) for New York
Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to
the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in
paragraph l(c), repurchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase
agreements between its own account and foreign and international
accounts maintained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may provide for a
service fee when appropriate.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency
Operations was amended to reflect the new title of Manager, System
Open Market Account.
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
Amended March 28, 1995
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to
the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency
directive and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions as the
Committee may issue from time to time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the
form of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the
open market at home and abroad, including transactions with the U.S.
Treasury, with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary
authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with
other international financial institutions:
Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Netherlands guilders
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts
to receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A
above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw
dollars under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph
2 below, provided that drawings by either party to any such
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the Committee,
because of exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies
not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open
position in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding
signs) of net positions in individual currencies. The net position in
a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that
currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, minus
outstanding contracts for future delivery of that currency, i.e., as
the sum of these elements with due regard to sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap"
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew
such arrangements on maturity:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of dollars equivalent)
Austrian National Bank
250
National Bank of Belgium
1,000
Bank of Canada
2,000
National Bank of Denmark
250
Bank of England
3,000
Bank of France
2,000
German Federal Bank
6,000
Bank of Italy
3,000
Bank of Japan
5,000
Bank of Mexico
Regular
3,000
Special
3,000
Netherlands Bank
500
Bank of Norway
250
Bank of Sweden
300
Swiss National Bank
4,000
Bank for International Settlements:
Dollars against Swiss francs
600
Dollars against authorized European currencies other than Swiss francs
1,250
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the
proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall
be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph
1.A. above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Committee, be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of
providing an investment return on System holdings of foreign
currencies, or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or
received in connection with swap drawings, transactions with foreign
central banks may be undertaken at non-market exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In
making operating arrangements with foreign central banks on System
holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or
understandings concerning the administration of the accounts
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign
banks designated by the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of
Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to the
Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances. Such
investments shall be in liquid form, and generally have no more than
12 months remaining to maturity. When appropriate in connection with
arrangements to provide investment facilities for foreign currency
holdings, U.S. Government securities may be purchased from foreign
central banks under agreements for repurchase of such securities
within 30 calendar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs
shall be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and
the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the
Board of Governors, and such other member of the Board as the Chairman
may designate (or in the absence of members of the Board serving on
the Subcommittee, other Board members designated by the Chairman as
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee,
his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at the
request of any member, or at the request of the Manager, System Open
Market Account ("Manager"), for the purposes of reviewing recent or
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other
matters relating to his responsibilities. At the request of any
member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and
consultations shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open
Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about
the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between
the System and the Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary
on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and
information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary
and Financial Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit
pertinent information on System foreign currency operations to
appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign
currency operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3
G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.
By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below
was reaffirmed.
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE
Reaffirmed March 28, 1995
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be
directed at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that
market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar reflect actions and behavior
consistent with the IMF Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign
exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with
selected foreign central banks and with the Bank for International
Settlements.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other
countries and with international monetary institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs
for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments
in particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange
Stabilization Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the
Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the
United States Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary
authorities; and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United
States in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange
arrangements under the IMF Article IV.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with Respect
to Foreign Currency Operations shown below were amended to reflect the
new title of Manager, System Open Market Account.
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
Amended March 28, 1995
In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency
Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager,
System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall be guided by the
following procedural understandings with respect to consultations and
clearances with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and
the Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant to
such clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on
any day or $600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the
Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150
million, or $300 million when the operation is associated with
repayment of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of
trading in a particular currency by the System, even though the change
in the System's net position in that currency might be less than the
limits specified in 1.B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the
Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the
full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion
since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the
Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System and about any
operations that are not of a routine character.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets and on System open market
transactions in foreign currencies during the period February 1, 1995,
through March 27, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
these transactions.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period February
1, 1995, through March 27, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
and financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over
the intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and
financial information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
expansion of economic activity had moderated considerably in early
1995. Slower growth in consumer spending, associated in part with a
sharp decline in expenditures for motor vehicles, and weakness in
housing purchases were factors in the moderation. Despite signs of
some weakening in final demand, however, further sizable gains had
been recorded in industrial production and payroll employment, and
overall rates of resource utilization remained high. Broad indexes of
consumer and producer prices had risen more rapidly on average over
January and February, but wages had shown no sign of an acceleration.
Nonfarm payroll employment increased considerably over
January and February, although the average monthly advance was
somewhat smaller than that of 1994. Further brisk job gains were
recorded in the January-February period in manufacturing; hiring in
retail and wholesale trade and in the service-producing sector slowed
a bit; and construction payrolls changed little on balance. The
average workweek of production or nonsupervisory workers remained at a
high level over the two months. The civilian unemployment rate rose
in January but fell back in February to its December level of 5.4
percent.
The expansion in industrial production also moderated in
January and February from the rapid pace of last year. Manufacturing
production grew less rapidly, with output gains down sharply in
February for consumer durable goods and construction supplies. Mining
production continued to be sluggish. By contrast, the output of
utilities surged during the January-February period as winter
temperatures, which had been unusually warm, moved back toward normal,
Capacity utilization rates, which were little changed over the first
two months of the year, remained high.
Retail sales fell in February, reversing most of a sizable
rise in January. The February declines in sales were widespread, with
slippage evident at most types of retail outlets. Most indicators of
housing activity had weakened in recent months in lagged response to
the earlier rise in mortgage interest rates. Housing starts fell
sharply in January and edged still lower in February; these declines
more than erased the gains that had been posted on balance over the
closing months of 1994. A substantial drop in sales of existing homes
in January (latest data) extended the trend that had been evident for
some months.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods recorded another
strong advance in February. Shipments of office and computing
equipment rebounded in February from declines in December and January,
and demand for most other types of equipment remained brisk. Business
outlays for heavy trucks fell back slightly in February after a surge
in January. While there were tentative signs in the recent orders
data of some deceleration in business equipment spending, the still-growing backlog of unfilled orders suggested further solid expansion
in business spending on equipment. Nonresidential construction
activity had been trending appreciably higher over the past two years;
however, a slowdown in spending by public utilities in December and
January, in an environment of uncertainty related to pending
deregulation, and a third straight monthly decline in permit issuance
for nonresidential structures in February pointed to some softening in
the uptrend.
Business inventory investment surged in January after a
slowdown in December; excluding a large increase in stocks of motor
vehicles at the wholesale and retail levels, inventories rose in
January at about the average rate of the final three quarters of 1994.
In manufacturing, inventory accumulation outpaced sales in January;
the stocks-to-sales ratio edged higher but was still near historical
lows. At wholesale establishments, inventory accumulation picked up
in January as a large rise in automotive inventories more than offset
a reduced increase in stocks of other goods. The inventory-to-sales
ratio for the sector moved higher in January but remained well within
its range of the last several years. At the retail level, inventories
jumped in January after a slight decline in December; almost all the
rise reflected increased stocks of motor vehicles. The inventory-to-sales ratio for the retail sector as a whole was unchanged in January
and remained near the middle of its range of recent years, at
automotive dealerships, the inventory-to-sales ratio rose sharply
while elsewhere the ratio edged lower.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened sharply in January from its December level and its average
rate in the fourth quarter; some of the increase in the deficit was
due to trade with Mexico, but somewhat distorted seasonal adjustment
factors also may have been involved. The value of exports of goods
and services declined substantially in January after having increased
strongly in November and December. The value of imports rose
considerably in January, continuing the pattern of the fourth quarter.
The export losses and import gains in January were distributed widely
across major trade categories. The pace of economic recovery in the
major foreign industrial countries appeared to have moderated in
recent months. In the fourth quarter, economic activity declined in
Japan and grew more slowly in most of the other major industrial
countries; growth had picked up in Canada. Available data suggested
that in the first quarter economic expansion had slowed in all of the
major foreign industrial countries except Japan, where growth appeared
to be positive despite the Kobe earthquake.
Consumer price increases in January and February were a
little larger than the average monthly rise in 1994. Food prices were
unchanged on balance over the two-month period, while energy prices
were up only slightly. Producer prices of finished goods increased in
January and February at the same rate as consumer prices; producer
price inflation for the two months also was higher than in 1994, with
a steep rise in gasoline prices in January contributing to the pickup.
Producer prices of intermediate materials surged in the first two
months of this year after having accelerated sharply in the second
half of 1994. Average hourly earnings of private production or
nonsupervisory workers were unchanged in February after a substantial
rise in January. For the two months combined, hourly earnings
increased at about the same average monthly pace as in 1994.
At its meeting on January 31-February 1, 1995, the Committee
adopted a directive that called for increasing somewhat the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions, taking account of a possible
rise of 1/2 percentage point in the discount rate. The directive
approved by the Committee did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any further adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period. Accordingly, the directive stated that in the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater or
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with moderate growth of M2
and M3 over coming months.
On the second day of the meeting, the Board of Governors
approved an increase of one-half percentage point in the discount
rate, to 5-1/4 percent. The rise was made effective immediately and
was passed through fully to interest rates in reserve markets. Open
market operations during the intermeeting period were conducted with a
view to maintaining the tighter policy stance adopted at the meeting
and implemented immediately thereafter. The federal funds rate
averaged a little less than 6 percent over the intermeeting interval,
and adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was a little below anticipated
levels.
Financial market participants generally had expected a
firming in reserve market conditions, and consequently market interest
rates showed little immediate reaction. Subsequently, most market
interest rates declined considerably in response to both incoming data
that were seen as indicating an appreciable slowing in the pace of
economic expansion and statements by Federal Reserve officials that
were viewed as suggesting that the period of monetary policy
tightening might be coming to a close. The largest declines in yields
were concentrated in intermediate- and long-term obligations.
Stronger-than-expected earnings reports coupled with heightened
prospects for sustained, moderate economic expansion and continued low
inflation boosted major indexes of equity prices to record levels.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies fell substantially
further. The dollar's decline was particularly sharp against the
Japanese yen and the German mark, and post-World War II record lows
against these two currencies were recorded. Declines in U.S. interest
rates and concerns about the persistence of large U.S. trade and
fiscal deficits appeared to have contributed to the dollar's drop.
Continuing economic and financial problems in Mexico, which resulted
in further depreciation on balance of the Mexican peso against the
dollar, also seemed to add to negative sentiment toward the dollar
because the process of adjustment in the Mexican economy to the lower
value of the peso was viewed as implying reduced imports from and
increased exports to the United States.
M2 declined, and growth of M3 slowed in February after
sizable January gains; data for the first part of March pointed to
some recovery in both aggregates. M2's weakness in February partly
reflected an unwinding of temporary increases in January of its
volatile components, including demand deposits, overnight repurchase
agreements, and overnight Eurodollars; the weakness also appeared to
be associated with depositor efforts to obtain higher returns by
shifting funds into market instruments. The slowdown in growth of M3
in February was entirely attributable to the decline in M2; its non-M2
component increased substantially further as banks continued to rely
heavily on managed liabilities to fund loan growth. Expansion of
total domestic nonfinancial debt had picked up a little in recent
months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth of economic activity was slowing and for some period ahead
would average a little less than the rate of increase in the economy's
potential output. The pace of the expansion seemed to have slackened
somewhat more than had been anticipated at the last meeting; however,
the recent declines in long-term interest rates and the rally in stock
prices were expected to provide additional support for aggregate
demand later in the year. Moreover, the substantial depreciation of
the dollar against the yen and several European currencies was acting
to offset some of the effects on demand of the previous tightening of
reserve conditions. The forecast continued to anticipate that in the
period ahead consumer spending would be restrained by smaller gains in
real incomes, the substantial degree to which pent-up demands had been
satisfied, and the lagged effects of earlier increases in interest
rates on the demand for durable goods. Business outlays for new
equipment would decelerate substantially in response to slower growth
of sales and profits. Homebuilding was projected to decline somewhat
further in the near term and to remain at somewhat subdued levels for
a time in reflection of the damping effects on housing demand of
slower growth in jobs and incomes and of the earlier rise in mortgage
rates. Developments in Mexico were likely to interrupt only briefly a
strong uptrend in U.S. exports, based on sustained growth in the
economies of other U.S. trading partners. Considerable uncertainty
continued to surround the federal fiscal outlook but, as in the
previous forecast, a moderate pace of deficit reduction was assumed
over the forecast horizon. In the staff's judgment, the economy was
operating beyond its long-run, noninflationary capacity, and there
remained a risk that higher inflation could emerge if the expansion
did not moderate sufficiently.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, the members agreed that the pace of the
economic expansion was moderating, though the extent of the slowdown
was not yet clear. The effects of the policy tightening implemented
since early 1994 seemed to be showing through in interest-sensitive
sectors, and those effects were expected to be reinforced by some
cutback in inventory accumulation from the unsustainable rates of
previous quarters. Quarters of fairly slow growth were not unusual in
a period of expansion. On the whole, however, the economy appeared to
retain considerable forward momentum, with current imbalances
seemingly of a relatively minor nature and in the process of being
corrected. Moreover, the recent declines in long-term interest rates,
if these persisted, could provide fresh support for interest-sensitive
spending later in 1995 and in 1996. While opinions differed somewhat
with respect to both the likely extent of the slowdown and the
prognosis for inflation, the members generally agreed that the economy
appeared to be on a trajectory toward a more sustainable path for
economic activity. However, a number of members expressed concern
that the slowdown might not be sufficient to relieve the persisting
pressures on labor and capital resources, thereby portending higher
inflation.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, members
reported on widespread signs that business activity, while still quite
strong in many areas, was growing less rapidly on balance. Still, a
number of factors pointed to continued solid expansion. Business
sentiment was generally described as quite positive, though somewhat
less ebullient than in earlier months. Likewise, recent surveys
suggested that consumer confidence remained very favorable, though
down slightly from recent peaks by most measures. In addition to the
favorable recent developments in financial markets, bank lending
policies remained quite accommodative, although business loan growth
had slowed recently after a period of unusual strength.
In their review of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members took note of the sluggishness in consumer spending
that had emerged in recent months in much of the country. To a
considerable extent the recent weakness reflected a sharp reduction in
spending for motor vehicles, but there also were signs in the most
recent data of broader declines in spending, especially for durable
goods other than automobiles. Some reduction in spending for durable
goods could be expected in lagged response to the policy tightening
over the past year, but a few members noted that unusual weather might
have led to the temporary postponement of some discretionary
purchases. In assessing the recent spending patterns, it was
difficult to determine whether they represented a temporary pause or a
more prolonged pullback by consumers. On balance, however, growth in
consumer spending probably would slow somewhat further to a rate more
in line with the expansion in jobs and incomes. Consumer spending
would tend to be sustained, however, by the ready availability of
consumer financing and the rise in bond and stock prices, which had
strengthened household balance sheets and perhaps was helping to
bolster consumer confidence.
The housing market had weakened noticeably according to
incoming data and anecdotal reports from around the country. The
decline in home sales that began in the latter part of 1994 had
persisted, and housing starts had fallen sharply in the early part of
the year as a consequence of the weaker sales and a larger inventory
of unsold homes. Partly because of the higher mortgage rates that had
prevailed for some time, members anticipated still soft housing
demand, particularly for single-family houses. There had been some
reports that recent declines in mortgage interest rates were having a
mitigating effect. In some parts of the country, the weakness in
housing construction was being countered by further improvement in
nonresidential construction activity. In other areas where commercial
real estate conditions remained soft, declines in vacancy rates seemed
to be preparing the way for a pickup in commercial building activity.
Committee members anticipated that growth of business
investment in plant and equipment would moderate from the
extraordinary rate of the last two years but that such investment
would continue to support growth in aggregate final demand during the
forecast period. The demand for durable equipment was expected to
increase more gradually as the growth of economic activity slowed and
business profits tended to flatten out, and the available data on
equipment expenditures thus far in 1995 appeared to be in line with
that expectation. However, some anecdotal reports suggested that
investment in plant and equipment might be stronger than expected in
an environment of tight labor supply and elevated levels of capacity
utilization, intense desires to control costs and improve
competitiveness, and a still relatively low user cost of capital. The
desire for additional production capacity was reflected in spending
for the construction of commercial and industrial structures, which
remained on an uptrend.
The rapid rise in business inventories in recent quarters
had been sustainable in the context of briskly increasing final sales,
but with some further accumulation early in the first quarter and
economic growth projected to moderate, the rate of inventory
investment would have to adjust downward as well. While the timing
and extent could not be anticipated with any precision, a short-term
inventory correction process might already be under way, with firms
initiating cutbacks to production schedules to reflect smaller-than-expected gains in sales over recent months. Members noted that
inventory-to-sales ratios already were at generally low levels and
they anticipated that any desired adjustments to production would be
made quickly. In the circumstances, the size of the inventory
correction and its effect on economic activity would be limited.
Moreover, reports of inventory shortages in some industries suggested
that many firms might raise their desired inventory levels to protect
against shortfalls in materials needed in the production process.
The defeat of the balanced budget amendment in Congress had
clouded the outlook for deficit reduction. Nonetheless, a moderately
restrictive fiscal policy that would provide for some progress toward
a balanced budget during the forecast period was seen as a reasonable
assumption. One member observed that there was a risk of a more
restrictive fiscal policy arising out of the dynamics of the current
political debate. In any event, any progress toward a balanced budget
might be expected to have a favorable effect on domestic financial
markets and perhaps also on the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
Members commented that considerable uncertainty surrounded
the outlook for the external sector, but for now it seemed reasonable
to forecast that this sector would make a small positive contribution,
on balance, to the growth of economic activity over the forecast
period. In the near term, economic developments in Mexico were
leading to lower U.S. exports and higher imports; anecdotal reports
suggested that the effects on trade flows and local business activity
tended to be felt most strongly in states that border Mexico.
However, there were signs that conditions were stabilizing in Mexico,
and more generally the relatively robust growth projected for the
major trading partners of the United States and the lower value of the
dollar now prevailing were expected to foster improvement in the
nation's trade balance.
Members noted that while the pace of the expansion evidently
had slowed, economic activity and utilization of labor and other
producer resources were still at very high levels. Prices of many
materials inputs to the production process had risen sharply, but thus
far there had been only a small pickup in consumer prices. Likewise,
the persisting tightness in many labor markets had not to this point
fostered appreciable increases in wages. The absence of a significant
rise in prices of finished goods or in wages might reflect in some
measure the lags in the inflation transmission process, the fruits of
heavy business investments in new capacity and more productive
equipment in recent years, and perhaps structural changes in business
organization that were raising the economy's capacity for sustained,
noninflationary activity. Members were concerned, however, that
despite continuing competitive pressures and some recent abatement in
materials prices, business firms were reporting greater success in
passing cost increases through to prices. The depreciation of the
dollar also would add to inflationary pressures in the economy. In
these circumstances, the members generally concluded that some
increase in inflation was likely in coming months.
In the Committee's discussion of monetary policy for the
intermeeting period ahead, all the members endorsed a proposal to
maintain an unchanged degree of pressure in reserve markets. The
policy tightening that had been implemented since early 1994 appeared
to be exerting a desired restraining effect on the growth of economic
activity and associated demands for goods and services. But the
extent of the slowing in growth and its effects on inflationary
pressures were not yet clear. On balance, though, the available
evidence tended to suggest that the economy might be moving toward a
growth path for economic activity that would be consistent with
limiting the uptick in inflation that was currently being experienced.
In discussing their policy choices, several members noted the
relatively steep decline in the value of the dollar. However, they
believed that policy should not be directed toward the achievement of
a specific level for the dollar but rather toward the implementation
of an effective anti-inflationary monetary policy, taking account of
all the factors bearing on the economic outlook. In current
circumstances, and given the substantial uncertainties that were
involved, the members believed that it would be prudent to pause and
assess developments before taking any further policy action.
With regard to possible adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period, most members expressed a preference for an
asymmetric directive tilted toward restraint. These members indicated
that near-term developments were not likely to call for an adjustment
to policy in either direction. Nonetheless, with the economy expected
to be operating in the neighborhood of its potential, the recent rise
in inflation and the risk of an unexpected impulse that could ratchet
inflation even higher suggested that an asymmetric directive would be
more consistent with the Committee's objective of moving over time
toward price stability. The economy retained considerable forward
momentum and, as had often happened in the past, the recent slowdown
in growth could prove to be temporary, with additional monetary
tightening needed at some point to contain inflation. In this
connection a few members indicated that further tightening might well
be needed sooner rather than later. An asymmetric directive also
would provide a clear signal of the Committee's intention to resist
higher inflation.
A few members preferred a symmetric directive. These
members agreed that additional policy tightening might be needed if
inflation began to pick up. However, they saw an undesirably weaker
economic performance as being about equally likely, and in their view
this balance in the risks to the outlook called for the adoption of a
symmetric directive. The Committee's determination to keep inflation
under control would be appropriately conveyed, in their view, through
future actions rather than through the adoption of a tilt toward
restraint. However, these members indicated that they could accept an
asymmetric intermeeting instruction.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they preferred or could support a directive
that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that included a bias toward the possible firming of
reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable and
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with moderate growth of M2 and
M3 over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the expansion of economic activity has moderated
considerably in early 1995. Nonfarm payroll employment
rose appreciably further in January and February, but
at a pace below the average monthly gain in 1994; the
civilian unemployment rate, after rising in January,
fell back in February to its December level of 5.4
percent. Advances in industrial production also
moderated in January and February, and capacity
utilization rates generally changed little from already
high levels. Total retail sales were about unchanged
over the two months. Housing starts have declined
somewhat after posting sizable gains on balance during
the closing months of 1994. Orders for nondefense
capital goods point to a still strong expansion of
spending on business equipment, but with tentative
signs of some deceleration; nonresidential construction
has been trending appreciably higher. The nominal
deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services widened
sharply in January from its average rate in the fourth
quarter. Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices
increased faster on average over January and February.
On February 1, 1995, the Board of Governors
approved an increase from 4-3/4 to 5-1/4 percent in the
discount rate, and in keeping with the Committee's
decision at the January 31-February 1 meeting, the
increase was allowed to show through fully to interest
rates in reserve markets. Nonetheless, most market
interest rates have declined somewhat since the
Committee meeting; the largest declines have been
concentrated in intermediate- and long-term obligations. In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies was down substantially further over the
intermeeting period. The Mexican peso has continued to
depreciate against the dollar.
M2 and M3 weakened in February, though data for
the first part of March pointed to some rebound.
Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt has picked
up a little in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting on January 31-February 1 established ranges for
growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee
anticipated that money growth within these ranges would
be consistent with its broad policy objectives. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was lowered to 3 to 7 percent for the
year. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, May 23, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
