








FRB: FOMC Minutes--November 15, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of November 15, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,  on Wednesday, November 15,  1995,  at 9:00  a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. 	Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. 	Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. 	Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. 	Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. 	Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. 	Baxter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. 	Prell, Economist
Mr. 	Truman, Economist
Messrs. Davis, Hunter, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Reinhart,1 Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Ramm,1 Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rolnick, and
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas
respectively
Messrs. Gavin and Kopcke, Mses. Krieger and
Rosenbaum, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, Boston, New York, and
Atlanta respectively
Mr. Stevens, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland
1. Did not attend portion of meeting covering the monetary policy discussion.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on September 26, 1995, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
recent developments in foreign exchange markets and on System foreign
currency transactions during the period September 26, 1995, through
November 14, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these
transactions.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period September
26, 1995, through November 14, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the renewal for
an additional one-year period of the System's reciprocal currency
("swap") arrangements with foreign central banks and the Bank for
International Settlements that were due to mature on various dates in
December 1995. The renewal encompassed all the System's swap
arrangements except that with the Bank of Mexico, which is scheduled
to mature on January 31, 1996, and will be considered at a later
meeting. The amounts and maturity dates of the arrangements approved
for renewal are shown in the table that follows:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of $ equivalent)
Term
(months)
Maturitydate
Austrian National Bank
$ 250.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Bank of England
3,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Bank of Japan
5,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Bank of Norway
250.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Bank of Sweden
300.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Swiss National Bank
4,000.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Bank for International Settlements --
Swiss francs
600.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
Other authorized European currencies
1,250.0
12 mos.
12/04/95
National Bank of Belgium
1,000.0
12 mos.
12/18/95
Bank of Canada
2,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/95
National Bank of Denmark
250.0
12 mos.
12/28/95
Bank of France
2,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/95
German Federal Bank
6,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/95
Bank of Italy
3,000.0
12 mos.
12/28/95
Netherlands Bank
500.0
12 mos.
12/28/95
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information available at the time of the meeting was
mixed, but on balance it suggested a more moderate rate of expansion
of economic activity after a strong gain during the summer. Consumer
spending had turned sluggish recently; but with order backlogs still
large, business spending for durable equipment was continuing at a
robust if somewhat less rapid rate, and the sizable rise in housing
starts in the third quarter presaged higher residential construction
outlays. Appreciable increases in employment and hours worked tended
to confirm that the economy had continued to expand at a solid pace,
although manufacturing activity had weakened a little. Consumer and
producer prices had risen more slowly on average in recent months
after having increased at elevated rates in the early part of the
year, and growth in labor costs had slowed further.
Nonfarm payroll employment, though held down somewhat by the
onset of a labor strike in the aircraft industry, increased in October
at the average monthly pace of the third quarter; in addition,
aggregate hours worked by private production workers rose appreciably
further. Construction payrolls recorded another sizable advance. The
rate of job growth in the services industry slowed a little further,
reflecting a decline in employment in personnel supply services after
two months of strong advances. Manufacturing employment declined
again. The civilian unemployment rate edged down in October to 5.5
percent.
Industrial production fell somewhat in October after having
risen appreciably in the third quarter; most of the loss reflected the
strike in the aircraft industry, but motor vehicle production and
mining output also recorded substantial declines. In contrast,
production of information processing equipment continued to rise at a
rapid pace. Total utilization of industrial capacity contracted in
October, with declines widespread across industries.
Total nominal retail sales, which had expanded relatively
briskly over the second and third quarters, fell in October. As part
of a pattern of widespread weakness in October, purchases at furniture
and appliance stores were down appreciably after large gains in
earlier months, and sales at general merchandise and apparel outlets
reversed most of their sizable September increases. Housing demand
and construction activity firmed in the third quarter: Sales of both
new and existing homes posted solid advances, and single-family
housing starts rose considerably, though multifamily starts remained
sluggish.
Business investment in both equipment and structures expanded
less rapidly in the third quarter. Stepped-up shipments of nondefense
capital goods in August and September more than offset a sharp drop in
shipments in July, but the quarterly average gain was significantly
smaller than the increases recorded in the previous two quarters.
Although orders for nondefense capital goods also rose more slowly in
the third quarter, the still-sizable order backlogs pointed to
substantial expansion of spending on business equipment in the near
term. Nonresidential construction increased appreciably further in
the third quarter, reflecting a surge in office and institutional
building activity.
Available data suggested a reduction in business inventory
accumulation in August and September. In manufacturing, the pace of
stockbuilding slowed in the third quarter from the brisk rate of the
first half of the year, leaving the factory stock-shipments ratio
unchanged in the third quarter and a little above historic lows. In
the wholesale sector, inventories were drawn down in August and
September after sizable buildups in earlier months; with sales weak,
the aggregate inventory-sales ratio for the sector edged up in the
third quarter and was at the upper end of its range for recent years.
Retail inventories expanded significantly in August (latest data
available), but the stockbuilding was generally in line with sales and
the ratio of inventories to sales remained near the middle of its
range in recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
narrowed markedly in August; for July and August-combined, the deficit
was significantly smaller than its average rate in the second quarter.
The value of exports declined over the two-month period, with
increases in exports of computers and agricultural products more than
offset by decreases in exports of aircraft, gold, and service
receipts. Imports fell more than exports; with the notable exception
of computers and semiconductors, declines were recorded in most major
import categories. Available data indicated that economic expansion
remained subdued in the major foreign industrial countries. Growth
continued to slow in the European economies other than Italy, and the
Japanese economy showed little evidence of a sustained recovery.
Consumer prices rose at a slightly faster rate in October;
with a smaller increase in food prices offsetting higher energy
prices, the index for items other than food and energy also picked up
a little. For the four months ending in October, prices for nonfood,
non-energy items advanced at a rate well below that of earlier in the
year. Producer prices of finished goods edged down in October,
reflecting a further decline in the prices of finished energy goods.
Excluding food and energy, producer prices were unchanged in October
and increased at a slower pace in the third quarter than in the first
half of the year. Growth in total nominal hourly compensation of
private industry workers slowed in the third quarter and, on a year-over-year basis, continued to trend down: the decrease in compensation
growth over the past year spanned most major occupations and
industries.
At its meeting on September 26, 1995, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. The directive stated that in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions associated with this directive were
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the balance of
the year at a pace near that experienced in recent months.
Open market operations were directed toward maintaining the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions throughout the
intermeeting period. The federal funds rate averaged close to 5-3/4
percent, apart from a temporary rise around the end of the third
quarter. Other short-term market rates also changed little on
balance; market participants continued to anticipate an easing of
monetary policy at some point but apparently viewed the chances of
near-term easing as small. Longer-term interest rates declined
further over the intermeeting period, perhaps in response to a growing
conviction that inflation pressures would remain subdued and that
substantial reductions in fiscal deficits would be achieved over a
period of years. The lower longer-term interest rates, coupled with
continuing reports of strong corporate earnings, helped lift major
indexes of equity prices to new record levels during the period. In
foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in
terms of the other G-10 currencies declined slightly over the
intermeeting period.
Expansion of the broad monetary aggregates weakened in
October. M2 was unchanged in October after having grown relatively
rapidly in the third quarter and despite the persistence of low
opportunity costs associated with holding M2 assets. For the year
through October, M2 expanded at a rate in the upper half of the
Committee's range for this aggregate in 1995. Growth of M3 apparently
was held down somewhat by the reduced need for additional bank funding
during a time of sluggish loan demand; for the year to date, M3 grew
at a rate a little above its range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt
had risen more slowly in recent months, reflecting reduced expansion
of both private and federal borrowing. Nonetheless, for the year to
date, this measure of debt remained around the midpoint of its
monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
the growth of economic activity would slow from the strong third-quarter pace to a rate more in line with the increase in the economy's
potential. The forecast assumed that the favorable interest-rate and
wealth effects of the extended rally in the debt and equity markets
would provide support for a moderate advance in final sales. Consumer
spending was expected to expand at a rate generally in line with the
growth of incomes; the favorable effects of higher prices on financial
assets held by households would be offset to some extent by the
difficulties of increasing numbers of households in servicing their
growing debts. The greater affordability of housing stemming from the
earlier decline in mortgage rates was projected to help sustain
homebuilding activity at a relatively high level. In anticipation of
reduced growth in sales and profits, business investment in new
equipment and structures was projected to slow appreciably from the
very rapid pace of the past few years. Strong export expansion would
be associated with the improving outlook for the economies of major
trading partners. Although substantial uncertainty still surrounded
the fiscal outlook, the forecast continued to incorporate a
considerable degree of fiscal restraint. In the staff's judgment,
wage and price inflation likely would not deviate significantly from
recent levels.
In the Committee's discussion, members commented that recent
statistical and anecdotal information pointed on balance to an
appreciable slowing in the economic expansion, which had displayed
unexpected strength during the summer months. There was some mix of
views among the members concerning how far the slowing might proceed,
though they generally viewed moderate growth as the most likely course
for the economy. A number of members believed that growth around
potential was a probable outcome, with business activity sustained in
part by the favorable developments this year in the bond and stock
markets. Other members expressed concern about some signs of further
ebbing in the strength of final demands, and they envisaged the
possible need for a policy adjustment at some point to sustain
continued moderate growth. With regard to inflation, members noted
that despite generally high levels of resource use, including tight
labor markets in many parts of the country, inflation had been more
subdued than many had expected over the past several months. A number
of members commented that they saw a basis in this development for
mild optimism about the outlook for inflation, but others expressed
concern that, in the context of current forecasts for economic
activity and relatively high levels of resource use, progress toward
lower inflation was unlikely over the projection period and indeed
there was a risk of some modest deterioration in price performance.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, members reported
on uneven business conditions in different parts of the country and
among industries. On balance, modest to moderate growth appeared to
characterize most regions, with overall levels of activity ranging
from relatively robust in some regions to comparatively depressed in
others. The mixed conditions were especially notable in manufacturing
where numerous producers faced lagging demands while others,
particularly in high-tech industries, found it difficult to satisfy
strong demands for their products. More generally, the industrial
sector of the economy had tended to stagnate for some time, including
a slight decline in manufacturing activity reported for October, but
recent improvement in orders for steel was cited as a favorable if not
decisive omen in the outlook for industrial production. In other
sectors of the economy, members observed that tourism displayed
considerable strength in many areas, while cattle operations and
energy production were adversely affected by high production costs or
low prices.
In their review of developments in key demand sectors of the
economy, members observed that consumer spending appeared to be on a
firm growth trend, though weakness in overall sales of motor vehicles
in recent months and a decline in total retail sales in October had
introduced a cautionary note. It was suggested that the performance
of retail sales during the holiday season would tend to set the tone
for the longer-term trend in such sales, and in this respect available
data and anecdotal reports covering the first part of November were
somewhat promising. More generally, further growth in consumer
spending, though probably at a somewhat slower pace than over the past
year, appeared likely. Such growth would be supported by moderate
expansion in incomes and by the favorable effects on household wealth
and confidence of the substantial improvement in the value of
financial assets this year and the ready availability of financing on
relatively attractive terms. Consumer confidence currently seemed to
be at a fairly high level, albeit not uniformly so across the country,
and at least for the quarters immediately ahead, anticipated strength
in homebuilding should induce spending for many household durables.
On the negative side, some members emphasized that the growth in
consumer debt was likely to exert an increasingly inhibiting effect on
consumer spending. Moreover, the satisfaction of earlier pent-up
demands might well limit sales of many consumer durables, notably
motor vehicles, in coming quarters. In one view, the projected growth
in personal incomes and the increases that had occurred this year in
the value of household holdings of financial assets would provide
relatively little stimulus to consumer spending because the
distribution of such gains was heavily tilted toward consumers in
higher income or older age groups.
Further sizable growth in business fixed investment, but at a
pace well below that experienced in recent years, was expected to
provide appreciable impetus to the expansion over the next several
quarters. Favorable factors in the outlook for business capital
spending included a desire to upgrade technological capabilities for
competitive reasons, strong business earnings and cash flows, and an
ample availability of financing on relatively liberal terms.
Declining office vacancy rates in a number of areas would help to
support office construction, and several members also commented on the
strength in commercial and other nonresidential building activity in
various parts of the country.
Ongoing efforts by many business firms to bring inventories into better alignment with sales had resulted in declining inventory investment since earlier in the year. Some further inventory adjustments, notably in stocks of motor vehicles, were expected over coming months, though not at a pace that would have a marked retarding effect on economic activity. Over much of 1996, inventory investment was projected to be a more neutral factor in the economy, with accumulation proceeding at a pace in line with growth in final sales, but the risks of unexpected developments in this sector of the economy were always substantial.
The outlook for fiscal policy remained obscured by the
uncertain outcome of the current debate between the Congress and the
Administration. While substantial fiscal restraint aimed at
eventually balancing the budget appeared to be the likely result, the
timing of the implementation of various tax and expenditure
initiatives and the resulting extent of the fiscal restraint over the
forecast period could not be anticipated with any degree of precision.
For the nearer term, the ongoing shutdown of much of the federal
government presented a downside risk to the expansion whose effects
would depend on the presently uncertain duration of the shutdown and
the potential unsettlement in financial markets that might develop at
some point. The members generally believed, however, that in light of
the underlying strength of the economy, the retarding effects of
likely federal budget developments would not be sufficient in
themselves to arrest the expansion over the forecast period, at least
if the federal government shutdown were of relatively short duration
and a federal debt default were averted.
The nation's foreign trade deficit had worsened substantially
during the past several years, but current forecasts did not point to
further deterioration over the projection period. An anticipated
firming in the economies of major U.S. trading partners was expected
to bolster exports. Several members questioned, however, the extent
to which forecasts of strengthening economic activity were likely to
materialize in a number of these countries, and they suggested that
the foreign sector might well remain a somewhat constraining factor in
the performance of the domestic economy.
Members welcomed the generally favorable price and cost
developments of recent months and the related indications that
currently high levels of resource use did not appear to be associated
with rising inflationary pressures. Many emphasized the persistence
of subdued increases in labor costs, and a number provided supporting
anecdotal indications of relatively small advances in labor compensation in many parts of the country despite tight labor markets. The
anecdotal reports also continued to suggest that strong competition
was holding down price inflation and that producers were benefiting
from soft prices of industrial materials. While a number of members
believed that these developments might augur a modest decline in
inflation over the year ahead, given current forecasts of moderate
economic expansion, many viewed as more likely the prospect of little
or no progress toward price stability over coming quarters and some
expressed concern about the potential for an upward drift in the rate
of inflation. An underlying factor in the relatively favorable
climate for inflation was the continued limited rise in the costs of
worker benefits. In the view of some members, however, benefit costs
were likely to be less well contained as time went on and further
major gains in curbing such costs became more difficult to achieve.
Moreover, worker willingness to accept relatively limited increases in
wages and other compensation might well begin to erode as concerns
about job security tended to diminish after an extended period of
relatively low unemployment. On balance, recent experience had raised
questions about the relationship between levels of resource use and
inflation that warranted careful monitoring.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all but one member favored or could accept an unchanged
policy stance. This policy position took account of current indications of a generally acceptable rate of economic growth and the
absence of any clear signs regarding the future strength of the
expansion in relation to the economy's potential or the future course
of inflation. Several commented that current monetary policy might be
viewed as somewhat restrictive, though the degree of restraint was
difficult to calibrate and it did not appear as yet to be inhibiting
declines in intermediate- and long-term interest rates, increases in
stock prices, or the availability of financing from lending
institutions.
Members expressed somewhat differing views regarding the
stance of monetary policy that was likely to prove consistent with the
Committee's objectives over time. In the view of some, private
spending was not likely to have sufficient momentum to overcome the
effects of increased fiscal restraint if the current stance of
monetary policy were maintained. In the circumstances, an easing at
some point would be needed to foster sustained economic growth at an
acceptable pace and would be consistent with progress toward the
System's price stability objective. For most of these members,
however, the stronger-than-expected performance of the economy in the
third quarter had reduced the urgency of such a policy move and had
created enough uncertainties to justify a careful appraisal of
unfolding developments before a decision was made to ease policy. In
the view of one member, the probability of a shortfall from an
acceptable rate of economic expansion was sufficiently high to require
an immediate easing of policy. Other members believed that an
unchanged policy was desirable under current conditions and that the
direction and timing of the next policy move was more open to
question. Not only were recent data giving an uncertain picture of
the underlying strength of aggregate demand, but current forecasts
generally did not point to progress toward the System's long-run goal
of price stability. In this view, therefore, the current stance of
monetary policy, even if slightly restrictive, was likely to be
consistent with satisfactory economic growth over time and it would
provide better assurance of consolidating gains against inflation and
fostering some further moderation in price increases over coming
years. With regard to potential fiscal policy developments, although
an especially broad range of outcomes seemed possible, the members
agreed that the Committee could not freeze its policy options while it
awaited the outcome of a prolonged federal budget debate nor could it
commit itself to a specific response to a particular fiscal policy
agreement. Fiscal policy and any associated market reactions would be
among the many factors that would have to be taken into account in the
formulation of monetary policy.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting
adjustments to monetary policy, a majority of the members expressed a
preference for retaining a symmetric directive. In their view, the
potential need to adjust policy during the relatively short intermeeting period was remote and some of these members also believed that the
direction of the next adjustment to policy was uncertain. A few also
noted that the adoption of a biased intermeeting instruction at this
point might send an unintended message regarding the prevailing view
within the Committee concerning the risks to the expansion. The
remaining members said that they preferred a directive that was tilted
toward an easing policy action. Such an instruction in the directive
would be consistent with what they viewed as the most likely policy
course over coming months. They agreed, however, that the current
uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook were not likely to be
resolved during the weeks immediately ahead and since no policy action
was likely to be required in this period, they could accept a
symmetric directive.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but one
of the members indicated that they could vote for a directive that
called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that did not include a presumption about the likely
direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the
Committee decided that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The
reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting were expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
a moderation in the expansion of economic activity
after a strong gain in the third quarter. Nonfarm
payroll employment increased further in October and the
civilian unemployment rate edged down to 5.5 percent.
Industrial production fell somewhat in October after a
moderate rise in the third quarter. Total nominal
retail sales were little changed on balance over
September and October. Single-family housing starts
were up considerably in the third quarter. Orders for
nondefense capital goods point to substantial expansion
of spending on business equipment in the near term;
nonresidential construction has risen appreciably
further. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods
and services narrowed over July and August from its
average rate in the second quarter. After increasing
at elevated rates in the early part of the year,
consumer and producer prices have risen more slowly on
average in recent months.
Short-term market interest rates have changed
little on balance since the Committee meeting on
September 26 while long-term rates have fallen
somewhat. In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies has declined slightly over the intermeeting
period.
In October, M2 was unchanged and M3 growth
moderated. For the year through October, M2 expanded
at a rate in the upper half of its range for 1995 and
M3 grew at a rate a little above its range. Growth in
total domestic nonfinancial debt has slowed somewhat in
recent months but for the year to date remains around
the midpoint of its monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the range it had established
on January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5
percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 3 to 7 percent for the
year that it had set for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt. The Committee raised the 1995 range
for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
1996, the Committee established on a tentative basis
the same ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Melzer,
Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Vote against this action: Mr. Lindsey.
Mr. Lindsey dissented because he believed that monetary
policy should be eased. The evidence suggested to him that in the
absence of an easing move the underlying rate of nominal GDP growth
was likely to be lower than needed to maintain real GDP at or near its
potential. The intermediate forecast was subject to a number of
significant risks: household balance sheets seemed unlikely to sustain
the current rate of durables expenditure for any extended period;
government expenditures were certain to be cut substantially; and with
fiscal contractions underway in Europe and Canada and severe financial
stresses present in Japan and Mexico, he did not see much likelihood
of a substantial expansion of exports. In keeping with his views, the
financial markets were signalling the likelihood that a weaker pace of
nominal GDP growth would materialize. The yield curve was virtually
flat, with government securities up through relatively long maturities
trading at yields below the current average federal funds rate. Thus,
markets would be unlikely to find some easing inappropriate and over
the intermediate horizon would view the current level of short-term
rates as unsustainable.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, December 19, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 1:35 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
