








FRB: FOMC Minutes--January 31-February 1, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting
of January 31-February 1, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., starting on Tuesday, January 31, 1995 at 1:30 p.m.
and continuing on Wednesday, February 1, 1995 at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Winn,1 Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Messrs. Hooper and Reinhart, Assistant Directors,
Divisions of International Finance and Monetary
Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Rosine,1 Senior Economist, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. English,1 Economist, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Freeman,1 Section Chief, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. O'Day,1 Associate General Counsel, Legal
Division, Board of Governors
Mr. Baer,1 and Ms. Misback,1 Managing Senior
Counsels, Legal Division, Board of Governors
Mr. Ely,1 Senior Attorney, Legal Division, Board
of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Barron and Rasdall, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and
Kansas City, respectively
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum,
Sniderman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, Dallas,
Cleveland, and Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Evans and Ms. Krieger, Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago
and New York, respectively
1. Attended portions of the meeting.
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices
of the election of the following members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee for the period commencing January 1,
1995, and ending December 31, 1995, had been received and that the
named individuals had executed their oaths of office.
The elected members and alternate members were as follows:
William J. McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, with James H. Oltman, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate;
Cathy E. Minehan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
with Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, as alternate;
Michael H. Moskow, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
with Jerry L. Jordan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, as alternate;
Thomas C. Melzer, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
with Robert D. McTeer, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, as alternate;
Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, with Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of their
successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee
after December 31, 1995, with the understanding that should they
discontinue their official connection with the Board of Governors or
with a Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any official
connection with the Federal Open Market Committee:
Alan Greenspan
Chairman
William J. McDonough
Vice Chairman
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary and Economist
Normand R. V. Bernard
Deputy Secretary
Joseph R. Coyne
Assistant Secretary
Gary P. Gillum
Assistant Secretary
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr.
General Counsel
Ernest T. Patrikis
Deputy General Counsel
Michael J. Prell
Economist
Edwin M. Truman
Economist
Lynn E. Browne, Thomas E. Davis,
William G. Dewald, David E. Lindsey,
Frederic S. Mishkin, Larry J. Promisel,
Charles J. Siegman, Lawrence Slifman,
David J. Stockton, and Carl E. Vander Wilt
Associate Economists
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account
until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after
December 31, 1995.
By unanimous vote, Peter R. Fisher was selected to serve at
the pleasure of the Committee as Manager, System Open Market Account,
on the understanding that his selection was subject to being
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Secretary's note: Advice subsequently was received
that the selection of Mr. Fisher was satisfactory to
the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on December 20, 1994, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets since the December meeting.
There were no market transactions for System Account during this
period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations during the period
December 20, 1994, through January 31, 1995. By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested a strong
further rise in economic activity during the closing months of 1994.
Although consumer spending appeared to be less buoyant and housing
demand had softened somewhat, growth in business investment, exports,
and inventories remained brisk. Industrial production and payroll
employment continued to record substantial gains. Broad indexes of
prices for consumer goods and services had risen moderately on average
over recent months despite shrinking margins of unemployed resources
and further sizable increases in the prices of many materials.
Nonfarm payroll employment advanced considerably further in
December after a sharp rise in November. Substantial job gains were
recorded in December in service industries and in the retail trade
sector. Hiring in manufacturing was brisk for a third straight month,
with labor demand especially strong in motor vehicles, capital goods,
and electronic equipment. Construction payrolls slipped after a large
increase in November. The average workweek was unchanged in December,
but factory overtime edged back up, matching the highest level reached
in the history of this series. The civilian unemployment rate
declined to 5.4 percent.
Industrial production registered another large advance in
December. Manufacturing accounted for all of the gain; an upturn in
mining production offset a decline in the output of utilities
associated with unseasonably warm weather. In manufacturing, the
output of motor vehicles and parts surged again and further solid
gains were recorded in the production of other goods. The large
advance in industrial output in December boosted rates of capacity
utilization above already high levels.
Retail sales were reported to have changed little over
November and December after substantial advances in September and
October; the flattening of sales reflected sharply reduced increases
in outlays for non-auto consumer goods. Consumer spending on services
rose moderately on balance over November and December, with outlays
for energy services held down by unusually mild weather. Although
some indicators of housing demand had weakened, housing starts posted
sizable gains on balance over November and December; single-family
construction remained at a relatively high level despite the rise in
mortgage rates in 1994, and multifamily construction continued its
gradual recovery from the depressed levels of early 1993. The
regional pattern of starts activity suggested that favorable weather
accounted for little of the strength in December.
Business fixed investment was estimated to have grown at a
very rapid pace in the fourth quarter, with a pickup indicated for
business spending on both equipment and nonresidential structures.
New orders for nondefense capital goods declined on balance over
November and December, but the large backlog of unfilled orders,
especially for computers, pointed to a continued strong expansion in
spending on business equipment in coming months. Nonresidential
construction activity was up considerably in November for a third
straight month, with increases in construction widespread by type of
structure. Recent data indicated that permits for nonresidential
construction were continuing to trend higher and perhaps were running
ahead of construction activity.
Business inventory investment remained brisk in November; in
the aggregate, the buildup was in line with shipments and sales. In
manufacturing, stocks increased more rapidly in November, but the
ratio of stocks to shipments declined further and was at a
historically low level. In wholesale trade, inventories rose less
rapidly in November, but the inventory-to-sales ratio increased
further, although it remained within its range of recent years.
Inventory accumulation slowed a little at the retail level, and the
inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector remained near the middle of
its range of recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened somewhat further in November, and for October and November
combined the deficit was well above its average rate in the third
quarter. The value of exports of goods and services increased more
slowly in the October-November period than in the third quarter,
largely reflecting reduced growth of exported industrial supplies.
The rise in the value of imports of goods and services for the
October-November period was led by increased imports of non-oil
industrial supplies and automotive, capital, and consumer goods.
Available data for the fourth quarter of 1994 indicated continued
growth in economic activity, though perhaps at a somewhat slower pace,
in the major foreign industrial countries.
Consumer price inflation slowed a little in December despite
a jump in food prices that was only partly offset by a decline in
energy prices. Excluding food and energy items, consumer prices edged
up in December and rose significantly less in 1994 than in 1993. At
the producer level, prices of finished goods also advanced more slowly
in December, with a drop in energy prices balancing a surge in food
prices. Prices of finished goods other than food and energy increased
modestly in 1994 after being held down in 1993 by a sharp drop in the
prices of tobacco products. In contrast to prices of finished goods,
price inflation at earlier stages of production picked up in 1994.
For intermediate goods other than food and energy items, prices rose
at a faster rate in the second half of 1994, with the pickup most
clearly evident in materials used in manufacturing. Prices of crude
materials rose rapidly in the second half of 1994 and for the year as
a whole. Increases in labor costs remained moderate. Average hourly
earnings were little changed on balance over November and December,
and for the year as a whole they advanced only slightly more than in
1993. More broadly, hourly compensation of private industry workers
increased more slowly in the fourth quarter than in any of the
previous three quarters of 1994, and the rise for the year was
significantly less than in 1993.
At its meeting on December 20, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that included a bias toward the possible
firming of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, the directive stated that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would be acceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve
conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with modest growth in the broader monetary aggregates over
coming months.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. With the need for seasonal credit diminishing over the
period, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing trended lower but averaged
a little above anticipated levels. Near year-end, the Trading Desk
accommodated heavy demands for reserves through System RPs. The
federal funds rate averaged close to 5-1/2 percent during the
intermeeting period.
Most other market interest rates declined slightly on balance
over the period after the December 20 meeting. Very short term
interest rates fell after the first of the year, reflecting the
disappearance of year-end premiums. More broadly, favorable news on
inflation and indications of some unexpected slowing in the growth of
final demands apparently led market participants to conclude that
further tightening of monetary policy, though still expected to be
substantial, would be less than previously thought and would be spread
over a longer period. Yields on tax-exempt instruments declined
considerably as concerns about the implications of Orange County's
problems for the financial condition of other municipal governments
abated. Strong earning reports for the fourth quarter boosted major
indexes of equity prices.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined somewhat over
the intermeeting period. The dollar fell substantially against the
mark, which was buoyed by safe-haven inflows from weaker European
currencies, but dropped less against the yen. One factor that weighed
against the dollar was uncertainty about the consequences for the U.S.
economy of the sharp depreciation of the Mexican peso and the related
economic and financial problems in Mexico and other developing
economies; market participants expressed some concern that the crisis
might constrain U.S. monetary policy in the event of further domestic
inflation pressures and that the counterpart to the large prospective
reduction in the Mexican current account deficit would lie importantly
in the already substantial U.S. deficit.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in December, and data for
the first half of January suggested a further acceleration in that
month. Much of the pickup in M2 in December was due to rapid
expansion in overnight repurchase agreements and overnight
Eurodollars, which outweighed a further contraction of liquid accounts
associated in part with depositor efforts to obtain higher returns by
shifting funds into market instruments. The faster growth of M3
reflected, in addition to the acceleration of its M2 component, bank
use of large CDs and nondeposit sources of funds to finance relatively
robust demands for credit. From the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994, M2 grew at the lower end of the Committee's
range for 1994 and M3 in the lower half of its range. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt had continued to expand at a moderate rate in recent
months, and for 1994 it was in the lower half of its monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth of economic activity would slow substantially over the next
several quarters and for some period thereafter would average less
than the rate of increase in the economy's potential output. Consumer
spending was projected to be well sustained for a time but to be
restrained later by smaller gains in real incomes, the satisfaction of
pent-up demands, and the lagged effects of higher interest rates on
the demand for durable goods. Business outlays for new equipment were
expected to decelerate substantially in response to higher financing
costs and slower growth of sales and profits. Homebuilding was
anticipated to soften a little in response to slower growth in jobs
and income as well as to the increase that had occurred in mortgage
rates. Recent developments in Mexico were expected to cut into
exports in the near term, but the sustained economic growth elsewhere
would keep export demand on an uptrend. Although there was
considerable uncertainty regarding the fiscal outlook, in light of the
Congressional intent to cut the federal deficit the forecast
incorporated a somewhat greater degree of fiscal restraint than had
been built into recent forecasts. In the staff's judgment, the
economy currently was operating beyond its long-run, noninflationary
capacity, and there remained a substantial risk that inflation could
ratchet higher absent further monetary policy actions.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, the members agreed that growth in economic
activity could be expected to moderate considerably over the course of
1995, although inflation was likely to be higher than in 1994. They
acknowledged that their current projections were subject to
substantial risks. The expansion continued to display appreciable
momentum and signs of slower growth were still quite limited and
tentative. Even so, the members remained persuaded that the lagged
effects of the policy tightening implemented over the course of 1994
would become increasingly evident in interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy as the year progressed. The projected moderation in the
growth of final demands, which probably would be concentrated at least
initially in the housing and consumer durables sectors, would
undoubtedly reinforce an expected cutback in inventory investment from
its unsustainable pace in recent quarters. A key uncertainty in the
outlook was whether the slowing in overall economic growth would be
sufficient to relieve the current pressures on labor and other
producer resources, which many members saw as portending higher
inflation, or, indeed, whether such pressures would intensify further.
Opinions differed to some degree with regard to both the likely extent
of the prospective slowing in economic growth and the outlook for
inflation. However, most of the members concluded that some rise in
inflation appeared probable over coming quarters, and they were
concerned that this upturn would not be reversed and could be extended
in the absence of further monetary restraint.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
establishes its long-run ranges for growth of the money and debt
aggregates, the members of the Committee and the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents not currently serving as members had prepared individual
projections of economic activity, the rate of unemployment, and
inflation for the year 1995. Measured from the fourth quarter of 1994
to the fourth quarter of 1995, their forecasts of the growth in real
GDP had a central tendency of 2 to 3 percent, compared with a growth
rate of 4 percent estimated for 1994. Most of the members also
anticipated that economic expansion in line with their forecasts would
be associated with little change in the unemployment rate and their
projections of the rate in the fourth quarter of 1995 were centered in
a narrow range around 5-1/2 percent. The high levels of resource
utilization implied by these projections were viewed by most members
as likely to foster somewhat greater pressure on wages and prices.
Accordingly, projections of the rate of inflation, as indexed by the
consumer price index, had a central tendency of 3 to 3-1/2 percent for
the period from the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of
1995, compared with rates of about 2-3/4 percent in both 1993 and
1994.
In their review of regional economic developments, members
referred to widespread evidence of further growth in business
activity, but a number also mentioned scattered signs of some
softening in a few areas or industries. Several emphasized, however,
that the anecdotal evidence did not currently point to any significant
moderation in the overall growth of the economy. With regard to
financial conditions, members commented that they saw little
indication that policy tightening actions over the past year were
constraining the availability of credit to any observable degree.
Despite higher interest rates, financial conditions remained broadly
supportive of further economic expansion. The performance of stock
market prices and the relatively narrow quality spreads in debt
markets attested to a considerable degree of confidence among
investors. Members also took note of the accommodative lending
policies of banking institutions. Those policies had encouraged rapid
growth in consumer and business loans and evidently were contributing
to the ongoing strength of the economic expansion. Some members
expressed concern that a number of banks might have eased their
lending standards unduly and thus assumed unwarranted risks in their
loan portfolios.
In their assessment of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members referred to the sluggish behavior of non-auto retail
sales in November and December, but they also noted that the available
information on consumer spending during the first few weeks of this
year was inconclusive with regard to the possible emergence of a
slowing trend. Anecdotal commentary on retail sales was mixed, and
evidence of some decline in January sales of motor vehicles needed to
be evaluated with caution because of the introduction of a new
reporting method. Consumer confidence was at a high level, but some
members observed that consumer indebtedness had grown rapidly and was
likely to exert a retarding effect on consumer spending at some point.
In this regard, however, it was pointed out that rising consumer
incomes had kept debt service burdens from increasing significantly
thus far. On balance, the members believed that the growth in
consumer spending probably would slow over the forecast horizon though
such spending might be relatively well maintained for some period,
given the ongoing expansion in jobs and incomes and the ready
availability of financing to many consumers. In any event, the
outlook for this sector of the economy, which was critical to any
significant moderation in overall economic growth, was uncertain with
regard to both the timing and the extent of possible slowing.
Housing construction was cited as potentially the most
important demand sector of the economy that was likely to contribute
to more moderate economic growth over the year ahead. As evidenced by
nationwide data through the end of 1994, single-family housing starts
had held up unexpectedly well despite sizable increases in home
mortgage rates, but anecdotal reports from around the country had
pointed to weakening demand for new homes for several months and
continued to do so. Against the background of current mortgage rate
levels and the rise that had occurred in home mortgage indebtedness,
the members continued to anticipate softening demand for housing, at
least in the single-family sector. The mild uptrend in the much
smaller multifamily sector was likely to continue for some period,
given low rental vacancy rates in a number of areas, and further
improvement in nonresidential construction was likely to offset to
some extent the overall slowing in housing construction.
In the capital goods sector, real business-fixed investment
had strengthened further in the fourth quarter, and the members
believed, on the basis of rising order backlogs and the strength of
permits for new business construction, that considerable momentum had
carried into this year. While the growth in spending for business
equipment undoubtedly would moderate from its extraordinary pace over
an extended period, large business profits and the still relatively
low user cost of capital would tend to support appreciable further
growth in such investment in the context of elevated levels of
capacity utilization and ongoing efforts, induced by strong market
competition, to increase productivity. Moreover, nonresidential
construction was now trending higher, with particular strength evident
in industrial and commercial construction.
The pace of inventory accumulation in recent quarters was
viewed as unsustainable and a decline in inventory investment was seen
as likely over the forecast horizon, though the precise timing and
extent were impossible to predict. While slower growth in final
demand might in most circumstances stimulate a relatively sharp
adjustment in inventory investment, members cited factors that could
mute the size of that adjustment and its effects on overall GDP.
These included relatively low inventory/sales ratios across much of
the economy and little anecdotal or other evidence of unintended
inventory accumulation. Moreover, because an unusually large share of
the inventory buildup in recent quarters appeared to involve imports,
a cutback in such investment should tend to have a smaller-than-usual
impact on domestic production. There was no current evidence that
inventory investment was slowing, and indeed recent data on business
loans at banks might suggest some acceleration in inventory
accumulation since the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, as more
moderate growth in final demand began to emerge, concerns about the
availability of materials used in the production process or stocks
needed to meet market demand should diminish, and business firms could
be expected to trim their demand for inventories, perhaps aggressively
for a time. Indeed, this sector of the economy might well account for
much of the slowing in the expansion for some period of time during
the year ahead.
Fiscal policy was under active debate in the Congress, and
the members viewed the outcome of that debate as very uncertain. The
emergence of a moderately restrictive fiscal policy might be a
reasonable assumption to incorporate in current forecasts, albeit an
assumption that clearly was subject to a wide range of error. In any
event, any progress toward cutting future budget deficits was likely
to have a favorable effect on domestic financial markets and perhaps
also on the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
Developments in Mexico and their possible repercussions in
other developing nations had negative implications for U.S. exports,
at least over the short run. Indeed, some members cited anecdotal
evidence that reduced trade with Mexico had already emerged since late
1994. Moreover, the effects of the earthquake in Kobe, Japan, seemed
to be disrupting trade with that nation in agricultural and other bulk
goods and was likely to continue doing so over the near term. Looking
beyond the months immediately ahead, the relatively robust growth
projected for many industrial countries together with the lower value
of the dollar should boost the nation's overall external trade
balance, though probably not to the extent of providing substantial
stimulus to the economy. One member observed that a number of
countries throughout the world faced the potential for important
changes in political conditions that could have adverse effects on
their growth and trading relationships, with possible repercussions on
U.S. exports.
Members commented that the strong growth in economic activity
and high levels of resource utilization had fostered relatively rapid
increases in the prices of many raw materials and semi-finished goods
used in the production process, but contrary to numerous forecasts
these developments had not led thus far to a broad pickup in inflation
as measured by the prices of final goods and services. This favorable
development might be explained in part by lags in the inflation
transmission process and perhaps to some degree by various structural
changes and productivity improvements in recent years that may have
raised both the level and the rate of increase of the economy's
potential for sustained activity. Many members observed, however,
that it would not be prudent from a monetary policy standpoint to
assume that continued rapid economic growth and further pressures on
producer resources would not lead to rising inflation over the
quarters ahead. While competitive pressures still generally limited
the extent to which business firms could pass through rising costs of
raw materials and other producer inputs to the prices of final goods,
the members referred to increasingly numerous examples of successful
efforts to raise such prices and to apparently growing business
expectations that it would be possible to implement such increases
over the months ahead. On balance, the members generally were
persuaded that the economy had attained levels of labor and capital
utilization that implied a strong risk of rising inflation over coming
quarters.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and
debt aggregates in 1995 that it had established on a tentative basis
at its meeting in July 1994. The tentative ranges included expansion
of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995. The monitoring
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt had been set
provisionally at 3 to 7 percent for 1995. The ranges for M2 and M3
were unchanged from those that the Committee had used in 1994, while
the range for debt was one percentage point lower.
All the members endorsed a proposal to adopt the ranges that
the Committee had set on a tentative basis in July 1994. While some
acceleration in the growth of the broad monetary aggregates from the
pace in 1994 could be anticipated over the year ahead according to a
staff analysis, monetary expansion within the ranges in question
appeared to be consistent with the moderation in the expansion of
nominal GDP that the members were projecting for 1995 and that they
viewed as desirable to head off increasing inflation. Moreover, the
ranges for the broad monetary aggregates had been reduced over the
past decade to levels that, notably in the case of M2, should now be
consistent over long periods with the Committee's objectives for
stable prices and maximum sustainable economic growth. This outcome
would depend on the restoration over time of the historical velocity
patterns linking the monetary aggregates to broad measures of economic
performance, including a level velocity trend for M2. It was noted in
this regard that until recent years the growth of M3 had tended to
exceed that of M2--a pattern that seemed to be re-emerging--and
therefore a somewhat higher range might be set for M3 than for M2.
However, the members did not believe that a persuasive argument could
be made at this juncture for raising the M3 range, though they did not
want to rule out the option of doing so later, possibly when the
ranges were reviewed at midyear. Indeed, to make the change at this
point might convey a misleading message regarding the Committee's
policy intentions or its confidence in prospective monetary growth
relationships.
The Committee also considered the potential advantages and
disadvantages of setting specific targets for bringing inflation down
and achieving price stability over time. Such targets might provide
an alternative or supplemental approach to the monetary growth ranges,
which had been found to be unreliable guides for monetary policy over
the past several years. The members discussed a number of aspects of
inflation targeting. On the one hand, such targeting would help to
anchor the conduct of monetary policy and progress in meeting these
objectives could enhance the credibility of the Federal Reserve and
perhaps reduce the overall cost of attaining price stability. On the
other hand, close adherence to preset inflation targets could unduly
constrain the Federal Reserve in its efforts to counteract the effects
of cyclical shortfalls in the performance of the economy. The members
agreed that the discussion had been helpful in outlining the issues
and that the subject should be revisited. It was noted in this
connection that the Committee might be asked to comment during the
months ahead on specific Congressional proposals for inflation
targeting.
At the conclusion of its discussion, all the members voted to
approve without change the tentative ranges for 1995 that the
Committee had established in July of last year. In keeping with its
usual procedures under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the Committee would
review its ranges at midyear, or sooner if interim conditions
warranted, in light of the growth and velocity behavior of the
aggregates and ongoing economic and financial developments.
Accordingly, the following longer-run policy statement for 1995 was
approved for inclusion in the domestic policy directive.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price
stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth
quarter of 1995. The Committee anticipated that money
growth within these ranges would be consistent with its
broad policy objectives. The monitoring range for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was lowered
to 3 to 7 percent for the year. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow,
Mses. Phillips and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members indicated that they could support some
firming in reserve conditions, though a few preferred to delay such an
action pending the receipt within the next few weeks of significant
new information that could help the Committee to evaluate whether and
to what extent the economic expansion might be slowing. Most of the
members were convinced, however, that current monetary policy should
be adjusted promptly to a more clearly restrictive stance. In their
view, prompt action was needed to counter inflationary pressures and
inflationary expectations in an economy that already seemed to be
operating at, and perhaps beyond, sustainable capacity levels and to
be continuing to expand at a pace above its long-run potential. In
these circumstances, a delay in tightening policy would incur an
unacceptable risk of allowing further inflationary momentum to develop
in the economy and would require more tightening over time than might
otherwise be needed to achieve the Committee's objectives. Part of
the risk involved a potential further decline in the dollar at a time
when there already was considerable concern about rising pressures on
prices. Some tightening of policy at this meeting was generally
anticipated in markets, and a failure to take action now was likely in
the view of a number of members to raise questions about the
credibility of the System's anti-inflation resolve and to generate
some unsettlement in financial markets, notably in the foreign
exchange market where the dollar already appeared to be vulnerable to
further weakness. In terms of balancing the policy risks that were
involved, a prompt move would provide some insurance against what
these members viewed as the principal risk in current circumstances--that of rising inflation. The risks of excessive tightening, while
not completely absent, were believed to be limited in light of the apparent strength and momentum of the expansion, which many
forecasters had underestimated over the past year. One member
expressed the view that while monetary growth had been damped,
continuing restraint on the growth of the narrow monetary aggregates
was desirable to offset a previous build-up in liquidity and help
assure that inflationary pressures would be contained.
Members who saw an advantage in postponing a decision to
tighten policy commented that, in light of some scattered signs of a
moderating expansion, it would be helpful to wait for certain key
statistics that would become available within the next few weeks to
judge the extent of any moderation. Data on retail sales in January
might provide particular insights as to whether the softening in such
sales in November and December was persisting. The favorable news on
inflation in the fourth quarter had lessened concerns about an
immediate inflation threat, and if the incoming information confirmed
the need for further tightening, the short delay in implementing it
would have only a minimal cost. In addition, an increase in monetary
restraint would be likely to exacerbate the problems of Mexico and
perhaps to some extent those of Canada and would have potentially
adverse implications for U.S. trade with both of these key trading
partners. Because the probability that incoming information would
counsel against any further policy tightening was certainly less than
50 percent so that only a matter of timing was likely to be involved,
these members indicated that they would join with the other members in
voting to tighten policy at this meeting.
Concerning the possible need to adjust policy during the
intermeeting period, the members were unanimously in favor of adopting
a symmetric directive. Given a decision to implement some tightening
in monetary policy at this meeting, they did not believe that there
should be a presumption toward possible further tightening in this
period. A number of members observed that further monetary restraint
might not be needed if, in line with their expectations, the incoming
evidence on the performance of the economy suggested that the
expansion was moderating sufficiently for the economy to return to a
growth path consistent with containing inflation pressures. In any
event, the Committee's most difficult decision over the next several
quarters was likely to be that of determining when further tightening
was no longer desirable.
Prior to the end of the meeting, the members were apprised of
a disposition on the part of the Board of Governors to approve an
increase of 1/2 percentage point in the discount rate that was pending
at several Federal Reserve Banks. In the event that such an increase
was approved by the Board, the members agreed that open market
operations should be conducted so as to allow that increase to be
reflected fully in reserve markets.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they could support a directive that called for
increasing somewhat the degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the implementation of this policy, account would be taken of a
possible increase of 1/2 percentage in the discount rate that was
under consideration by the Board of Governors. The members also
agreed that the directive should not include any presumption about
possible adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the
Committee decided that somewhat greater or somewhat lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
According to a staff analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at
this meeting would be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3
over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting
suggests a strong further rise in economic activity
during the closing months of 1994. Nonfarm payroll
employment was up considerably further in December
after a sharp increase in November, and the
civilian unemployment rate declined to 5.4 percent.
Industrial production registered another large
advance in December and capacity utilization
continued to move up from already high levels.
Current estimates indicate little change in retail
sales over November and December, while housing
starts posted sizable gains on balance over the two
months. Orders for nondefense capital goods point
to a continued strong expansion in spending on
business equipment; permits for nonresidential
construction have been trending appreciably higher.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and
services widened somewhat in October-November from
its average rate in the third quarter. Prices of
many materials have continued to move up rapidly,
but broad indexes of prices for consumer goods and
services have increased moderately on average over
recent months.
Most market interest rates have declined
slightly on balance since the Committee meeting on
December 20, 1994. In foreign exchange markets,
the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of
the other G-10 currencies has declined somewhat
over the intermeeting period. The Mexican peso has
depreciated sharply against the dollar.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in December
and January. From the fourth quarter of 1993 to
the fourth quarter of 1994, M2 grew at a rate at
the bottom of the Committee's range for 1994 and M3
at a rate in the lower half of its range for the
year. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has
continued to expand at a moderate rate in recent
months, and for the year 1994 it grew at a rate in
the lower half of its monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster
price stability and promote sustainable growth in
output. In furtherance of these objectives, the
Committee at this meeting established ranges for
growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4
percent respectively, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995. The
Committee anticipated that money growth within
these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth
of total domestic nonfinancial debt was lowered to
3 to 7 percent for the year. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to increase
somewhat the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions, taking account of a possible increase in
the discount rate. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, somewhat greater reserve restraint or
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow,
Mses. Phillips and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
Temporary Increase in Reciprocal Currency Agreement with the Bank of
Mexico and Increase in Agreement to "Warehouse" Foreign Currencies
On December 30, 1994, the Committee approved a temporary
increase from $3 billion to $4-1/2 billion in the System's reciprocal
currency (swap) agreement with the Bank of Mexico and it also approved
the activation of that agreement. The Committee approved a further
temporary increase of $1-1/2 billion and activation of that amount at
this meeting, thereby raising the swap arrangement with the Bank of
Mexico to a level of $6 billion, consisting of the regular $3 billion
line and a special $3 billion line. The special $3 billion line may
be drawn on until January 31, 1996. Drawings would be for three-month
periods and could be renewed a maximum of three times. Once a drawing
on the special line is repaid, the size of the line will be reduced
pari passu. All drawings on the special line will have to be repaid
no later than January 31, 1997. The terms and conditions for use of
the permanent $3 billion swap facility with the Bank of Mexico remain
unchanged and drawings, once repaid, will require Committee action
prior to subsequent use. The Treasury has undertaken to assure the
repayment of any swap drawing by the Bank of Mexico on the $6 billion
in lines that is outstanding more than 12 months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, LaWare,
Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Votes against this action: Messrs.
Lindsey and Melzer.
The Committee also approved at this meeting an increase from
$5 billion to $20 billion in the amount of eligible foreign currencies
that the System is prepared to "warehouse" for the Treasury and the
Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF). The purpose of the warehousing
facility, which has been in place for many years, is to supplement the U.S. dollar resources of the Treasury and the ESF for financing
purchases of foreign currencies and related international operations.
The size of the warehousing facility had ranged up to $15 billion in
past years, but it was reduced to $5 billion in February 1992. The
expansion of the warehousing agreement at this meeting was intended to
facilitate U.S. participation in the Multilateral Program to Restore
Financial Stability in Mexico, announced by President Clinton on
January 31, 1995, by warehousing up to $20 billion in German marks and
Japanese yen held by the Treasury through the ESF. The Committee will
review each year the need to maintain this level of warehousing
authority in light of the progress and needs of the Program.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, LaWare,
Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Votes against this action: Messrs.
Lindsey and Melzer.
Members who voted to approve these proposals were persuaded
that the nature and severity of Mexico's financial problems could not
be contained without making available substantial financial assistance
to the Government of Mexico. The financial support provided by the
United States would be accompanied by similar assistance from the IMF
and would be conditioned on Mexico's commitment to implement major
changes in its economic policies, including monetary policy. It was
emphasized during the Committee's discussion that the United States
had a strong interest in encouraging the restoration of stability in
Mexico for numerous reasons, including the growth of trade between the
two nations and the resulting creation of jobs in both countries.
Moreover, Mexico's financial problems appeared to be spreading to a
number of other nations and adversely affecting the dollar in the
foreign exchange markets. The participation of the Federal Reserve in
this effort was strongly endorsed by the Administration and the
overall program had the support of the bipartisan leadership in the
Congress. Apart from temporary financial resources, the Federal
Reserve was in a position to supply expertise and experience that were
not readily available elsewhere. On the negative side, the members
acknowledged that there could be no assurances that the rescue program
would succeed, but its scale, its multinational character, and the
apparent willingness of Mexican officials to pursue the difficult
policies needed to assure success were grounds for optimism.
Messrs. Lindsey and Melzer dissented with respect to
increases in both the swap line and the warehousing arrangement with
the Exchange Stabilization Fund. They did not believe that the
Committee had been provided sufficient information to assess whether
developments in Mexico threatened U.S. financial stability, a possible
justification for increased central bank lending on a short-term
basis, Furthermore, they considered it inappropriate for the Federal
Reserve to participate, directly or indirectly, in intermediate to
long-term financing to facilitate debt restructuring. They were
concerned that such participation in a fiscal policy matter might
compromise, or appear to compromise, the independence of the monetary
policy process. Mr. Lindsey added that the latter risks were
significantly enhanced given the absence of Congressional
authorization or more general public support for these measures.
Disclosure Policy.
At this meeting, the Committee decided to retain the procedures that it had followed over the past year for providing greater
information to the public about its policy actions and discussions.
It was the judgment of the members that these procedures strike an
appropriate balance between making the Committee's decisions and
deliberations accessible to the public as soon and as fully as
feasible, while safeguarding the Committee's flexibility in policymaking and preserving an unfettered deliberative process. The
procedures in question involve the prompt announcement of the
Committee's decisions and the release of minutes and transcripts of
FOMC meetings.
The Committee will continue its practice of announcing each
change in the stance of monetary policy in a press release on the day
the decision is made. This practice removes any uncertainty about the
Committee's intentions in regard to reserve conditions and enables all
financial market participants and others to receive the information at
the same time. When no change is made at a meeting, the Committee
normally will announce only the time when the meeting ended and that
there are no further announcements. However, in some infrequent
circumstances, the Committee may decide to issue a statement even when
no change in policy is made.
The full substance of the Committee's deliberations relating
to each policy decision will continue to be reported, as is the
current practice, in comprehensive minutes of the meeting that are
released two or three days following the next regularly scheduled
meeting. For historians and other students of monetary policymaking,
those minutes will be supplemented by lightly edited transcripts of
the discussion at each Committee meeting. For recent and future
meetings, transcripts for an entire year will be released with a five-year lag; earlier transcripts dating back to March 1976 will continue
to be released on an ongoing basis as the light editing process is
completed. Continuing the practice followed since the beginning of
1994, transcripts prepared by the Committee's Secretariat will be
circulated to each participant to verify his or her comments, and only
changes that clarify meaning, such as the correction of grammar or
transcription errors, will be permitted. A limited amount of material
will be withheld from the publicly released version of these
documents, primarily to protect the confidentiality of foreign and
domestic sources of information that likely would be lost if the
information they provide were to be made public. As required by law,
a complete, unredacted version of the transcript of each meeting will
be turned over to the National Archives after 30 years have elapsed.
For the purpose of preparing the minutes and transcripts, the
discussions of monetary policy at Committee meetings will continue to
be recorded. The tape recorder may be turned off at the Chairman's
discretion when the Committee deals with issues unrelated to monetary
policy, such as organizational and personnel matters. The transcripts
will indicate that the tape recorder has been turned off and the
minutes will provide a summary description of the matters that were
discussed, As permitted by the National Records Act, the recordings
and unedited transcripts will be discarded after all the participants
at the meeting have reviewed and corrected, as necessary, the
transcripts prepared by the Secretariat.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, March 28, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 3:20 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007
