








FRB: FOMC Minutes - February 3-4, 1998
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of February 3-4, 1998
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 3, 1998 at 2:30 p.m. and
continued on Wednesday, February 4, 1998 at 9:00 a.m.
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Meyer
Ms. Minehan
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Rivlin
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, Moskow, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Cecchetti, Dewald, Hakkio,
Lindsey, Promisel, Simpson, Sniderman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Alexander, Hooper, and Ms. Johnson,
Associate Directors, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Messrs. Brayton 1 and Rosine,1 Senior
Economists, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Garrett and Mr. Nelson,1 Economists, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Rives, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Beebe, Eisenbeis, Hunter, Ms. Krieger,
Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Atlanta, Chicago, New York,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas
respectively
Mr. Hetzel, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices
of the election of the following members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee for the period commencing January 1,
1998, and ending December 31, 1998, had been received and that these
individuals had executed their oaths of office.
The elected members and alternate members were as follows:
William J. McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, with Ernest T. Patrikis, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate;
Cathy E. Minehan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
with Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, as alternate;
Jerry L. Jordan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
with Michael H. Moskow, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, as alternate;
Robert D. McTeer, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, as voting alternate pending the election of a President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, with Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31,
1998, with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance
of their official connection with the Board of Governors or with a
Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any official connection
with the Federal Open Market Committee:
Alan Greenspan,                       Chairman
William J. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Donald L. Kohn,       Secretary and Economist
Normand R. V. Bernard,        Deputy Secretary
Joseph R. Coyne,      Assistant Secretary
Gary P. Gillum,       Assistant Secretary
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr.,     General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr.,        Deputy General Counsel
Michael J. Prell,     Economist
Edwin M. Truman,      Economist
Lynn E. Browne, Stephen G. Cecchetti,
William G. Dewald, Craig S. Hakkio,
David E. Lindsey, Larry J. Promisel,
Thomas D. Simpson, Mark S. Sniderman,
and David J. Stockton 	Associate Economists
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account
until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after
December 31, 1998.
By unanimous vote, Peter R. Fisher was selected to serve at
the pleasure of the Committee as Manager, System Open Market Account,
on the understanding that his selection was subject to being
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Secretary's note:  Advice subsequently was received
that the selection of Mr. Fisher as Manager was
satisfactory to the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
On the recommendation of the Manager, the Committee at this
meeting unanimously approved two changes in the Authorization for
Domestic Open Market Operations.
First, the Committee amended paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization
to raise from $8 billion to $12 billion the limit on intermeeting
changes in System account holdings of U.S. government and federal
agency securities.  The increase was the first permanent change in the
limit since February 1990 when it was raised from $6 billion to $8
billion.  The Manager indicated that the Committee had approved
temporary increases several times during the past year and that the
existence of a permanent $12 billion limit would have obviated the
need for most of the increases.  A permanent increase to $12 billion
would reduce the the number of occasions requiring special Committee
action, while still calling the need for particularly large changes to
the Committee's attention.  The Committee concurred in the Manager's
view that a $4 billion increase was appropriate.
Second, the Committee terminated the Manager's authority to
conduct transactions in bankers acceptances.  This involved the
deletion of paragraph 1(b), which authorized purchases or sales of
prime bankers acceptances in the open market, and also the deletion of
the reference in paragraph 1(c), which authorized repurchase
agreements in such market instruments.  The Manager indicate that
operations in bankers acceptances were not a practical means of
affecting reserves under current circumstances, given the ample
availability of U.S. Treasury obligations in the market.  Indeed, the
Committee previously had decided in 1977 to suspend transactions on an
outright basis in bankers acceptances and had completed the System's
disengagement from this market in 1984 by instructing the Manager to
discontinue the use of repurchase agreements involving bankers
acceptances.  While those decisions had left open the possibility
resuming transactions in bankers acceptances and no changes had been
made in the Authorization, the Committee agreed that the existing
authority no longer served a practical purpose.  Accordingly, the
amended Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations was
unanimously approved in the form shown below.
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations
Amended February 3, 1998
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out
the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including
securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States in the open market, from
or to securities dealers and foreign and international accounts
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash,
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market
Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange maturing
U.S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement;
provided that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal
agency securities held in such Account (including forward commitments)
at the close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at
which action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $12.0 billion during
the period commencing with the opening of business on the day
following such meeting and ending with the close of business on the
day of the next such meeting;
(b) To buy U.S. Government securities and securities that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States, from dealers for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under agreements for
repurchase of such securities or obligations in 15 calendar days or
less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying
reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual
dealers; provided that in the event Government securities or agency
issues covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in
the market or transferred to the System Open Market Account.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs
the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S. Government securities held in
the System Open Market Account to Government securities dealers and to
banks participating in Government securities clearing arrangements
conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as
the Committee may specify from time to time.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments
for foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open
Market Account, to sell U.S. Government securities to such foreign and
international accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph l(a) under
agreements providing for the resale by such accounts of those
securities within 15 calendar days on terms comparable to those
available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for New York
Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to
the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in
paragraph l(b), repurchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase
agreements between its own account and foreign and international
accounts maintained at the Bank.  Transactions undertaken with such
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may provide for a
service fee when appropriate.
With Mr. Jordan dissenting, the Authorization for Foreign
Currency Operations shown below was reaffirmed.
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations
Reaffirmed February 3, 1998
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to
the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency
directive and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions as the
Committee may issue from time to time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the
form of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the
open market at home and abroad, including transactions with the U.S.
Treasury, with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary
authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with
other international financial institutions:
Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Netherlands guilders
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts
to receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A
above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw
dollars under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph
2 below, provided that drawings by either party to any such
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the Committee,
because of exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies
not exceeding $25.0 billion.  For this purpose, the overall open
position in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding
signs) of net positions in individual currencies.  The net position in
a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that
currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, minus
outstanding contracts for future delivery of that currency, i.e., as
the sum of these elements with due regard to sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap"
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew
such arrangements on maturity:
Foreign bank     Amount of arrangement   (millions of dollars equivalent)
Austrian National Bank    250
National Bank of Belgium    1,000
Bank of Canada   2,000
National Bank of Denmark   250
Bank of England  3,000
Bank of France  2,000
German Federal Bank 6,000
Bank of Italy   3,000
Bank of Japan   5,000
Bank of Mexico   3,000
Netherlands Bank 500
Bank of Norway     250
Bank of Sweden    300
Swiss National Bank   4,000
Bank for International Settlements:
Dollars against Swiss francs   600
Dollars against authorized European  currencies other than Swiss francs   1,250
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the
proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall
be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph
1.A. above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Committee, be at prevailing market rates.  For the purpose of
providing an investment return on System holdings of foreign
currencies, or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or
received in connection with swap drawings, transactions with foreign
central banks may be undertaken at non-market exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions.  In
making operating arrangements with foreign central banks on System
holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  Any agreements or
understandings concerning the administration of the accounts
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign
banks designated by the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of
Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to the
Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to ensure that
adequate liquidity is maintained to meet anticipated needs and so that
each currency portfolio shall generally have an average duration of no
more than 18 months (calculated as Macaulay duration).  When
appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide investment
facilities for foreign currency holdings, U.S. Government securities
may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements for
repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs
shall be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and
the Committee.  The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the
Board of Governors, and such other member of the Board as the Chairman
may designate (or in the absence of members of the Board serving on
the Subcommittee, other Board members designated by the Chairman as
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee,
his alternate).  Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at the
request of any member, or at the request of the Manager, System Open
Market Account ("Manager"), for the purposes of reviewing recent or
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other
matters relating to his responsibilities.  At the request of any
member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and
consultations shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open
Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about
the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between
the System and the Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary
on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and
information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary
and Financial Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit
pertinent information on System foreign currency operations to
appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign
currency operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3
G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.
With Mr. Jordan dissenting, the Foreign Currency Directive
shown below was reaffirmed.
Foreign Currency Directive
Reaffirmed February 3, 1998
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be
directed at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that
market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar reflect actions and behavior
consistent with the IMF Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign
exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with
selected foreign central banks and with the Bank for International
Settlements.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other
countries and with international monetary institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs
for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments
in particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange
Stabilization Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the
Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the
United States Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary
authorities; and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United
States in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange
arrangements under the IMF Article IV.
Mr. Jordan dissented in the votes on the Foreign Currency
Authorization and the Foreign Currency Directive because these policy
instruments provide the basis for foreign exchange market
transactions.  He believes that the primary mission of the Federal
Reserve is to achieve and maintain a stable purchasing power of the
U.S. dollar.  That objective is best achieved when open market
transactions are restricted to purchases and sales of U.S. government
securities.  When compatible with the System's primary objective,
foreign exchange transactions are redundant to open market operations.
Often, however, foreign exchange transactions conflict with the
System's primary objective, requiring opposite adjustments in System
holdings of U.S. Treasury obligations.  Moreover, holdings of foreign
securities expose the Reserve Banks to foreign exchange translation
losses resulting from the depreciation of foreign currencies relative
to a strong and stable U.S. dollar.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with Respect
to Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed.
Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations
Reaffirmed February 3, 1998
In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency
Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager,
System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall be guided by the
following procedural understandings with respect to consultations and
clearances with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and
the Chairman of the Committee.  All operations undertaken pursuant to
such clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on
any day or $600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the
Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150
million, or $300 million when the operation is associated with
repayment of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of
trading in a particular currency by the System, even though the change
in the System's net position in that currency might be less than the
limits specified in 1.B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the
Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the
full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion
since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the
Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System and about any
operations that are not of a routine character.
On January 16, 1998, the continuing rules, regulations,
authorizations, and other instructions of the Committee had been
distributed with the advice that, in accordance with procedures
approved by the Committee, they were being called to the Committee's
attention before the February 3-4 organization meeting to give members
an opportunity to raise any questions they might have concerning them.
Members were asked to indicate if they wished to have any of the
instruments in question placed on the agenda for consideration at this
meeting, and no requests for consideration were received.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on December 16, 1997, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange and international financial markets
in the period since the previous meeting on December 16, 1997.  There
were no System open market transactions in foreign currencies during
this period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account also reported
on developments in domestic financial markets and on System open
market transactions in government securities and federal agency
obligations during the period from December 17, 1997, through February 3,
1998.  By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in
1998, and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting
period ahead.  A summary of the economic and financial information
available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion
is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was
approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
economy continued to expand at a robust pace during the closing months
of 1997.  Both employment and industrial output recorded substantial
increases in the fourth quarter.  While spending for final goods and
services by U.S. residents decelerated noticeably, inventory
investment strengthened and the deficit in international trade in
goods and services appeared to have narrowed.  Tighter labor markets
brought some acceleration in wages, but falling import and energy
prices helped to hold down price inflation over the closing months of
the year.
Labor demand expanded rapidly in the fourth quarter; a sharp
increase in nonfarm payroll employment in December followed large
advances in October and November, and the average workweek edged up on
balance over the three-month period.  Job gains were widely spread
across industries.  In the fourth quarter, new hires in manufacturing
accounted for more than half of that sector's total for the year, and
construction employment also registered an unusually large rise
compared with earlier in 1997.  Job growth surged in retail trade and
persisted at a rapid pace in service-producing industries.  The
civilian unemployment rate, at 4.7 percent in December, was near its
low for the current economic expansion.
Industrial production continued to advance at a brisk pace in
the fourth quarter.  Growth in the manufacturing of durable goods
remained strong despite sharply slower, though still substantial,
expansion in the output of computing and office equipment.  The
production of nondurable goods picked up after having been sluggish
earlier in the year.  Capacity utilization in manufacturing was at a
relatively high rate in the fourth quarter, but available information
suggested few bottlenecks.
Consumer spending, in real terms, rose at a slower though
still appreciable rate in the fourth quarter.  Purchases of durable
goods increased moderately after surging in the third quarter, and
spending on nondurables edged down.  By contrast, expenditures for
consumer services grew at a somewhat faster rate.  Recent surveys
indicated that consumer confidence remained at a very high level.
Housing demand continued to exhibit considerable strength at
year-end in the context of sharp declines in fixed mortgage rates in
recent months, further sizable gains in employment and household
income, and very positive consumer assessments of homebuying
conditions.  Applications for mortgages to purchase homes increased to
a new monthly high in December; the pace of sales of existing homes
rose further in the fourth quarter; and sales of new homes in November
(latest available monthly data) were at their highest monthly pace in
more than ten years.  Housing starts edged lower in December but
remained close to the highs of the current expansion.
After unusually strong increases earlier in the year, real
business fixed investment declined slightly in the fourth quarter.
However, the outlook for further growth remained positive, with
corporate cash flow still healthy and the user cost of capital still
low.  Data on shipments of nondefense capital goods in December
indicated a rebound in business spending on capital goods, notably for
office, computing, and communications equipment, after sizable
declines in the October-November period.  Business spending on
nonresidential structures declined slightly in the fourth quarter
despite rising real estate prices and falling vacancy rates.
The pace of business inventory investment evidently picked up
somewhat in the fourth quarter.  In manufacturing, inventories climbed
further in November (latest monthly data available), and the
stock-shipments ratio was at the top of its narrow range for the past twelve
months.  The accumulation of wholesale stocks continued its strong
upward trend, and by November the inventory-sales ratio for the
wholesale sector had reversed its 1996 decline.  In the retail sector,
inventories declined slightly in November after having changed little
in October; the inventory-sales ratio for this sector was near the
bottom of its range for the last twelve months.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
narrowed substantially on average in October and November from its
level in the third quarter.  The value of exports rose appreciably in
the October-November period, with the largest increases occurring in
automotive and agricultural products.  The average value of imports
for October and November changed little from the third-quarter rate.
Imports of consumer goods and machinery rose, but they were about
offset by declines in automotive products, computers, and, to a lesser
extent, a wide variety of other products.  The available information
indicated that economic expansion remained healthy in most of the
foreign G-7 countries, although slowing somewhat from the third
quarter.  In Asia, weakness in economic activity in Japan continued
into the fourth quarter, and persisting financial turmoil was having
strong adverse effects on the economies of a number of developing
countries.
Consumer price inflation remained low in December, damped by
a sizable further drop in energy prices and a small decline in food
prices.  Excluding food and energy items, an acceleration in the costs
of services, notably medical care and shelter, provided a slight boost
to core consumer price inflation in December.  For the year as a
whole, prices of core consumer items rose considerably less than in
1996, in part reflecting the effect of declining import prices.  At
the producer level, prices of all finished goods and of the core
finished goods component declined further in December.  For the year
1997, the core producer price index was little changed after a
relatively small rise the previous year; the total index, weighed down
by falling prices of finished food and energy items, partially
reversed its 1996 increase.  Prices also remained subdued at earlier
stages of processing in 1997, with prices of crude materials falling
substantially.  Labor costs, as measured by the hourly compensation of
private industry workers, increased at appreciably faster rates in the
fourth quarter and for the year.
At its meeting on December 16, 1997, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve markets
that were consistent with an unchanged federal funds rate averaging
around 5-1/2 percent.  In light of the increased uncertainties in the
outlook and the possibility that the next change in policy might be in
either direction, the Committee adopted a directive that did not
include a presumption about the likely direction of any adjustment to
policy during the intermeeting period.  Reserve market conditions
associated with this directive were expected to be consistent with
some moderation in the growth of M2 and M3 over coming months.
Open market operations were directed throughout the
intermeeting period toward maintaining reserve conditions consistent with
the intended federal funds rate average of around 5-1/2 percent, and
the effective rate averaged close to that level despite some largely
anticipated upward pressures in reserve markets around year-end.  Most
other domestic market interest rates moved down on balance during the
intermeeting period, apparently as a result of increased concerns over
the turbulence in Asia and its potential implications for the U.S.
economy.  Share prices in U.S. equity markets moved up slightly on
net, perhaps partly in response to the bond market rally, while equity
markets in some other countries, notably in Asia, remained unsettled.
In foreign exchange markets, the dollar appreciated on
balance over the intermeeting period.  The dollar rose considerably
further against the currencies of many of the emerging market
economies in Asia amid continuing market concerns about the adequacy
of reforms that would be undertaken in the affected countries and the
magnitude and availability of international financial assistance that
would be needed to support those efforts.  The dollar also gained
slightly on average in relation to the currencies of the other G-10
currencies.  A sizable advance by the dollar relative to the German
mark was largely reversed late in the intermeeting period; incoming
information suggesting greater strength in the German economy lifted
the value of the mark and tended to offset growing concern about the
likely effect of the Asian crisis on Germany.  The dollar declined
somewhat on balance against the yen as heightened prospects for
domestic fiscal stimulus in Japan fostered hopes of a less weak
performance of the Japanese economy.
M2 and M3 continued to grow at relatively rapid rates in
December and apparently also in January.  Recent gains in nominal
income evidently underpinned much of the greater-than-expected
strength in M2 in January; also contributing were a pickup in mortgage
refinancing activity and, perhaps, depositor transfers of funds from
market instruments whose yields had declined relative to those on M2
assets.  Large increases in repurchase agreements contributed to rapid
growth of M3 in January; the rise in M3 helped to finance further
solid expansion of bank credit.  From the fourth quarter of 1996 to
the fourth quarter of 1997, M2 increased at a rate somewhat above the
upper bound of its range for the year and M3 at a rate substantially
above the upper bound of its range.  Total domestic nonfinancial debt
expanded in 1997 at a pace somewhat below the middle of its range,
reflecting the slow rise in the federal debt.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting indicated that
the expansion of economic activity would slow appreciably during the
next few quarters and remain moderate in 1999.  The staff analysis
suggested that slower growth abroad and the considerable rise that
already had occurred in the foreign exchange value of the dollar would
exert substantial restraint on the demand for U.S. exports and subject
domestic producers to even stiffer competition from imports.  An
anticipated reduction in the desired rate of inventory accumulation
would add to the restraint on the expansion.  As output growth slowed,
pressures on resources would be expected to diminish somewhat.  None-
theless, it was expected that, consistently measured, inflation would
increase to some degree over the ensuing period through 1999, owing in
part to an abatement of restraining forces from foreign exchange and
oil markets.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic conditions, members commented that the performance of the
economy continued to be quite favorable.  They noted that the economy
had entered the new year with considerable momentum and very few
indications that growth was moderating from what appeared to be an
unsustainable rate.  Nonetheless, their assessments of the various
factors bearing on the outlook led them to conclude that appreciably
slower economic growth was in the offing for the year ahead, possibly
to a pace in the vicinity of current estimates of the economy's long-
run growth potential.  Many emphasized that the prospects for
declining net exports as a consequence of the dollar's appreciation
and the crises in a number of Asian economies were a key factor in the
outlook for some slowing in the expansion.  In addition, a moderating
rate of inventory accumulation appeared likely after the rapid buildup
during 1997.  At the same time, high levels of confidence and generally
accommodative financial conditions supported expectations of
persisting, though likely diminishing, strength in consumer spending
and business fixed investment.  The members acknowledged that their
forecasts were subject to a great deal of uncertainty since there was
little precedent to guide them in their evaluation of the extent and
likely effect of Asian market turmoil.  In the circumstances, the
risks of a considerable deviation on the upside or the downside of
their current forecasts were unusually high.  Partly as a consequence,
the outlook for inflation was quite tentative as well.  Moreover,
questions persisted about the level and growth of sustainable output.
Members observed that price inflation had remained subdued, and by
some measures had declined, in recent months despite very tight labor
markets and indications of somewhat faster increases in labor
compensation.
In keeping with the practice at meetings just prior to the
Federal Reserve's semi-annual monetary policy report to Congress
and the Chairman's associated testimony, the members of the Committee
and the Federal Reserve Bank presidents not currently serving as
members had provided individual projections of the growth in real and
nominal GDP, the rate of unemployment, and the rate of inflation for
the year ahead.  Based on developments over the second half of 1997,
the central tendency of the projections for 1998 now pointed to
slightly more strength in real GDP and appreciably less inflation than
the forecasts prepared at the time of the July 1997 meeting.  The
forecasts of the rate of expansion in real GDP in 1998 had a central
tendency of 2 to 2-3/4 percent and a full range of 1-3/4 to 3 percent.
Such growth was expected to be associated with a civilian unemployment
rate in a range of 4-1/2 to 5 percent in the fourth quarter of this
year, implying little or no change from the current level.  With
regard to nominal GDP growth in 1998, the forecasts were mainly in a
range of 3-3/4 to 4-1/2 percent, with an overall range of 3-1/2 to 5
percent.  Projections of the rate of inflation, as measured by the
consumer price index, had a central tendency of 1-3/4 to 2-1/4
percent, on the high side of the outcome for 1997 when the rise in the
index was held down by damped increases in food prices and declines in
energy prices.  These forecasts took account of likely further
technical improvements in the CPI by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
that would trim the reported rate.  The projections were based on
individual views concerning what would be an appropriate policy over
the projection horizon to foster the Committee's longer-term goals.
The members stressed that the potential extent of the
negative effects of developments in Asia on the nation's trade balance
represented a key uncertainty in the economic outlook.  On the whole,
those effects had been quite limited thus far.  Anecdotal reports
indicated that a number of domestic producers, notably of agricul-
tural, lumber, and wood products, had experienced some cancellations
or postponements of orders from Asian customers and there was some
evidence of increased imports from those nations.  Exports to affected
Asian nations were likely to be held back by declining incomes and
rising prices of U.S. products in local currencies, and reportedly
also by difficulties that importing firms in Asia were encountering in
securing financing.  The eventual effects of the Asian financial
turmoil on the U.S. trade balance and the overall economy were
unknown--in part because in some key countries needed reforms had yet
to be implemented and markets to stabilize--but they clearly seemed
likely to become more pronounced in coming months.  Net exports also
would be held down by the appreciation of the dollar against the
currencies of the industrial countries that had occurred earlier in
1997 before the Asian crisis intensified.
Another factor viewed as likely to exert a moderating effect
on the growth of economic activity was the expectation of some slowing
in inventory investment.  In the past year, businesses had added to
inventories at a rate that exceeded the rise in final sales, and
somewhat reduced accumulation to a pace more in line with that of
final sales was seen as a reasonable expectation.  Some members
expressed reservations, however, about the extent of any weakening in
inventory accumulation in light of the relatively favorable economic
conditions that they believed were likely to persist over the year
ahead.
Members viewed further growth in consumer spending as likely
to remain the major factor in sustaining the expansion in overall
economic activity.  Consumer sentiment was at or close to historically
high levels according to recent surveys, evidently reflecting the
strong uptrend in employment and income and to some extent the very
large cumulative increase in stock market wealth over the course of
recent years.  Some also noted that consumer debt burdens, while
large, were manageable and that such burdens would be lessened for
many consumers by their refinancing of home mortgages at the lower
mortgage rates now prevailing.  Evidence of strength in the consumer
sector was supported by upbeat anecdotal reports of retail sales
during the holiday season and more recently.  While the growth in
personal expenditures was likely to moderate somewhat from its recent
pace, members did not rule out a more ebullient consumer sector in the
context of substantial further growth in disposable incomes, favorable
financing conditions for purchases of homes, automobiles, and other
consumer durables, and the high level of stock market prices.
Business fixed investment also was expected to provide
substantial support to continued economic expansion, though some
moderation in purchases of business equipment seemed likely after the
exceptionally rapid rates of growth in such investments in recent
years.  Business sentiment remained generally optimistic, and both
debt and equity financing continued to be readily available on
attractive terms to most business borrowers.  However, early signs of
faltering profit trends in some industries, in part related to
developments in Asia, appeared to have introduced a cautionary note
among some business planners.  Members also referred to emerging signs
of speculative overbuilding in some areas, especially of commercial
structures.  Even so, in the absence of unanticipated weakness in
consumer expenditures, a variety of favorable factors seemed likely to
sustain relatively robust spending on business structures and
equipment over the year ahead.  The latter included increased
opportunities to cut costs and enhance efficiency by investing in
relatively inexpensive high-tech equipment in a period characterized
by strong competition in many markets and rising labor compensation
associated with tight labor markets.
Residential construction activity had remained relatively
robust in recent months and was expected to be well maintained over
coming quarters.  Positive indications for the housing outlook
included relatively low mortgage interest rates, very favorable
measures of cash-flow affordability, and quite positive home-buying
attitudes as expressed in recent surveys.  While these factors were
expected to help sustain the housing sector over coming months,
members noted that housing construction had been high for some time
and some cited anecdotal evidence of softening activity in some parts
of the country.  On balance, only modest, if any, slippage from
current levels of home construction activity seemed likely over the
year ahead.
With regard to the outlook for inflation, members referred to
widespread indications of increasingly tight labor markets and to
statistical and anecdotal reports of faster increases in labor
compensation.  Labor cost increases in recent quarters had been especially
rapid in a large segment of the service sector, where foreign
competition was not a factor.  Some members commented, however, that
there were reasons to discount the sharp fourth-quarter increase in
the employment cost index because to a large extent it was the result
of nonrecurring developments in a limited number of industries.
Despite the upward trend in labor compensation, gains in productivity
clearly had kept increases in unit labor costs at a very modest level;
and with unit nonlabor costs continuing to decline, overall unit cost
increases had remained not far above zero.  In these circumstances--and
in the context of highly competitive conditions in many markets,
declines in input prices and in the prices of many commodities,
including oil--rising labor costs seemed to pose little risk of an
upward impetus to inflation in coming months.
The longer-run outlook for inflation was more clouded and
under some scenarios less promising.  Inflation expectations had been
moving down according to recent surveys, and in the context of
relatively modest increases in consumer prices expected over coming months
such expectations could continue to move lower, thereby constraining
increases in compensation and prices.  Nonetheless, some of the
factors that had helped to moderate price increases--including
declining oil prices, the appreciation of the dollar, and restrained
increases in health insurance costs--were not likely to continue to
exert benign effects on inflation as time went on.  More fundamentally,
the productivity improvement that had held down producer costs
could not necessarily be counted on to continue to offset such costs,
especially if the economic expansion remained sufficiently rapid to
put additional pressures on available labor resources.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and debt aggregates in
1998 that it had established on a tentative basis at its meeting in
July 1997.  Those ranges included expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2
and 2 to 6 percent for M3, measured from the fourth quarter of 1997 to
the fourth quarter of 1998.  The associated range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at 3 to 7 percent for
1998.  The tentative ranges for 1998 were unchanged from the ranges
that had been adopted initially for 1995 (in July of that year for
M3).
In reviewing the tentative ranges, the members took note of a
staff projection indicating that, given the members' expectations for
the performance of the economy and prices and assuming no major
changes in interest rates, M2 likely would grow in 1998 in the upper
half of its tentative range, and M3 somewhat above the top of its
range.  The staff analysis anticipated that the velocity of M2 would
continue its recent pattern of relatively stable behavior that was
more in line with historical experience than had been the case in the
early 1990s.  The velocity of M3 was projected to continue to decline
at a somewhat faster rate than historical experience would indicate,
reflecting the greater use by business firms of institution-only money
market funds as a cash management tool and the needs of depository
institutions for appreciable non-M2 funding to finance brisk loan
growth.  The staff projected that the debt of the domestic
nonfinancial sectors would grow around or perhaps slightly above the middle of
its tentative range, reflecting the credit needs of businesses facing
a weaker earnings outlook and larger merger-related retirements of
equity.
In their discussion of the ranges for M2 and M3, the members
noted that the apparently greater predictability of velocity in recent
years could not be counted on to persist, given changes in financial
markets that had made investment alternatives more readily available.
As a consequence, substantial uncertainty still surrounded projections
of money growth consistent with the Committee's basic objectives for
monetary policy.  In this environment, the members did not see any
firm basis for deviating from their recent practice of setting ranges
that, assuming velocity behavior in line with historical patterns,
would serve as benchmarks for monetary expansion consistent with
longer-run price stability and a sustainable rate of real economic
growth.  The tentative ranges for 1998 had been derived in this way,
and Committee members saw no reason to change those ranges at this
time.  Indeed, adjusting the ranges to center them more closely on
growth rates deemed likely to be more consistent with the Committee's
expectations for economic activity and prices could foster the
misinterpretation that the Committee had become much more confident of
the stability and predictability of velocity and was placing greater
emphasis on M2 and M3 as gauges of the thrust of monetary policy.
Several members commented, however, that the adoption of ranges
centered on the Committee's expectations for growth of the monetary
aggregates should be reconsidered in the future if the members were to
become more confident about the relationship between the growth of the
money and measures of aggregate economic performance.  The Committee
also agreed that the range for nonfinancial debt for 1998 should be
left unchanged.  The tentative range readily encompassed the pace seen
as likely to be associated with the members' forecasts for economic
activity and prices.
Accordingly, the following statement of longer-run policy for
1998 was approved for inclusion in the domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output.  In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at this meeting
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5
percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1997 to the fourth quarter of 1998.
The range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
was set at 3 to 7 percent for the year.  The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
Votes for this action:  Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Jordan,
Kelley, McTeer, Meyer, and Mses. Minehan, Phillips,
and Rivlin.
Votes against this action:  None.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members endorsed a proposal to maintain an
unchanged policy stance.  The economy currently was performing very
well and the outlook over the near term was for subdued inflation and
continued solid economic growth.  Over a longer horizon, the range of
possible outcomes was unusually wide, and the direction that policy
would need to move to promote sustained expansion and damped inflation
was unclear.  At this point, the extent to which the still largely
anticipated external drag from events in Asia would offset the strong
upward momentum in domestic demand was a source of major uncertainty.
In addition, it was impossible to predict whether or when the tightness
in labor markets would exert a more pronounced effect on labor
costs and ultimately on price inflation.  Even the thrust of the
current stance of monetary policy as it was transmitted through financial
markets was open to some question.  On the one hand, a real
federal funds rate that was on the high side of historical experience
and a substantially stronger dollar suggested some restraint.  From a
different perspective, however, financial conditions seemed to be
quite stimulative as evidenced by lower nominal and perhaps real
intermediate and long-term interest rates, rising equity prices, ready
credit availability, and rapid growth of the broad measures of money
and credit.  While the members differed to some extent in their forecasts of major trends in the economy and in the risks of alternative
outcomes, they agreed that, under foreseeable circumstances, needed
adjustments to policy probably could be made on a timely basis once
the balance of underlying forces became more evident.  Accordingly, a
steady policy would not incur an unacceptable risk of a seriously
deteriorating economic performance.  In the interim, the greater risk
would be to make a preemptive policy move on the basis of inadequate
evidence regarding underlying economic trends.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting
adjustments to policy, all the members agreed that prevailing
uncertainties indicated the desirability of retaining a symmetric
instruction in the directive.  While a number of members expressed the
view that the next policy move was likely to be a tightening action
and one member saw a greater probability of an easing action, the
uncertainties were sufficiently great to warrant remaining sensitive
to the need for a policy change in either direction.  Accordingly, a
symmetric directive would signal the Committee's readiness to respond
promptly to developments that might threaten the economy's satisfactory performance.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated their support of a directive that called for
maintaining conditions in reserve markets that were consistent with an
unchanged federal funds rate of about 5-1/2 percent, and all also
favored a directive that did not include a presumption about the
direction of a change, if any, in the stance of policy during the
intermeeting period.  Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, the members decided that a slightly higher or a
slightly lower federal funds rate might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period.  The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with some moderation in the
growth of M2 and M3 over coming months.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and
directed, until instructed otherwise by the Committee, to execute
transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following
domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity continued to grow rapidly during
the closing months of 1997.  Nonfarm payroll employment
increased sharply further in December after posting very
large gains in other recent months; the civilian unem    ployment rate, at 4.7 percent, remained near its low for
the current economic expansion.  Industrial production
continued to advance at a brisk pace in the fourth
quarter.  Consumer spending rose appreciably in the
quarter, and housing starts remained close to the highs
of the current expansion.  Business fixed investment
weakened following exceptionally strong increases in the
second and third quarters; nonfarm inventory accumulation
appears to have picked up somewhat.  The nominal deficit
on U.S. trade in goods and services narrowed significantly on average in October and November from its level
in the third quarter.  Price inflation has remained
subdued despite appreciably faster increases in worker
compensation in recent months.
Most interest rates have declined on balance since
the day before the Committee meeting on December 16,
1997.  Share prices in U.S. equity markets have moved up
somewhat over the period; equity markets in some other
countries, notably in Asia, have remained volatile.  In
foreign exchange markets, the value of the dollar has
risen over the intermeeting period relative to the
currencies of several Asian developing countries, but it
has registered only a small increase on average in
relation to the currencies of major industrial nations.
M2 and M3 continued to grow at relatively rapid
rates in December and apparently also in January.  From
the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997,
M2 expanded at a rate somewhat above the upper bound of
its range for the year and M3 at a rate substantially
above the upper bound of its range.  Total domestic
nonfinancial debt expanded in 1997 at a pace somewhat
below the middle of its range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output.  In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at this meeting established
ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1997 to the fourth quarter of 1998.  The range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at
3 to 7 percent for the year.  The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the
light of progress toward price level stability, movements
in their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an
average of around 5-1/2 percent.  In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration
to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
a slightly higher federal funds rate or a slightly lower
federal funds rate might be acceptable in the intermeeting
period.  The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with some moderation in the
growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Votes for this action:  Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Jordan,
Kelley, Meyer, McTeer, Mses. Minehan, Phillips
and Rivlin.
Votes against this action:  None
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, March 31, 1998.
The meeting adjourned at 10:50 a.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
Footnotes
1  Attended portions of meeting relating to the Committee's review of
the economic outlook and establishment of its monetary and debt ranges
for 1998.
Home | FOMC
Accessibility
To comment on this site, please fill out our
feedback form.
Last update: April 2, 1998, 2:00 PM
