








FRB: FOMC Minutes--January 27-28, 2004
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
January 27-28, 2004  A meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., starting at 2:00 p.m.
on Tuesday, January 27, 2004, and continuing at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday,
January 28, 2004.
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Olson
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Poole
Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero, and Stern, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Mr. Connors, Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Fuhrer, Hakkio, Howard, Madigan, Rasche,
Slifman, Sniderman, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin1,
Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Clouse1,
and Whitesell, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Kamin and Ms. Zickler2
, Deputy Associate Directors, Divisions of International Finance and Research
and Statistics respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. English, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Nelson and Wood2,
Senior Economists, Divisions of Monetary Affairs and
International Finance respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Carpenter2, Economist,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, Goodfriend, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rolnick and
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago,
Richmond, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas respectively
Messrs. Elsasser and Rudebusch, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of New York and San Francisco respectively
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices
of the election of the following members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee for the period
commencing January 1, 2004, and ending December 31, 2004, had been received
and that these
individuals had executed their oaths of office.
The elected members and alternate members were as follows:
Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
with a vacancy in the
position of alternate member for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Cathy E. Minehan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, with
Anthony M. Santomero, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
as alternate
Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
with
Michael H. Moskow, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as
alternate
William Poole, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, with
Robert D. McTeer, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
as alternate
Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
with
Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as
alternate
Following this meeting the board of directors of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York appointed Christine M. Cumming to the position of First
Vice President of the Bank, effective February 6, 2004. The directors
also elected her to serve as an alternate member of the Federal Open Market
Committee representing the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Subsequently,
Ms. Cumming executed her oath of office as an alternate member of the
Committee, effective for the period from February 20 to December 31, 2004.
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market
Committee were elected to serve until the election of their successors
at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee after December
31, 2004, with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance
of their official connection with the Board of Governors or with a Federal
Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any official connection with the
Federal Open Market Committee:
Alan Greenspan
Chairman
Timothy F. Geithner
Vice Chairman
Vincent R. Reinhart
Secretary and Economist
Normand R. V. Bernard
Deputy Secretary
Michelle A. Smith
Assistant Secretary
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr.
General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr.
Deputy General Counsel
Karen H. Johnson
Economist
David J. Stockton
Economist
Thomas A. Connors, Christine M. Cumming,
Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, Craig S. Hakkio,
David H. Howard, Brian F. Madigan,
Robert H. Rasche, Lawrence Slifman,
Mark S. Sniderman, and David W. Wilcox
Associate Economists
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected
to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account until the adjournment
of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee after December
31, 2004.
By unanimous vote, Dino Kos was selected to serve at the pleasure of
the Committee as Manager, System Open Market Account, on the understanding
that his selection was subject to being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York3.
By unanimous vote, the Committee amended its Program for Security of
FOMC Information on January 27, 2004, by making small clarifying additions
or changes relating especially to electronic transmissions of confidential
information.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations
was amended in the form shown below.
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out the most
recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including securities
of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are direct obligations
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of
the United States in the open market, from or to securities dealers and
foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange
maturing U.S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury
or the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement;
provided that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal agency
securities held in such Account (including forward commitments) at the
close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at which action
is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $12.0 billion during the period commencing with
the opening of business on the day following such a meeting and ending
with the close of business on the day of the next such meeting;
(b) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that are direct obligations
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of
the United States, from dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York under agreements for repurchase of such securities or
obligations in 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise
expressly authorized by the Committee, shall be determined by competitive
bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements
with individual dealers; provided that in the event Government securities
or agency issues covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by
the dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall
be sold in the market or transferred to the System Open Market Account.
(c) To sell U.S. Government securities and obligations that are direct
obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any
agency of the United States to dealers for System Open Market Account
under agreements for the resale by dealers of such securities or obligations
in 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly
authorized by the Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding,
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with
individual dealers.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations,
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York to lend on an overnight basis U.S. Government securities held
in the System Open Market Account to dealers at rates that shall be determined
by competitive bidding. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall set
a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program and
apply reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue that
may be auctioned and on the amount of securities that each dealer may
borrow. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York may reject bids which could
facilitate a dealer's ability to control a single issue as determined
solely by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations,
while assisting in the provision of short-term investments for foreign
and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York and accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as
fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to Section 15 of the Federal
Reserve Act, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open Market Account,
to sell U.S. Government securities to such accounts on the bases set forth
in paragraph l(a) under agreements providing for the resale by such accounts
of those securities in 65 business days or less on terms comparable to
those available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for New York
Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to
the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in paragraph
l(b), repurchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency securities,
and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements between its
own account and such foreign, international, and fiscal agency accounts
maintained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such accounts under
the provisions of this paragraph may provide for a service fee when appropriate.
4. In the execution of the Committee’s decision regarding policy
during any intermeeting period, the Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, upon the instruction of the Chairman
of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the
degree of pressure on reserve positions and hence the intended federal
funds rate. Any such adjustment shall be made in the context of the Committee’s
discussion and decision at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth,
and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments during
the intermeeting period. Consistent with Committee practice, the Chairman,
if feasible, will consult with the Committee before making any adjustment.
The amendment to the authorization for domestic open market operations
involved the addition of a reference in paragraph 3 to accounts held at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York pursuant to fiscal agency instructions
from the Secretary of the Treasury. Accounts listed in paragraph 3, which
include those maintained by the Bank on behalf of official foreign and
international accounts, are eligible for participation in the Bank’s
short-term investment facility, the so-called “repo pool.”
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations was
reaffirmed in the form shown below.
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to the extent
necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive and
express authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in conformity
with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time
to time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form
of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the open market
at home and abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Treasury, with
the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by Section 10 of the
Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the
Bank for International Settlements, and with other international financial
institutions:
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Euro
Pounds sterling
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to
receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw dollars
under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below,
provided that drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount outstanding at that
time was first drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional circumstances,
specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not
exceeding $25.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open position in
all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net
positions in individual currencies. The net position in a single foreign
currency is defined as holdings of balances in that currency, plus outstanding
contracts for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for future delivery
of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements with due regard to
sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap"
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum
of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among those designated
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section
214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with
the approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of dollars equivalent)
Bank of Canada
2,000
Bank of Mexico
3,000
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed
terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred
for review and approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph
1.A. above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee,
be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment
return on System holdings of foreign currencies or for the purpose of
adjusting interest rates paid or received in connection with swap drawings,
transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at non-market
exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks
for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating
arrangements with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign
currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not commit itself
to maintain any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal Open
Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning the administration
of the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with
the foreign banks designated by the Board of Governors under Section 214.5
of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to ensure that adequate
liquidity is maintained to meet anticipated needs and so that each currency
portfolio shall generally have an average duration of no more than 18
months (calculated as Macaulay duration). When appropriate in connection
with arrangements to provide investment facilities for foreign currency
holdings, U.S. Government securities may be purchased from foreign central
banks under agreements for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar
days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall
be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.
The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman and Vice Chairman
of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such
other member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence
of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee, other Board members
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the absence of the Vice
Chairman of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee
shall be called at the request of any member, or at the request of the
Manager, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), for the purposes
of reviewing recent or contemplated operations and of consulting with
the Manager on other matters relating to his responsibilities. At the
request of any member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such
reviews and consultations shall be referred for determination to the Federal
Open Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed agreement
or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about the division
of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the System and
the Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning System
foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary on policy
matters relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information
to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial
Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit pertinent
information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials
of the Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign currency
operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the
Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships
of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.
By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive was reaffirmed in
the form shown below.
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed
at countering disorderly
market conditions, provided that market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar
reflect actions and
behavior consistent with IMF Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with
selected foreign central banks.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other countries
and with international
monetary institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments in particular
currencies,
and to facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United
States Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities;
and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States
in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange arrangements under
IMF Article IV.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign
Currency
Operations were reaffirmed in the form shown below.
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and direction
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the Authorization
for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager, System Open Market
Account ("Manager"), shall be guided by the following procedural
understandings with respect to consultations and clearances with the Committee,
the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee.
All operations undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported
promptly to the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with the Chairman,
if the Chairman
believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the
time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall
open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or $600 million since the
most recent regular
meeting of the Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the System's
net position in a
single foreign currency exceeding $150 million, or $300 million when the
operation is
associated with repayment of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of trading
in a particular currency by
the System, even though the change in the System's net position in that
currency might be
less than the limits specified in 1.B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the larger
of (i) $200 million
or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the Subcommittee,
if the Subcommittee
believes that consultation with the full Committee is not feasible in
the time available, or with
the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee
is not feasible
in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall
open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most recent regular meeting
of the Committee.
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the larger
of (i) $200 million or
(ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the Chairman
about proposed swap
drawings by the System and about any operations that are not of a routine
character.
On January 9, 2004, the continuing rules, regulations, and other instructions
of the Committee had been distributed with the advice that, in accordance
with procedures approved by the Committee, they were being called to the
Committee's attention before the January 27-28 organization meeting to
give members an opportunity to raise any questions they might have concerning
them. Members were asked to indicate if they wished to have any of the
instruments in question placed on the agenda for consideration at this
meeting, and no requests for consideration were received. Accordingly,
all of these instruments remained in effect in their existing form.
The Committee considered a report from the Manager of the System Open
Market Account that discussed the feasibility and costs of purchasing
mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage
Association (GNMA), a federal government agency. A potential advantage
of transactions in such GNMA obligations was their use to supplement purchases
of direct Treasury securities in periods when large federal surpluses
reduced market supplies of Treasury debt. However, the resumption of large
federal deficits had led to sizable increases in market supplies of Treasury
obligations, which members saw as the preferred vehicle to supply the
need for permanent additions to the System Open Market Account. The report
concluded that outright transactions in mortgage-backed GNMA securities
were feasible but would involve sizeable start-up costs and would tend
to complicate the conduct of System open market operations. Against this
background the Committee decided not to initiate outright transactions
in mortgage-backed GNMA obligations. It was understood, however, that
such GNMA obligations would continue to be eligible as collateral for
System repurchase agreements.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on December 9, 2003, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on recent developments
in foreign exchange markets. There were no open market operations in foreign
currencies for the
System's Account in the period since the previous meeting.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic financial markets
and on System open market transactions in government securities and federal
agency obligations during the period December 9, 2003 to January 27, 2004.
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
At this meeting the Committee engaged in a broad-ranging discussion
of its communication practices.
A portion of this discussion focused on the report of a working group
that had been directed to study how the Committee’s announcements
might be improved. In the course of the discussion, members stressed the
importance that they attached to conveying clearly to the public information
regarding the reasons for policy decisions and how those decisions related
to the Committee’s longer-term objectives. However, only limited
support emerged for the use of particular standard wording to express
the Committee’s appraisals of the economic outlook and views about
the balance of risks. Indeed, several members were in favor of discontinuing
the use of statements regarding the balance of risks to the outlook and
instead focusing mostly on the reasons for their policy decisions in the
announcement. At the same time, all the members indicated that they could
support a flexible approach in which the wording of the Committee’s
announcements, including the assessment of the balance of risks going
forward, would be adjusted gradually over time in keeping with evolving
economic conditions.
In further discussion the members reviewed the potential value and drawbacks
of accelerating the publication of Committee minutes. Possible benefits
would include the provision of more complete information sooner after
meetings on the considerations that led the Committee to adopt the current
stance of policy. Some members expressed concern, however, that accelerated
release of the minutes might have the potential to feed back adversely
on the deliberations of the Committee and on the minutes themselves. The
members also emphasized the importance of allowing sufficient time for
them to review and comment on the minutes and for reconciling differences
of opinion among the members of a large and geographically dispersed committee.
At the conclusion of this discussion, staff was asked to study the issue
further.
The members also discussed the possible advantages of making some changes
in the content, time horizon, and frequency of the individual forecasts
that are summarized in the semi-annual Monetary Policy Reports to the
Congress. In general, the members saw little to be gained by altering
the Committee’s current practices in any significant way, although
some proposed relatively minor changes. It was agreed that there was no
need to reach a decision on such changes at this time, but staff was instructed
to ascertain the degree of interest on the part of the members in making
possible minor adjustments to current procedures.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic outlook and
the conduct of monetary policy over the intermeeting period.
The economy appeared to have expanded at a robust pace in the fourth
quarter, though well below the exceptional pace recorded in the third
quarter. Consumer spending continued to increase at a solid rate over
the final three months of the year, and activity in the residential sector
remained at a very high level. On the business side, outlays for equipment
and software likely posted moderate gains in the fourth quarter, and firms
apparently accumulated inventories for the first time in three quarters.
Despite the strong pace of economic activity, the labor market was improving
only slowly, with private payrolls showing a small acceleration in the
fourth quarter. Core consumer price inflation continued to slow, and inflation
expectations remained subdued over the closing months of 2003.
The December employment report suggested that the labor market had not
gained as much momentum as previously appeared to be under way. Private
nonfarm payrolls increased only slightly in that month, and their level
in November was revised down appreciably. The average monthly increase
in employment in the fourth quarter was indicative of a fairly weak recovery
in the labor market, although it was a clear improvement over the average
monthly loss during the first half of the year. Manufacturing payrolls
continued to shrink in December at about the same pace as in the previous
few months, and holiday-related hiring in retail trade was below average.
In other sectors, job gains were recorded in construction, education and
health services, and professional and business services. Average weekly
hours of production or nonsupervisory workers declined somewhat in December,
reversing the gains of the previous two months. Aggregate hours worked
by nonfarm employees fell in December but in the fourth quarter as a whole
posted their first quarterly increase since 2000. Despite the weak payroll
data, the unemployment rate, which is measured by the household survey,
fell to 5.7 percent in December, in part because of a further decline
in the labor force participation rate. Initial claims for unemployment
insurance continued to drift down in the weeks following the reference
week for the December employment report, suggesting improved job growth
in January.
The pace of expansion in the industrial sector picked up in the fourth
quarter. Total industrial production rose at the fastest rate since the
second quarter of 2002, and manufacturing production posted solid and
widespread gains. High-tech industries, including those producing semiconductors,
computers, and communications equipment, accounted for nearly one-third
of the increase in total industrial production in the fourth quarter.
After having surged in the third quarter, the production of motor vehicles
and parts moved up in the fourth quarter at about the same rate as overall
manufacturing. Outside the manufacturing sector, output at mines increased
modestly in the quarter, while output at utilities rose appreciably, led
by a solid advance in electricity generation that mirrored the strengthening
in the manufacturing sector. Capacity utilization was unchanged in December
and remained well below its long-term average.
Sales of light vehicles jumped in December, and the fourth-quarter average,
although below the torrid third-quarter pace, was well above that recorded
for the first half of the year. These data, along with those on retail
sales excluding autos, were consistent with a solid increase in real personal
consumption expenditures in the fourth quarter. Real disposable personal
income advanced smartly in November. Spending was also supported by the
recent stock market gains, and by greater consumer confidence as reflected
in the Michigan Survey Research Center’s index of consumer sentiment
and the Conference Board’s index of consumer confidence, both of
which stood significantly above their average readings for 2003.
Activity in the housing market remained very robust. In December, single-family
starts edged down only a bit from the exceptional rate they had reached
in November, and multifamily starts moved up to the highest level in almost
four years. New home sales declined in November for the third consecutive
month, but they were still not far below the record highs registered earlier
in the year. Existing home sales had fallen back from September’s
high, though the level in November was still noticeably higher than average
monthly sales in the first half of 2003.
The available data suggested that business purchases of transportation
equipment strengthened in the fourth quarter and that spending on other
capital goods advanced at a moderate pace. Business expenditures on aircraft
rebounded noticeably in the fourth quarter, albeit to a level that was
still far below the levels that prevailed before the downturn following
the terrorist attacks in 2001. Both fleet sales of light vehicles and
truck sales also rose significantly. In the high-tech sector, real outlays
for computing equipment and for software again appeared to have posted
sizable increases in the fourth quarter, while spending on communications
equipment was little changed after three quarters of double-digit growth.
Outside transportation and high tech, nominal shipments were about unchanged
in the fourth quarter, but the upward trend in orders established since
the beginning of last year was consistent with further gains in spending.
After holding roughly steady, on balance, in the first half of 2003, real
spending on private nonresidential construction appeared to have slipped
further in the third and fourth quarters. In the commercial and health-care
sector and in the manufacturing sector, average nominal outlays in October
and November were about unchanged from the previous quarter. However,
spending on other types of construction moved down.
The book value of manufacturing and trade inventories excluding motor
vehicles posted the third consecutive significant monthly increase in
November. Stocks at manufacturers were down a little on average in October
and November, but non-auto wholesalers and retailers accumulated inventories
at a brisk pace. Strong increases in sales, however, kept book-value inventory-sales
ratios at or near their recent lows. Motor vehicle and parts inventories
ended the year noticeably above the level at the end of the third quarter.
The international trade deficit in November shrank to its lowest level
in about a year. Exports of goods and services increased to a level not
recorded since early 2001, while imports fell moderately. Recent data
indicated that the pickup in economic activity in the major foreign industrial
countries continued in the fourth quarter. Japanese exports, machinery
orders, and industrial production rose strongly in October and November.
Euro-area manufacturing data exhibited increasing strength, particularly
in Germany. In the United Kingdom, indicators of business and retail sales
in December pointed to a maintained expansion. And Canadian employment
and sales data were strong in the fourth quarter, with the housing sector
continuing to make a significant contribution to growth.
Prices of consumer goods and services other than food and energy continued
to decelerate through the end of 2003. Overall consumer prices were flat,
on balance, over the past three months, as a small increase in core prices
and a large rise in food prices were offset by a sizable drop in energy
prices. Over the year, the consumer price index posted a moderate increase
that was noticeably below that in the previous year. Core consumer prices
decelerated more sharply and rose only slightly over the year. Producer
prices for finished goods were up moderately over the year, and the advance
was substantially above that over the previous year. The rise last year
was due almost entirely to substantial increases in food and energy prices
as core producer prices rose only a little after having edged down over
2002. With regard to labor costs, the average hourly earnings of production
or nonsupervisory workers on private nonfarm payrolls rose modestly in
the twelve months ending in December, an increase somewhat below that
over 2002.
At its meeting on December 9, 2003, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) adopted a directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve
markets consistent with keeping the federal funds rate at around 1 percent.
In reaching this decision, the Committee members generally perceived the
upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for
the next few quarters to be roughly equal. They also judged that the probability
of an unwelcome fall in inflation had diminished in recent months and
now appeared almost equal to that of a rise in inflation. Nevertheless,
with inflation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee believed
that policy accommodation could be maintained for a considerable period.
The Committee’s decision at the December meeting to keep its target
for the federal funds rate at 1 percent appeared to have been fully anticipated
in financial markets, and interest rate futures for the first half of
2004 were essentially unchanged after the announcement. But futures rates
for the second half of the year rose a few basis points, presumably in
response to the Committee’s assessment that the probability of an
unwelcome decline in inflation had fallen in recent months to a level
almost equal to that of a rise in inflation. Subsequently, however, the
release of the minutes for the October FOMC meeting, which indicated that
at that time the Committee was concerned about the possibility of persistent
slack arising from rapid productivity growth, and the publication of surprisingly
modest growth in employment in December led most market participants to
push back the date of the expected onset of tightening by several months
to some time in the fall. Reflecting the change in policy expectations,
intermediate- and longer-term nominal Treasury yields declined substantially
over the intermeeting period. Yields on inflation-indexed debt fell by
nearly as much, suggesting that the drop in nominal yields owed more to
lower real interest rates than to reduced inflation compensation. Yields
on investment-grade and most speculative-grade securities moved down by
about the same amount as Treasury yields. Major equity indexes rose strongly
in response to the declines in yields and positive news about the outlook
for profits.
The exchange value of the dollar, as measured by the major currencies
index, declined moderately on net over the intermeeting period. Ongoing
investor concerns about the ability of the United States to finance its
current account deficit reportedly were again a primary factor exerting
pressure on the dollar.
M2 fell in December, the fourth consecutive monthly decline. The decline
in M2 over the fourth quarter was the largest on record since the start
of consistent data collection in 1959. The weakness was concentrated in
liquid deposits and, to a lesser extent, in retail money market mutual
funds and appeared to be due in large part to the unwinding of a previous
buildup in deposits associated with heavy mortgage refinancing activity
and to portfolio shifts by households into equities.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting indicated that the momentum
in economic activity that had built up in the second half of 2003 would
carry over into the first half of the current year and that the ongoing
gains in spending and production would soon result in a more visible improvement
in labor market conditions. The considerable stimulus being provided by
fiscal and monetary policies was expected to keep aggregate demand on
a solid uptrend. In addition, improving labor market conditions and the
effects of strong productivity growth on permanent income were projected
to support household spending, while business investment spending was
seen as strengthening in response to the acceleration in business output,
swelling profits, and continued favorable financing conditions. Some slight
downward pressure on core consumer price inflation was anticipated in
the forecast given the ongoing slack in labor and product markets.
In the Committee’s discussion of current and prospective economic
developments, the members commented that the information that had become
available since the December meeting had tended to validate their earlier
assessment that the expansion was firmly established and that robust economic
growth, under way since about mid 2003, was likely to continue as the
year progressed. Many emphasized that business expenditures now appeared
to be on a solid upward trajectory amid widespread reports of much improved
business sentiment. Indeed, business expenditures had broadened the sources
of significant strength in the expansion, which earlier had been sustained
mainly by household and government spending. Factors underlying a favorable
outlook for economic activity continued to include stimulative fiscal
and monetary policies, accommodative conditions in financial markets,
and the positive effects of a strong uptrend in productivity on business
investment incentives and, with some lag, on household incomes. The members
nonetheless expressed disappointment that the acceleration in economic
activity had thus far failed to generate significant strengthening in
employment, though they pointed to a number of positive signs in labor
markets. Given their expectations of persisting above-trend economic growth,
they saw increasing demand for workers as a likely prospect going forward.
Regarding the outlook for inflation, members observed that wide margins
of slack in labor and product markets continued to hold down wages and
prices, especially given the concurrent strength in productivity. Core
consumer inflation appeared to have drifted lower recently, and a number
of members mentioned the possibility of a modest further decline in such
inflation from its current subdued level. Over the year ahead, however,
the members generally anticipated little net change in consumer price
inflation.
In keeping with the practice at meetings preceding the Federal Reserve’s
semi-annual report to the Congress on the economy and monetary policy,
the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks had provided individual projections of the growth of GDP,
the rate of unemployment, and consumer price inflation for the year 2004.
The forecasts pointed to a continuation of relatively vigorous growth
in economic activity, some further decline in unemployment, and a quite
low rate of inflation. Specifically, the forecasts of the expansion in
real GDP between the fourth quarter of 2003 and the fourth quarter of
2004 had a central tendency of 4-1/2 to 5 percent and a full range of
4 to 5-1/2 percent. The projections of the civilian unemployment rate
in the fourth quarter of 2004 were all in a range of 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent.
Forecasts of consumer price inflation for the year, as measured by the
PCE chain-type price index, were centered in a range of 1 to 1-1/4 percent,
with a full range of 1 to 1-1/2 percent.
In their discussion of developments across the nation, members emphasized
growing indications of rising business confidence and, despite persisting
softness in a number of industries, more widespread signs of increasing
business spending for equipment and software and for inventories. The
members cited a variety of factors that pointed to a further pickup in
business capital expenditures over the coming year, including the strength
in new orders and shipments, increasing profits and cash flow, the improved
financial condition of many business firms, the general availability of
financing on favorable terms, and the temporary tax incentive on expenditures
for new equipment. Anecdotal reports from business contacts about capital
spending plans were indicative of appreciable further acceleration in
business expenditures on a widening range of capital goods. While many
contacts indicated that replacement demand or the cost-saving opportunities
provided by more productive new equipment were still the driving factors
in guiding investment decisions, there were more reports of investment
spending to expand capacity.
The members also viewed business inventory investment as likely to provide
some support to the economic expansion over the year ahead. Business inventories
were at exceptionally low levels in relation to sales, and if further
brisk growth in demand broadly in line with current forecasts materialized
this year, business firms could be expected to make commensurate additions
to their inventories. Indeed, inventories appeared to have turned up in
the fourth quarter after declining on balance earlier in 2003 as businesses
evidently became more confident that increases in their sales would be
sustained.
While business expenditures had turned up, employers had continued to
display a high degree of caution in hiring new workers. Employment had
trended up since mid-2003 after a protracted period of job losses, but
the gains were significantly weaker than was typical at similar stages
of earlier business cycles. A key factor that had tended to hold down
hiring was the continuing ability of business firms to meet increasing
demand by improving productivity with existing workforces rather than
hiring new workers. Against this background, labor markets continued to
be described as soft in most areas, albeit with more signs of at least
modest improvement. In this regard, members referred to positive developments
such as the decline in initial claims and the rise in aggregate hours
worked in the fourth quarter. Looking ahead, the members saw considerably
faster growth in employment as a likely prospect in the context of further
strengthening in aggregate demand and expectations of some slowing in
the growth of productivity from its extraordinary pace in recent quarters.
Several emphasized, however, that the timing and extent of the improvement
in employment were subject to considerable uncertainty.
The household sector was continuing to supply major impetus to the expansion.
Household spending was benefiting from stimulative fiscal and monetary
policies, the wealth effects of rising real estate and equity prices,
and increased consumer confidence about the economic outlook. Members
noted that retailers in many parts of the country reported solid sales
during the holiday period. With respect to the outlook for overall consumer
spending, it was suggested that the elevated growth of productivity could
be expected to raise incomes over time and thereby help to buttress consumption
even as the stimulus from earlier tax cuts faded. Residential construction
activity remained at a high level, evidently supported in part by recent
declines in mortgage interest rates. Contacts in the housing industry
indicated that they expected a high level of construction activity in
2004, though perhaps not as robust as in 2003.
Fiscal policy was providing considerable stimulus to the economy and
would continue to do so in the first part of this year, reflecting the
large tax refunds anticipated as a result of overwithholdings in 2003.
Beyond the nearer term, however, the fiscal stimulus was projected to
diminish under existing legislation. In this regard, one member questioned
whether a robust expansion would be sustained once the fiscal impulse
was removed. Some members expressed concern about the longer-run prospects
for large federal deficits and their implications for the future performance
of the economy.
In their comments about the international economy, members noted that
the strengthening in economic activity abroad and the decline in the foreign
exchange value of the dollar had boosted exports. Even so, the ongoing
strength in imports was still producing a widening trade deficit, and
net exports were expected to be a small arithmetic drag on domestic economic
activity over the year ahead. Some members indicated that they were concerned
about the implications of the nation’s rapidly growing external
debt for domestic financial markets and the economy over time.
In the Committee’s discussion of the outlook for inflation, the
members agreed that increases in core consumer prices were likely to remain
muted this year, with ongoing strength in the expansion only gradually
reducing the current output gap and anticipated gains in productivity
exerting downward pressure on costs and prices. Some members commented,
however, that the relationship between the output gap and inflation was
quite loose and that the outlook for productivity remained uncertain.
Accordingly, while members agreed that changes in core consumer price
inflation were likely to be limited, there was some divergence of opinion
about the most probable direction. In the view of many, some modest further
disinflation appeared to be the most likely prospect. A few members noted
that such disinflation, if it was associated with rapid growth in productivity,
could be viewed as non-threatening. Moreover, the expected strength in
aggregate demand would curb the extent of disinflation over time. A few
members expressed the differing view that core consumer prices might well
edge up over the course of the year in light of the considerable stimulus
stemming from current monetary and fiscal policies and the possibility
that the expected pickup in economic activity and employment, especially
if it were on the high side of current forecasts, would be associated
with slower growth in productivity. The evidence pointing to the possibility
of an uptick in inflation was still quite limited, but some members noted
that in addition to sizable advances in the prices of many commodities
including oil, reports from business contacts indicated that a few firms
had been able to raise their selling prices and maintain them at higher
levels in an effort to pass on increases in costs. Overall, however, the
pricing power of business firms remained quite limited.
In the Committee’s discussion of policy for the intermeeting period
ahead, all the members favored an unchanged policy stance that was directed
toward maintaining reserve conditions consistent with a target federal
funds rate of 1 percent. While the members were persuaded that a relatively
vigorous economic expansion was now firmly established and was likely
at some point to call for a move toward a more neutral policy stance,
they concluded that such an adjustment was not warranted under current
circumstances. In this regard they stressed that unused labor and other
resources remained substantial, that inflation was at a very low level,
and that inflation was not expected to change appreciably in either direction
over the year ahead. Members acknowledged that there were risks in maintaining
what might eventually prove to be an overly accommodative policy stance,
but for now they judged that it was desirable to take risks on the side
of assuring the rapid elimination of economic slack.
With regard to the wording of the Committee’s press statement
to be released shortly after the meeting, members discussed at some length
the desirability of retaining a reference from earlier statements to the
prospect that an accommodative policy could be maintained “for a
considerable period.” The existing language had been explicitly
qualified at the December meeting by tying it to low inflation and slack
in resource use, thereby underscoring the notion that a move away from
the current degree of policy accommodation would depend on economic conditions
rather than simply on the passage of time. All the members agreed that
a change in wording was desirable, not to signal a policy tightening move
in the near term, but rather to increase the Committee’s flexibility
to take such an action when it was deemed to be desirable and to underline
that any such decision would be made on the basis of evolving economic
conditions. However, some differences of opinion arose with regard to
the specific proposal under consideration, namely to remove the reference
to “considerable period” and to substitute one referring to
“patience.” Those who fully endorsed the proposal believed
that the new wording conveyed important information about the Committee’s
strategy in an environment of price stability and economic slack and under
those circumstances was unlikely to have outsized effects in financial
markets. A number of members commented that expectations of sustained
policy accommodation appeared to have contributed to valuations in financial
markets that left little room for downside risks, and the change in wording
might prompt those markets to adjust more appropriately to changing economic
circumstances in the future. A few members, while expressing agreement
with respect to the merits of a language change, nonetheless preferred
to drop the reference to a “considerable period’’ entirely
without substituting a reference to the Committee’s ability to be
patient. In this view, even the replacement language would tend to shape
expectations in ways that could complicate the conduct of policy, and
with the economy in a strong uptrend, the Committee no longer needed to
utilize such special language.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Committee voted to authorize and
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise,
to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following
domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the
federal funds rate at an average of around 1 percent.
The vote encompassed approval of the paragraph below for inclusion in
the press statement to be released shortly after the meeting:
The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal. The probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished
in recent months and now appears almost equal to that of a rise in inflation.
With inflation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee believes
that it can be patient in removing its policy accommodation.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan, Geithner,
Bernanke, Ms. Bies, Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Kohn, Ms. Minehan,
Mr. Olson, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Poole.
Vote against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on
Tuesday, March 16, 2004.
The meeting adjourned at 1:45 p.m. on January 28, 2004.
Vincent R. Reinhart
Secretary
Footnotes
1.  Attended Wednesday's
session only. Return to text
2. Attended portion of meeting
relating to the Committee's review of the economic outlook. Return to text
3.Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was received that the selection
of Mr. Kos as Manager was satisfactory to the board of directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Return to text
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: March 18, 2004, 2:00 PM
