











































Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, October 30-31, 2007


                  Page 1 
 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
October 30-31, 2007 

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, October 30, 2007 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, October 31, 2007 at 9:00 a.m.  
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Hoenig 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Mr. Mishkin 
Mr. Poole 
Mr. Rosengren 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Ms. Cumming, Mr. Fisher, Ms. Pianalto, and 

Messrs. Plosser and Stern,  Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Lacker and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respec-
tively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Clouse, Connors, Fuhrer, Kamin, Rasche, 

Slifman, Sullivan, and Wilcox, Associate 
Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of 

Staff Director for Management 
 
Mr. English, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Reifschneider 1/ and Wascher, Associate 
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Wright, Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Zakrajšek, Assistant Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. K. Johnson, Senior Adviser, Division of Inter-

national Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Dale, 1/ Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
  
Mr. Gross,1/ Special Assistant to the Board, Office 

of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Kumasaka 2/ and Luecke, 3/ Senior Fi-

nancial Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Judson, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-

fairs, Board of Governors 
  
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 
 
 
____________________ 
1/  Attended portion of meeting relating to the 

discussion of communication issues. 
2/  Attended Tuesday session. 
3/  Attended Wednesday session. 



Page 2                          Federal Open Market Committee 
 

Messrs. Judd and Sniderman, Executive Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San 
Francisco and Cleveland, respectively 

 
Mr. Altig and Ms. Mester, Senior Vice Presidents, 

Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Phila-
delphia, respectively 

 
Mr. Hakkio, Special Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Kansas City 
  
Messrs. Hilton, Koenig, and Potter, Vice Presi-

dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Dallas, and New York, respectively  

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 
 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee selected D. Nathan Sheets to serve as Economist 
until the selection of his successor at the first regularly 
scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2008. 

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.   

The information provided to the Committee on the 
first day of the meeting, prior to the release of the ad-
vance estimates of the third-quarter national income 
and product accounts, indicated that economic activity 
expanded at a solid pace in the third quarter.  Con-
sumer spending rose more strongly after a tepid in-
crease in the second quarter, and the pace of expansion 
of business outlays for equipment and structures re-
mained reasonably solid.  Manufacturing posted a siz-
able gain for the third quarter as a whole.  In contrast, 
the slump in residential investment intensified during 
the third quarter, at least partly because of ongoing dis-
ruptions in the markets for nonconforming mortgages.  
The average monthly gain in private employment also 
slowed significantly.  Headline inflation eased during 

the third quarter, reflecting a decline in energy prices; 
core inflation continued to be moderate. 

Employment increased more slowly in the third quarter 
than in the first half of the year.  Private payroll em-
ployment registered a considerably smaller average 
monthly gain; employment in residential construction, 
manufacturing, and industries related to mortgage lend-
ing continued to decline, but most service-producing 
industries added jobs at a moderate pace.  With gains in 
employment smaller and the workweek flat, the growth 
of aggregate hours of private production or nonsuper-
visory workers stepped down from its second-quarter 
pace.  The labor force participation rate was un-
changed, on average, in the third quarter, and the un-
employment rate ticked up to 4.7 percent in September.  

Industrial production changed little in August and Sep-
tember after having posted solid advances in June and 
July.  Manufacturing output expanded in the third quar-
ter overall at about the same pace as in the second 
quarter but declined modestly on net in August and 
September.  During those two months, production was 
damped by declines in the output of motor vehicles 
and parts.  In addition, output of construction supplies 
and products fell, likely reflecting the ongoing decline 
in residential investment.  Meanwhile, production in the 
high-tech sector rose at a moderate rate. 

Consumer spending was well maintained in August and 
September.  Motor vehicle sales improved, and real 
spending on other goods posted solid gains in both 
months.  Real outlays on consumer services were 
strong in August because of a weather-induced jump in 
energy services.  Solid increases in nominal wages and 
salaries and lower headline inflation led to robust gains 
in real income over the summer.  However, other fac-
tors affecting consumer spending were mixed.  Short-
term interest rates dropped and stock prices rose, on 
balance, after August.  By contrast, house prices con-
tinued to decelerate, standards on consumer and mort-
gage credit tightened after mid-summer, and the tur-
moil in financial markets that started in the summer  
likely exerted some restraint on consumer spending.  
Moreover, measures of consumer confidence had de-
clined in recent months. 

The housing downturn deepened as sales of new and 
existing single-family homes continued to fall.  Deterio-
ration in nonprime mortgage markets as well as higher 
mortgage interest rates and tighter lending conditions 
for prime jumbo loans since earlier in the year appeared 



                              Minutes of the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                        Page 3 
 

to be restraining housing demand.  Forward-looking 
indicators, including an index of pending home sales 
and adjusted single-family permit issuance, continued 
to point to a further slowing in housing activity over 
the near term.  Single-family housing starts declined 
significantly over August and September.  Nonetheless, 
with single-family home sales continuing to sag, inven-
tories of unsold homes remained quite elevated.  In the 
multifamily sector, starts declined sharply in September; 
however, the third-quarter reading remained within the 
fairly narrow range observed over the past decade. 

Orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods 
excluding aircraft rose on average over August and 
September.  In the high-tech category, orders and 
shipments of computers and peripherals posted robust 
gains over the same period.  Shipments of communica-
tion equipment also rose in August and September, but 
orders were little changed on balance over the same 
period.  Outside the technology sector, shipments of 
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased at 
a solid rate over August and September but orders de-
clined in August and were flat in September.  Sales of 
medium and heavy trucks leveled off in the third quar-
ter after a sharp drop in the first half of the year.  Do-
mestic outlays for aircraft likely stepped down some-
what in the third quarter.  Nonresidential building ac-
tivity remained vigorous through August after having 
posted very strong gains in the second quarter; anecdo-
tal evidence through early October indicated that the 
recent turbulence in commercial credit markets had 
done little to slow the pace of commercial construction.  
More generally, surveys of business conditions contin-
ued to point to further near-term gains in spending, 
although reports from business contacts indicated that 
some firms had marked down their capital spending 
plans. 

Data on the book value of business inventories through 
August suggested that real nonfarm inventory invest-
ment excluding motor vehicles moved down in the 
third quarter after having risen at a moderate pace in 
the second quarter.  The ratio of book-value invento-
ries to sales in the manufacturing and trade sector ex-
cluding motor vehicles, which was available through 
August, remained well below the elevated values seen 
around the turn of the year.  Purchasing managers, on 
average, viewed the level of their customers’ invento-
ries as about right in September. 

The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in August 
as exports increased and imports decreased.  Goods 

exports were boosted by a jump in exports of agricul-
tural products and of gold, which more than offset a 
decline in exports of other goods.  Exports of automo-
tive products fell back sharply after a surge in July.  
Exports of capital goods contracted slightly, led by a 
drop in aircraft exports.  Exports of semiconductors 
declined, while exports of computers were about flat.  
On the import side, the decline was concentrated in 
goods; service imports were flat.  Higher imports of oil 
and of capital goods, particularly computers and semi-
conductors, were more than offset by lower imports of 
automotive products, consumer goods, and industrial 
supplies excluding oil. 

Indicators of economic activity in the third quarter for 
advanced foreign economies were solid on balance.  In 
the euro area, production and sales picked up in the 
third quarter from their second-quarter levels.  How-
ever, recent survey data, including the purchasing man-
agers’ index for the service sector in the euro area, 
pointed to a possible slowing in the pace of growth.  
Likewise, notwithstanding a strong preliminary estimate 
of third-quarter GDP growth in the United Kingdom, 
more recent surveys pointed to some softening.  Re-
cent Canadian data were mixed, with relatively strong 
employment growth and some weakness in retail sales.  
In contrast, Japan’s retail sales and exports rebounded 
in August, and the October Tankan survey seemed to 
suggest that the second quarter’s sharp contraction in 
investment was temporary.  

In emerging-market economies, recent information, 
mostly through August, gave no signs that the turmoil 
in financial markets was having a significant negative 
effect on real economic activity.  In emerging Asia, ac-
tivity appeared to have remained robust, although 
growth slowed from its elevated second-quarter pace.  
Economic indicators for Mexico pointed to moderate 
growth in the third quarter.  In South America, activity 
was strong, boosted by high prices for commodities 
and, in Argentina and Venezuela, by expansionary mac-
roeconomic policies.  Food prices continued to be a 
major source of inflationary pressures in emerging-
market economies, and Chinese authorities took several 
steps aimed at quelling rising prices. 

After having risen rapidly in the first half of the year, 
headline consumer prices decelerated considerably over 
the summer, largely because of a fall in energy prices.  
Over September and October, gasoline prices appeared 
to have risen only moderately despite a jump in crude 
oil costs.  Consumer food prices posted further sizable 

   



Page 4                          Federal Open Market Committee 
 
increases in August and September and continued to 
run well above the change in core prices.  Core con-
sumer price inflation remained moderate in August and 
September and, on a twelve-month change basis, was 
down noticeably from a year earlier.  Core goods prices 
fell over the year ending in September after having 
risen little over the preceding year; noticeable decelera-
tions occurred in the prices of apparel, prescription 
drugs, and motor vehicles.  In addition, increases in 
owners’ equivalent rent slowed noticeably, while rent 
inflation remained about the same as a year earlier.  The 
producer price index for core intermediate materials 
edged up in September.  The twelve-month change in 
that index stepped down considerably from last year, in 
part because of softer prices for a variety of energy-
intensive and construction-related items.  Household 
surveys indicated that median year-ahead inflation ex-
pectations inched down in September and October to 
about the level observed in the first quarter, and 
longer-term inflation expectations slipped to their low-
est level in two years.  Average hourly earnings posted a 
moderate increase over the twelve months ending in 
September. 

At its September meeting, the FOMC lowered its target 
for the federal funds rate 50 basis points, to 4¾ per-
cent.  The Board of Governors also approved a 50 ba-
sis point decrease in the discount rate, to 5¼ percent, 
leaving the gap between the federal funds rate target 
and the discount rate at 50 basis points.  The Commit-
tee’s statement noted that, while economic growth had 
been moderate during the first half of the year, the 
tightening of credit conditions had the potential to in-
tensify the housing correction and to restrain economic 
growth more generally.  The Committee indicated that 
its action was intended to help forestall some of the 
adverse effects on the broader economy that could 
otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial mar-
kets and to promote moderate growth over time.  
Readings on core inflation had improved modestly dur-
ing the year, but the Committee judged that some infla-
tion risks remained, and the Committee planned to 
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.   
The Committee further noted that developments in 
financial markets since the last regular FOMC meeting 
had increased the uncertainty surrounding the eco-
nomic outlook.  Accordingly, the Committee would 
continue to assess the effects of these and other devel-
opments on economic prospects and remained ready to 
act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable 
economic growth.   

The expected path for monetary policy as inferred from 
futures markets declined in the wake of the September 
policy action, as many investors were surprised by the 
magnitude of the reduction in the target rate.  Over the 
intermeeting period, many investors came to expect 
that the Committee would reduce the target federal 
funds rate at its October meeting; in addition, the an-
ticipated policy path further ahead moved down a bit 
more, on net, over the remainder of the intermeeting 
period, apparently in response to heightened concerns 
among investors about economic growth. 

Early in the intermeeting period, the functioning of 
short-term funding markets improved somewhat, but 
conditions in these markets remained strained.  The 
effective federal funds rate was very close to the target, 
on average, but the average absolute daily deviation of 
the effective rate from the target and the intraday stan-
dard deviation remained elevated.  Credit spreads de-
clined in the commercial paper and term interbank 
funding markets but stayed well above longer-term 
norms.  Liquidity in the Treasury bill market was poor 
at times.  Corporate bond spreads narrowed somewhat, 
leaving private yields a little lower.  Nonfinancial bond 
issuance was robust; speculative-grade offerings in-
creased markedly.  The credit quality of most house-
holds remained strong, but delinquency rates on sub-
prime mortgages climbed further.  Securitization of 
nonconforming mortgages remained limited, and 
spreads on jumbo mortgages relative to conforming 
mortgages stayed high. Two-year Treasury yields de-
clined roughly in line with the lower expected policy 
path, while yields on ten-year Treasuries were little 
changed, on net.  TIPS-based inflation compensation 
was about unchanged on balance over the intermeeting 
period despite a sharp rise in spot oil prices.  Stock 
prices jumped early in the intermeeting period in re-
sponse to the cut in the target federal funds rate and 
some favorable economic news but later dropped back, 
leaving broad indexes up only a bit on net.  The foreign 
exchange value of the dollar against other major cur-
rencies declined notably. 

Debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors was esti-
mated to have expanded slightly more quickly in the 
third quarter than in the previous quarter.  Despite evi-
dence that bank lending standards and terms had tight-
ened over the previous three months, business debt 
was still rising strongly, reflecting a continued surge in 
commercial and industrial (C&I) lending by banks and 
robust issuance of investment-grade bonds.  The ex-
pansion of business loans was apparently due in part to 



                              Minutes of the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                        Page 5 
 

financings for leveraged buyouts that underwriters 
could not syndicate to institutional investors.  House-
hold mortgage borrowing was estimated to have decel-
erated again in the third quarter.  M2 increased signifi-
cantly more slowly in September and October than the 
rapid pace observed in August, when the financial mar-
ket turmoil apparently drove investors to the safety of 
M2 assets.  Inflows to retail money market funds and 
small time deposits were especially strong in September 
and October; small time deposits were apparently 
boosted by the attractive rates that banks were offering 
in order to help fund their expanding loan portfolios. 

In the forecast prepared for this meeting, which was 
formulated prior to the release of the advance estimates 
of the third-quarter national income and product ac-
counts, the staff revised up its estimate of aggregate 
economic activity in the third quarter from its forecast 
presented at the September meeting in light of available 
indicators that suggested that consumer spending, 
business investment, and exports were stronger than 
previously expected.  Nonetheless, the staff expected 
real GDP growth to be considerably slower in the 
fourth quarter, reflecting steepening declines in residen-
tial construction, reductions in the pace of motor vehi-
cle production, and a smaller contribution from net 
exports.  Looking forward, the staff expected residen-
tial investment to remain weak in 2008 with modest 
declines in house prices.  In addition, the staff contin-
ued to expect the stress in credit markets and the ap-
preciably higher oil prices indicated by futures markets 
to restrain spending by businesses and consumers, al-
though the lower foreign exchange value of the dollar 
suggested some boost to net exports.  On balance, real 
GDP growth for 2008 was projected to slow to a pace 
a bit below that of its potential, and unemployment was 
expected to creep up slightly.  For 2009, the forecast 
called for real output growth to step up to a pace 
slightly above potential as the drags on economic activ-
ity exerted by the contraction in residential investment 
and financial strains were expected to abate.  The staff’s 
forecast for core PCE inflation was little changed from 
that presented at the September meeting because fa-
vorable incoming figures on core PCE inflation were 
offset by expectations for some limited feed-through 
into retail prices of recent increases in energy prices 
and for slightly less easing in resource utilization.  The 
forecast for headline inflation was in the same range as 
that for core inflation in 2008 and 2009, reflecting ex-
pectations that energy prices would level off and then 
turn down and that increases in food prices would slow 
to a pace more in line with core inflation.   

The advance data on the national income and product 
accounts for the third quarter, which were released on 
the morning of the second day of the FOMC meeting, 
indicated a stronger increase in real GDP than the staff 
had forecast, mostly because inventory investment was 
estimated to be higher than projected by the staff.  The 
staff interpreted this information as suggesting some 
upward revision to its estimate of output growth in the 
third quarter, a small downward revision to its forecast 
of growth in the current quarter, and no significant 
change to its forecast for coming quarters. 

In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in October, all 
meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members 
and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projec-
tions for economic growth, unemployment, and infla-
tion for the period 2007 through 2010.  The projec-
tions are described in the Summary of Economic Projections, 
which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.  

In their discussion of the economic outlook and situa-
tion, and in the projections that they had submitted for 
this meeting, participants noted that economic activity 
had expanded at a somewhat faster pace in the third 
quarter than previously anticipated and that there was 
scant evidence of negative spillovers from the ongoing 
housing correction to other sectors of the economy.  
Conditions in financial markets had improved since the 
September FOMC meeting, but functioning in a num-
ber of markets remained strained.  Even with some 
further easing of monetary policy, participants expected 
economic growth to slow over the next few quarters, 
reflecting continued sharp declines in the housing sec-
tor and tighter lending standards and terms across a 
broad range of credit products.  The slowing of growth 
was likely to produce a modest increase in the unem-
ployment rate from its recent levels, leading to the 
emergence of a little slack in labor markets.  Looking 
further ahead, participants noted that economic growth 
should increase gradually to around its trend rate by 
2009 as weakness in the housing sector abated and 
stresses in financial markets subsided.  With aggregate 
demand showing somewhat greater than expected 
strength in the third quarter and little evidence of sig-
nificant spillovers from the housing sector to other 
components of spending, participants viewed the 
downside risks to growth as somewhat smaller than at 
the time of the September meeting, but those risks 
were still seen as significant.  Participants generally ex-
pected that inflation would edge down over the next 
few years, a projection consistent with the recent string 
of encouraging releases on core consumer prices, fu-

   



Page 6                          Federal Open Market Committee 
 
tures prices pointing to a flattening of energy costs, and 
the anticipated easing of pressures on resources.  
Nonetheless, some upside risks to inflation remained, 
reflecting in part the potential feed-through to inflation 
expectations of increases in energy and import prices. 

Financial market functioning was judged to have im-
proved somewhat since the previous FOMC meeting, 
but the situation in a number of markets remained 
strained, and credit market conditions were thought 
likely to weigh on economic growth over coming quar-
ters.  In light of some improvement in the commercial 
paper and leveraged loan markets over the intermeeting 
period, participants were somewhat less concerned that 
banks would not have sufficient balance-sheet capacity 
to absorb large volumes of assets.  Conditions in cor-
porate credit markets also had improved in recent 
weeks, and most businesses were apparently having 
little difficulty raising external funds, as evidenced by 
strong issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds, a 
pickup in speculative-grade issuance, and surging C&I 
loans.  Markets for nonconforming mortgages, by con-
trast, remained disrupted.  Meeting participants also 
mentioned that while financial market conditions had 
improved, the functioning of some markets remained 
somewhat impaired.  Indeed, several participants noted 
some relapse in financial conditions late in the inter-
meeting period.  Moreover, unusual pressures in fund-
ing markets persisted.  Participants generally viewed 
financial markets as still fragile and were concerned that 
an adverse shock—such as a sharp deterioration in 
credit quality or disclosure of unusually large and unan-
ticipated losses—could further dent investor confi-
dence and significantly increase the downside risks to 
the economy.  Participants were also concerned about a 
potential scenario in which unexpected economic 
weakness could cause a further tightening of credit 
conditions that could in turn reinforce weakness in ag-
gregate demand. 

In their discussion of individual sectors of the econ-
omy, participants noted that the recent declines in 
housing activity—while substantial—had largely been 
anticipated.  Nonetheless, the potential for significant 
further weakening in housing activity and home prices 
represented a downside risk to the economic outlook.  
Most participants pointed to the deterioration in non-
prime mortgage markets as well as higher interest rates 
and tighter credit standards for prime nonconforming 
mortgages as factors that had exacerbated the deterio-
ration in housing markets, and they noted that these 
developments could further limit the availability of 

mortgage credit and depress the demand for housing.  
Some participants also pointed to downside risks to the 
housing market stemming from the large volume of 
substantial upward interest-rate resets that were likely 
on subprime mortgages in coming quarters, which 
could lead to a faster pace of foreclosures in the near 
term, thereby intensifying the downward pressure on 
house prices. 

Participants generally agreed that the available data 
suggested that consumer spending had been well main-
tained over the past several months and that spillovers 
from the strains in the housing market had apparently 
been quite limited to date.  Nevertheless, a number of 
participants cited notable declines in survey measures 
of consumer confidence since the onset of financial 
turbulence in mid-summer, along with sharply higher 
oil prices, declines in house prices, and tighter under-
writing standards for home equity loans and some types 
of consumer loans, as factors likely to restrain con-
sumer spending going forward.  Moreover, anecdotal 
reports by business contacts suggested a softening in 
retail sales in some regions of the country.  Participants 
expressed a concern that larger-than-expected declines 
in house prices could further sap consumer confidence 
as well as net worth, causing a pullback in consumer 
spending.  All told, however, participants envisioned 
that the most likely scenario was for consumer spend-
ing to continue to advance at a moderate rate in com-
ing quarters, supported by the generally strong labor 
market and further gains in real personal income. 

Meeting participants noted that capital expenditures 
had grown at a solid pace in recent months and that the 
financial turmoil generally appeared to have had a lim-
ited effect on business capital spending plans to date.  
Nevertheless, business sentiment appeared to have 
eroded somewhat amid heightened economic and fi-
nancial uncertainty, potentially restraining investment 
outlays in some industries.  However, participants 
noted that conditions in corporate bond markets had 
improved since the September FOMC meeting, and 
that credit availability generally appeared to be ample, 
albeit on somewhat tighter terms.  Participants judged 
that moderate growth of investment outlays going for-
ward was the most likely outcome.  A number of par-
ticipants saw downside risk to the outlook for nonresi-
dential building activity, reflecting elevated spreads on 
commercial-mortgage-backed securities and a further 
tightening of banks’ lending standards for commercial 
real estate loans. 



                              Minutes of the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                        Page 7 
 

Data on economic growth outside the United States 
indicated that the global expansion, though likely to 
slow somewhat in coming quarters, was nevertheless 
on a firm footing. The continued strength of global 
growth and the recent decline in the foreign exchange 
value of the dollar were seen as likely to support U.S. 
exports going forward. 

Readings on core inflation received during the inter-
meeting period continued to be generally favorable, and 
meeting participants agreed that the recent moderation 
in core inflation would likely be sustained.  The slower 
pace of economic expansion anticipated for the next 
few quarters would help ease inflationary pressures.  
Nonetheless, participants expressed concern about the 
upside risks to the outlook for inflation.  The recent 
increases in the prices of energy and other commodi-
ties, along with the significant decline in the foreign 
exchange value of the dollar, were cited as factors that 
could exert upward pressure on prices of some core 
goods and services in the near term.  Increases in unit 
labor costs also could add to inflationary pressures.  
Moreover, participants expressed concern that some 
measures of inflation compensation calculated from 
TIPS securities had risen this year, although they 
viewed inflation expectations generally as remaining 
contained.  Participants were concerned that if headline 
inflation remained above core measures for a sustained 
period, then longer-term inflation expectations could 
move higher, a development that could lead to greater 
inflation pressures over the longer term and be costly 
to reverse. 

In the Committee’s discussion of policy for the inter-
meeting period, members discussed the relative merits 
of lowering the target federal funds rate 25 basis points, 
to 4½ percent, at this meeting or awaiting additional 
information on prospects for economic activity and 
inflation before assessing whether a further adjustment 
in the stance of monetary policy was necessary.  Many 
members noted that this policy decision was a close 
call.  However, on balance, nearly all members sup-
ported a 25 basis point reduction in the target federal 
funds rate.  The stance of monetary policy appeared 
still to be somewhat restrictive, partly because of the 
effects of tighter credit conditions on aggregate de-
mand.  Moreover, most members saw substantial 
downside risks to the economic outlook and judged 
that a rate reduction at this meeting would provide 
valuable additional insurance against an unexpectedly 
severe weakening in economic activity.  Many members 
were concerned about the still-sensitive state of finan-

cial markets and thought that an easing of policy would 
help to support improvements in market functioning, 
thereby mitigating some of the downside risks to eco-
nomic growth.  With real GDP likely to expand below 
its potential over coming quarters, recent price trends 
favorable, and inflation expectations appearing rea-
sonably well anchored, the easing of policy at this meet-
ing seemed unlikely to affect adversely the outlook for 
inflation.  A number of members noted that the recent 
policy moves could readily be reversed if circumstances 
evolved in a manner that would warrant such action. 

The Committee agreed that the statement to be re-
leased at this meeting should indicate that economic 
growth was solid in the third quarter and that strains in 
financial markets had eased somewhat on balance.  
Members also agreed that economic growth seemed 
likely to slow over coming quarters, but that the easing 
action taken at the meeting—combined with the 50 
basis point cut in the target federal funds rate at the 
September meeting—should help to promote moderate 
growth over time, although some downside risks to 
growth would remain.  Members felt that it was appro-
priate to underscore the upside risks to inflation stem-
ming from the recent increases in the prices of energy 
and other commodities, even though recent readings 
on core inflation had been favorable.  While the Com-
mittee saw uncertainty regarding the economic outlook 
as still elevated, it judged that, after this action, the up-
side risks to inflation roughly balanced the downside 
risks to growth. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

 
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks mone-
tary and financial conditions that will foster price sta-
bility and promote sustainable growth in output.  To 
further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the 
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets 
consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an 
average of around 4½ percent.” 
 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 
 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided today 
to lower its target for the Federal funds rate 25 basis 
points to 4½ percent. 

   



Page 8                          Federal Open Market Committee 
 

Economic growth was solid in the third quarter, and 
strains in financial markets have eased somewhat on 
balance.  However, the pace of economic expansion 
will likely slow in the near term, partly reflecting the 
intensification of the housing correction.  Today’s ac-
tion, combined with the policy action taken in Sep-
tember, should help forestall some of the adverse ef-
fects on the broader economy that might otherwise 
arise from the disruptions in financial markets and 
promote moderate growth over time. 

Readings on core inflation have improved modestly 
this year, but recent increases in energy and commod-
ity prices, among other factors, may put renewed up-
ward pressure on inflation.  In this context, the 
Committee judges that some inflation risks remain, 
and it will continue to monitor inflation develop-
ments carefully.  

The Committee judges that, after this action, the up-
side risks to inflation roughly balance the downside 
risks to growth.  The Committee will continue to as-
sess the effects of financial and other developments 
on economic prospects and will act as needed to fos-
ter price stability and sustainable economic growth.”  

 
Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke, Geith-
ner, Evans, Kohn, Kroszner, Mishkin, Poole, 
Rosengren, and Warsh. 
 
Votes against this action:   Mr. Hoenig. 
 

Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed that policy 
should remain unchanged at this meeting.  Projections 
for the U.S. and global economies suggested that 
growth was likely to proceed at a reasonable pace over 
the outlook period.  To better assure that outcome, the 
FOMC had moved rates down significantly at its Sep-
tember meeting.  At this meeting, inflation risks ap-
peared elevated and Mr. Hoenig felt that the target fed-
eral funds rate was currently close to neutral.  In these 
circumstances, he judged that policy needed to be 
slightly firm to better hold inflation in check.  Going 
forward, if the data suggested the Committee needed to 
ease further, it could do so.  He also recognized that 
liquidity remains a near-term challenge and that the 
Federal Reserve would be prepared to act if needed.  
Mr. Hoenig saw the risks to both economic growth and 
inflation to be elevated and preferred to wait, watch, 
and be ready to act depending on how events devel-
oped.  

The Committee then resumed its discussion of an en-
hanced role for the economic projections that are made 
periodically by the members of the Board of Gover-
nors and the Reserve Bank presidents.  At this meeting, 
participants reached a consensus on increasing the fre-
quency and expanding the content of the projections 
that in the past have been released to the public in 
summary form twice a year.  They agreed to publish 
with the minutes a summary of participants’ economic 
projections made for this meeting and to release a press 
statement describing the plan for the future.  The re-
lease of more frequent forecasts covering longer time 
spans and accompanied by explanations of those fore-
casts was seen as providing the public with more con-
text for understanding the Committee’s monetary pol-
icy decisions.   

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, December 11, 2007. 
 
The meeting adjourned at 12:00 noon. 
 
Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on October 5, 2007, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on September 18, 2007 and of the 
conference calls on August 10, 2007 and August 16, 
2007. 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary



                           Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                  Page 9  
 

   

Summary of Economic Projections 
 
In conjunction with the October 2007 FOMC meeting, 
the members of the Board of Governors and the presi-
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par-
ticipate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided 
projections for economic growth, unemployment, and 
inflation in 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010.  Projections 
were based on information available through the con-
clusion of the October meeting, on each participant’s 
assumptions regarding a range of factors likely to affect 
economic outcomes, and his or her assessment of ap-
propriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary 
policy” is defined as the future policy most likely to 
foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation 
that best satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the 
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
ployment and price stability. 
 
The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and 
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected that, 
in the near term, output will grow at a pace somewhat 
below its trend rate and the unemployment rate will 
edge higher, owing primarily to weakness in housing 
markets and to the tightening in the availability of 
credit resulting from recent strains in financial markets.  
Further ahead, output was projected to expand at a 
pace close to its long-run trend.  Total inflation was 
expected to be lower in 2008 than in 2007, and then to 
edge down further in subsequent years. 
 
The Outlook 
Data available at the time of the October FOMC meet-
ing indicated that economic growth had been solid dur-
ing the second and third quarters, and evidence that the 
contraction in the housing sector had begun to spill 
over substantially to other sectors of the economy re-
mained scant.  Consequently, despite the recent finan-
cial market turmoil, the central tendency of partici-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2007, at 2.4 
to 2.5 percent, was little changed from the central ten-
dency of the projections provided in conjunction with 
the June FOMC meeting and included in the Board’s 
Monetary Policy Report to the Congress in July.  However, 
the central tendency of participants’ projections for real 
GDP growth in 2008 was revised down to 1.8 to 2.5 
percent, notably below the 2½ to 2¾ percent central 
tendency in June.  These revisions to the 2008 outlook 
since June stemmed from a number of factors, includ-
ing the tightened terms and reduced availability of sub-
prime and jumbo mortgages, weaker-than-expected 
housing data, and rising oil prices. Partly in response to 

declining housing wealth, the personal saving rate was 
expected to rise over the next few years, contributing to 
restraint on the growth of personal consumption ex-
penditures.  However, net exports were expected to 
provide some support to growth.  The subpar eco-
nomic growth projected in the near term was not an-
ticipated to persist.  Growth was expected to pick up as 
the adjustment in housing markets ran its course, fi-
nancial markets gradually resumed more-normal func-
tioning, and as the monetary policy easing at the Sep-
tember and October FOMC meetings provided sup-
port to aggregate demand.  Economic activity was pro-
jected to expand at a pace broadly in line with partici-
pants’ estimates of the rate of expansion of the econ-
omy’s productive potential in 2009 and to continue at 
much the same pace in 2010.  Participants read last 
summer’s benchmark revisions to the national income 
and product accounts as suggesting a somewhat slower 
rate of trend growth than previously thought.   
 
Most participants expected that, with output growth 
running somewhat below trend over the next year or 
so, the unemployment rate would increase modestly.  
The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
the average rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter 
of 2008 was 4.8 to 4.9 percent, slightly above the 
4¾ percent unemployment rate forecasted in June; 
these projections suggested the emergence of a little 
slack in labor markets.  The central tendency of partici-
pants’ projections was for the unemployment rate to 
stabilize in 2009 and to fall back a bit in 2010 as output 
and employment growth pick up. 
 
Overall inflation was expected to edge down over the 
next few years, fostered by an assumed flattening of 
energy prices about in line with futures markets quotes, 
a modest easing of pressures on resource utilization, 
and fairly well anchored inflation expectations.  Partici-
pants’ projections for core inflation this year and next 
were marked down from those provided at the time of 
the June FOMC meeting, partly in light of recent gen-
erally favorable core inflation data that pointed to some 
reduction in underlying inflation pressures.  The central 
tendency of projections for core PCE inflation in 2007 
was 1.8 to 1.9 percent, down from 2 to 2¼ percent in 
June.  The central tendency of core inflation projec-
tions for 2008 was 1.7 to 1.9 percent.  Participants’ pro-
jections for PCE inflation in 2009 and 2010 were im-
portantly influenced by their judgments about the 
measured rates of inflation consistent with the Federal 



Page 10                         Federal Open Market Committee 
 
Reserve’s dual mandate to promote maximum em-
ployment and price stability and about the time frame 
over which policy should aim to attain those rates given  

current economic conditions.  The central tendency of 
participants’ projections for both core and total infla-
tion in 2010 ranged from 1.6 to 1.9 percent. 
 

 
 

Table 1:  Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve 
Bank Presidents1  

 
 2007 2008 2009 2010 

Central Tendencies     
 Real GDP Growth 2.4 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.5 2.3 to 2.7 2.5 to 2.6 

June Projections 2¼ to 2½ 2½ to 2¾   

Unemployment Rate 4.7 to 4.8 4.8 to 4.9 4.8 to 4.9 4.7 to 4.9 
June Projections 4½ to 4¾ about 4¾   

PCE Inflation 2.9 to 3.0 1.8 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 1.9 
     

Core PCE Inflation 1.8 to 1.9 1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 1.9 1.6 to 1.9 
June Projections 2 to 2¼ 1¾ to 2   

     
Ranges     

 Real GDP Growth 2.2 to 2.7 1.6 to 2.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.2 to 2.7 
June Projections 2 to 2¾ 2½ to 3   

Unemployment Rate 4.7 to 4.8 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0 
June Projections 4½ to 4¾ 4½ to 5   

PCE Inflation 2.7 to 3.2 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0 
     

Core PCE Inflation 1.8 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 
June Projections 2 to 2¼ 1¾ to 2   

1. Projections of real GDP growth, PCE inflation, and core PCE inflation are fourth-quarter-to-
fourth-quarter growth rates, that is, percentage changes from the fourth quarter of the prior year to 
the fourth quarter of the indicated year. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage 
rates of change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures and the price index for 
personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, respectively. Projections for the un-
employment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of each year. 
Each participant's projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. 
The range for each variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from lowest to high-
est, for that variable in the given year; the central tendencies exclude the three highest and three 
lowest projections for each variable in each year. 

   



                           Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                  Page 11  
 

   

Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*

* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

PercentReal GDP Growth

•
• • • •

Central Tendency of Projections
Range of Projections

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
3

4

5

6

7

8
PercentUnemployment Rate

• • • • •

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5
PercentPCE Inflation

• •
• •

•

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5
PercentCore PCE Inflation

• •
• • •



Page 12                         Federal Open Market Committee 
 
Risks to the Outlook 
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projec-
tions as weighted to the downside and the associated 
risks to their projections of unemployment as tilted to 
the upside.  Financial market conditions had deterio-
rated sharply in August, and although there had been 
some signs of improvement since then, markets re-
mained strained.  The possibilities that markets could 
relapse or that current tighter credit conditions could 
exert unexpectedly large restraint on household and 
business spending were viewed as downside risks to 
economic activity.  Participants were concerned about 
the possibility for adverse feedbacks in which economic 
weakness could lead to further tightening in credit con-
ditions, which could in turn slow the economy further.  
The potential for a more severe contraction in the 
housing sector and a substantial decline in house prices 
was also perceived as a risk to the central outlook for 
economic growth.  But participants also noted that in 
recent decades, the U.S. economy had proved quite 
resilient to episodes of financial distress, suggesting  
that the adverse effects of financial developments on 
economic activity outside of the housing sector could 
prove to be more modest than anticipated. 
 
Participants were more persuaded than they had been 
in June that the decline in core inflation readings this 
year represented a sustained albeit modest step-down 
rather than the effect of transitory influences.  None-
theless, participants saw some upside risks to their in-
flation projections.  Recent increases in energy and 
commodity prices and the pass-through of dollar de-
preciation into import prices would raise inflation over 
the medium term.  That increase could lead to an up-
ward drift in inflation expectations that would add to 
price pressures and could be costly to reverse.   
 
The possibility that financial market turbulence could 
have larger-than-anticipated adverse effects on house-
hold and business spending heightened participants’ 
uncertainty about the outlook for economic activity.  
Most participants judged that the uncertainty attending 
their October projections for real GDP growth was 
above typical levels seen in the past.  (Table 2 provides 
an estimate of average ranges of forecast uncertainty 
for GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation over 
the past twenty years.1)  In contrast, the uncertainty 

                                                 
1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary dis-
cusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic 
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty 
and risks attending participants’ projections. 

attached to participants’ inflation projections was gen-
erally viewed as being broadly in line with past experi-
ence, although several participants judged that the de-
gree of uncertainty about total inflation was higher than 
usual, reflecting the possibility that the recent volatility 
in food and energy prices might persist. 

 
 

Table 2:  Average Historical Projection Error 
Ranges1  

 
 2007 2008 2009 2010

 Real GDP2 ±0.6 ±1.3 ±1.4 ±1.4
 Unemployment 

rate3 ±0.2 ±0.6 ±0.9 ±1.1

 Total consumer 
prices2 

±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0

1. “Average historical projection error ranges” for the 
years 2007 through 2010 are measured as plus or minus the 
root mean squared error of projections that were released in 
the autumn from 1986 through 2006 for the current and 
following three years by various private and government 
forecasters.  As described in the forecast uncertainty box, 
under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent prob-
ability that actual outcomes for real activity, unemployment, 
and inflation will fall in ranges implied by the average size of 
projection errors made in the past.  For further information, 
see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip, “Gauging the 
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical 
Forecast Errors,” Federal Reserve Board Financial and Eco-
nomics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November 2007). 
2. Overall consumer price index, as this is the price meas-
ure that has been most widely used in government and pri-
vate economic forecasts.  Percent change, fourth quarter of 
year relative to fourth quarter of preceding year. 
3. Percent, fourth-quarter average. 

 

   



                           Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                  Page 13  
 

Diversity of Participants’ Views 
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diver-
sity of participants’ views.  The dispersion of partici-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2008 was 
markedly wider than in June.  The dispersion of par-
ticipants’ projections for growth next year seemed 
largely to reflect differing assessments of the likely 
depth and duration of the correction in the housing 
market, the effect of financial market disruptions on 
real activity outside of the housing sector, and the 
speed with which financial markets will return to more 
normal functioning.  The dispersion of participants’ 
projections for the rate of unemployment over the next 
year or so had changed little.  Participants’ longer-term 
projections for real GDP growth and for the rate of 

unemployment were more heavily influenced by their 
views about, respectively, the economy’s trend growth 
rate and the unemployment rate that would be consis-
tent over time with maximum employment.  The dis-
persion of the projections for PCE inflation in the near 
term partly reflected different weights attached to the 
various factors expected to foster a moderation of in-
flation.  Some participants judged that the anticipated 
modest easing in resource pressures was unlikely to 
have a marked effect on inflation.  Similarly, views dif-
fered about the influence that inflation expectations 
would exert on inflation over the short and medium 
run.  Participants’ projections further out were also 
influenced by their views about the rate of inflation 
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 
 

   



Page 14                         Federal Open Market Committee 
 

   * See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions. Those participants’ June projections that were provided in quarter points have been rounded to the nearest tenthfor the construction of these histograms.

Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)*

Real GDP Unemployment Rate

1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1

October Projections
June Projections

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2007

4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3

October Projections
June Projections

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2007

1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2008

4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2008

1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2009

4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2009

1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2010

4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2010

 



                           Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007                  Page 15  
 

   * See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions. Those participants’ June projections that were provided in quarter points have been rounded to the nearest tenthfor the construction of these histograms.

Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)*

PCE Inflation Core PCE Inflation

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

October Projections

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2007

1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4

October Projections
June Projections

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2007

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2008

1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2008

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2009

1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2009

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2010

1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4

0
4
8
12
16

Number of Participants

2010



Page 16                         Federal Open Market Committee 
 
 
 
 

  
Forecast Uncertainty 

 
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the 
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks help shape monetary policy and can aid public 
understanding of the basis for policy actions.  Considerable uncertainty attends these 
projections, however.  The economic and statistical models and relationships used to 
help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world. 
And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop-
ments and events.  Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider 
not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their 
projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occur-
ring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. 
 
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve 
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee.  The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated 
with economic forecasts.  For example, suppose a participant projects that real GDP 
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 
2 percent.  If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in 
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported 
in table 2 might imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand 
2.4 percent to 3.6 percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3 percent next year, and 
1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in the third and fourth years.  The corresponding 70 percent 
confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.7 percent to 2.3 percent in the cur-
rent year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth years. 
 
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed on average over history, 
participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projec-
tions of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2.  Participants also provide judgments 
as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most likely outcome.  These judgments about 
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from 
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty 
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with di-
vergences across a number of different projections. 
 

   


















<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /None
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (Dot Gain 20%)
  /CalRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CalCMYKProfile (U.S. Web Coated \050SWOP\051 v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Error
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.4
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJobTicket false
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /DetectCurves 0.0000
  /ColorConversionStrategy /CMYK
  /DoThumbnails false
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams false
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize true
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments true
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Apply
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile ()
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 300
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleColorImages false
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 300
  /ColorImageDepth -1
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages false
  /ColorImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages true
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 300
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleGrayImages false
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 300
  /GrayImageDepth -1
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages true
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleMonoImages false
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages true
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /CheckCompliance [
    /None
  ]
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile ()
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /CreateJDFFile false
  /Description <<
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
    /BGR <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>
    /CHS <FEFF4f7f75288fd94e9b8bbe5b9a521b5efa7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065876863900275284e8e9ad88d2891cf76845370524d53705237300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c676562535f00521b5efa768400200050004400460020658768633002>
    /CHT <FEFF4f7f752890194e9b8a2d7f6e5efa7acb7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef69069752865bc9ad854c18cea76845370524d5370523786557406300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c4f86958b555f5df25efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef63002>
    /CZE <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>
    /DAN <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>
    /DEU <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /ETI <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>
    /FRA <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>
    /GRE <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>
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
    /HRV (Za stvaranje Adobe PDF dokumenata najpogodnijih za visokokvalitetni ispis prije tiskanja koristite ove postavke.  Stvoreni PDF dokumenti mogu se otvoriti Acrobat i Adobe Reader 5.0 i kasnijim verzijama.)
    /HUN <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>
    /ITA <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>
    /JPN <FEFF9ad854c18cea306a30d730ea30d730ec30b951fa529b7528002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020658766f8306e4f5c6210306b4f7f75283057307e305930023053306e8a2d5b9a30674f5c62103055308c305f0020005000440046002030d530a130a430eb306f3001004100630072006f0062006100740020304a30883073002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee5964d3067958b304f30533068304c3067304d307e305930023053306e8a2d5b9a306b306f30d530a930f330c8306e57cb30818fbc307f304c5fc59808306730593002>
    /KOR <FEFFc7740020c124c815c7440020c0acc6a9d558c5ec0020ace0d488c9c80020c2dcd5d80020c778c1c4c5d00020ac00c7a50020c801d569d55c002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020bb38c11cb97c0020c791c131d569b2c8b2e4002e0020c774b807ac8c0020c791c131b41c00200050004400460020bb38c11cb2940020004100630072006f0062006100740020bc0f002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020c774c0c1c5d0c11c0020c5f40020c2180020c788c2b5b2c8b2e4002e>
    /LTH <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>
    /LVI <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>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-documenten te maken die zijn geoptimaliseerd voor prepress-afdrukken van hoge kwaliteit. De gemaakte PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /POL <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>
    /PTB <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>
    /RUM <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>
    /RUS <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>
    /SKY <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>
    /SLV <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /TUR <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>
    /UKR <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>
    /ENU (Use these settings to create Adobe PDF documents best suited for high-quality prepress printing.  Created PDF documents can be opened with Acrobat and Adobe Reader 5.0 and later.)
  >>
  /Namespace [
    (Adobe)
    (Common)
    (1.0)
  ]
  /OtherNamespaces [
    <<
      /AsReaderSpreads false
      /CropImagesToFrames true
      /ErrorControl /WarnAndContinue
      /FlattenerIgnoreSpreadOverrides false
      /IncludeGuidesGrids false
      /IncludeNonPrinting false
      /IncludeSlug false
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (InDesign)
        (4.0)
      ]
      /OmitPlacedBitmaps false
      /OmitPlacedEPS false
      /OmitPlacedPDF false
      /SimulateOverprint /Legacy
    >>
    <<
      /AddBleedMarks false
      /AddColorBars false
      /AddCropMarks false
      /AddPageInfo false
      /AddRegMarks false
      /ConvertColors /ConvertToCMYK
      /DestinationProfileName ()
      /DestinationProfileSelector /DocumentCMYK
      /Downsample16BitImages true
      /FlattenerPreset <<
        /PresetSelector /MediumResolution
      >>
      /FormElements false
      /GenerateStructure false
      /IncludeBookmarks false
      /IncludeHyperlinks false
      /IncludeInteractive false
      /IncludeLayers false
      /IncludeProfiles false
      /MultimediaHandling /UseObjectSettings
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (CreativeSuite)
        (2.0)
      ]
      /PDFXOutputIntentProfileSelector /DocumentCMYK
      /PreserveEditing true
      /UntaggedCMYKHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UntaggedRGBHandling /UseDocumentProfile
      /UseDocumentBleed false
    >>
  ]
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [2400 2400]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice

