









































Microsoft Word - 20080625.minutes.FOMC.publication.doc


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
June 24-25, 2008 

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, June 24, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, June 25, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Mr. Mishkin 
Ms. Pianalto  
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock-

hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, 

Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, Slifman, Tracy, 
and Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Ms. J. Johnson,1 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervi-

sion and Regulation, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson,1 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Bailey,1 Deputy Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Parkinson,1 Deputy Director, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Barger,1 Deputy Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Stehm,1 Associate Director, Division of Re-

serve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, 
Board of Governors 

 
Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-

rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Gagnon,2  Visiting Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Wright, Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Zakrajšek, Assistant Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Erceg,2 Assistant Director, Division of Inter-

national Finance, Board of Governors 
 
_________________ 
1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the 

supervisory report concerning investment banks 
and related policy issues. 

2 Attended portions of the meeting through the 
policy vote. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Gross,1 Special Assistant to the Board, Office 

of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Tevlin,2 Senior Economist, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Ammer,2 Senior Economist, Division of Inter-

national Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Beechey, Economist, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Dykes, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Hughes,1 Staff Assistant, Office of the Secre-

tary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Atlanta 
 

Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Boston 

 
Messrs. Altig, Angulo,1 Rasche, Schweitzer, Sellon, 

and Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, St. 
Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Richmond, 
respectively 

 
Messrs. Fernald and Fisher, and Ms. McLaughlin, 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San 
Francisco, Chicago, and New York, respec-
tively 

 
_________________ 
1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the 

supervisory report concerning investment banks 
and related policy issues. 

2 Attended portions of the meeting through the 
policy vote. 

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. 

The information reviewed at the June meeting indi-
cated that economic activity had remained soft in re-
cent months.  Manufacturing activity had deteriorated, 
business investment in equipment appeared to have 
moved down, and residential construction had contin-
ued its steep descent.  Labor market conditions had 
weakened further, and consumer sentiment was at his-
torical lows, but despite these developments, consumer 
spending appeared resilient.  Core consumer price in-
flation had been stable over recent months, but head-
line inflation had remained elevated because of further 
substantial increases in food and energy prices. 

Labor demand continued to weaken in April and May.  
Private payroll employment fell at a slower rate than 
earlier in the year, but the decline in jobs was again 
widespread, with the exception of nonbusiness services.  
As a result, aggregate hours of private production or 
nonsupervisory workers fell, on average, in April and 
May.  The unemployment rate jumped from 5.0 per-
cent in April to 5.5 percent in May and was now about 
a percentage point above its level of a year ago.  The 
increase from April to May was accompanied by a rise 
in labor force participation, especially among young 
people. 

Industrial production contracted in April and May at a 
slightly faster pace than in the first quarter.  Manufac-
turing output also fell in April and was unchanged in 
May; over the two months, factory production slowed 
across a broad range of industries.  Production in the 
high-tech sector continued to expand but at only a 
modest rate.  The factory utilization rate edged down 
further in April and May to a level below its first-
quarter average and was well below its recent high in 
the third quarter of 2007. 

The growth of real consumer spending appeared to 
have picked up moderately from its sluggish pace in the 
first quarter.  Real outlays on goods other than motor 
vehicles increased at a robust pace, on average, in April 
and May.  However, retail purchases of motor vehicles 
fell to a low level.  More broadly, households’ financial 
conditions appeared to have weakened in recent 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



months.  Real disposable personal income had been 
rising only slowly since last summer, restrained by the 
gradual deterioration in labor market conditions and 
sharp increases in food and energy prices.  The ratio of 
household wealth to income had dropped sharply in 
the first quarter, reflecting substantial net declines in 
broad equity prices and further depreciation of house 
prices.  Measures of consumer sentiment fell further in 
April and May; the May readings from the 
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers 
and the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Sur-
vey were near their low points reached during the early 
1990s. 

Activity in the housing sector remained very weak in 
April and May.  Single-family housing starts posted 
further declines, leaving the pace of construction in this 
sector down about two-thirds from the peak in early 
2006; starts of multifamily homes were a bit below their 
average over the last 10 years.  Although production 
cuts in the single-family housing sector resulted in con-
tinued reductions of inventories of unsold new homes, 
the slow pace of sales left the ratio of unsold new 
homes to sales at elevated levels not seen since the 
early 1980s.  Sales of existing homes remained little 
changed through April at a low level.  However, the 
index of pending sales agreements—an indicator of 
existing home sales in coming months—jumped in 
April to its highest reading in six months.  Conditions 
in mortgage credit markets remained tight, particularly 
for nonprime borrowers and for those seeking noncon-
forming mortgages. 

In the business sector, real spending on equipment and 
software appeared to move down a bit further in April 
and May following a slight decrease in the first quarter.  
Business outlays on transportation equipment contin-
ued to fall sharply.  The data on shipments and orders 
of nondefense capital goods through May suggested 
that spending on high-tech equipment and software 
was expanding sluggishly, while outlays for other 
equipment remained weak.  The slower pace of capital 
expenditures appeared consistent with a general dete-
rioration of business conditions, including a decelera-
tion of sales, a pessimistic tone across monthly surveys 
of business conditions, and tighter standards and terms 
on business credit.  Real spending on nonresidential 
construction continued to rise in the first quarter, but 
at a substantially slower rate than over the previous two 
years.  The architectural billing index plummeted re-
cently, and vacancy rates for commercial properties 
ticked up. 

Real nonfarm inventories excluding motor vehicles 
rose only slightly in the first quarter, as firms cut pro-
duction to keep inventories aligned with the sluggish 
pace of sales.  The ratio of book-value inventories to 
sales (excluding motor vehicles) ticked down in April 
and had changed relatively little, on net, since the mid-
dle of 2007.  Despite sharply lower sales of motor vehi-
cles, the modest pace of production allowed inventories 
to fall further through May.  Production at automakers 
was restrained by both weak demand and disruptions 
caused by labor disputes. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened in April, as 
a jump in imports outweighed a rise in exports.  Most 
categories of goods imports rebounded in April from 
lower levels in March, especially petroleum products, 
the prices of which had moved sharply higher.  Imports 
of non-oil industrial supplies, capital goods, and auto-
motive products also surged in April, whereas imports 
of consumer goods expanded more slowly.  The in-
crease in exports was broad-based, with strong in-
creases in exports of industrial supplies, capital and 
consumer goods, and automotive products. 

Economic activity in advanced foreign economies ap-
peared to have expanded moderately in the first quar-
ter, but the pace of that activity varied markedly across 
economies.  In the euro area and Japan, strong invest-
ment contributed to a sharp acceleration in output.  
Economic growth in the United Kingdom moderated 
because of a slowdown in real estate and business ac-
tivities.  Falling exports and inventories subtracted 
from Canadian output growth.  Recent data pointed to 
broad softness across the advanced foreign economies 
in the second quarter, consistent with a weakening of 
consumer and business confidence.  Indicators for 
emerging market economies pointed to continued solid 
growth in the first quarter, albeit at a slower pace than 
last year among Latin American economies.  In particu-
lar, economic activity in Mexico slowed further in the 
first quarter, in the wake of weaker growth in the 
United States.  In contrast, real output in China and 
India appeared to have continued expanding at the 
rapid rates seen in 2007.  Inflation stayed high, on bal-
ance, in all regions, as recent price increases for food 
and energy added to global inflationary pressures. 

Headline consumer price inflation in the United States 
remained elevated in April and May, mostly because of 
large increases in food and energy prices.  Excluding 
these categories, core prices rose at a relatively subdued 
rate in these two months.  Average hourly earnings in-
creased in April and May at a slower pace than in the 
first quarter, bringing the change over the 12 months 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



ending in May below the pace over the previous 12 
months.  The employment cost index for hourly com-
pensation rose moderately in the first quarter and at a 
similar rate to recent years. 

At its April 29-30 meeting, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) lowered its target for the federal 
funds rate 25 basis points, to 2 percent.  In addition, 
the Board of Governors approved a decrease of 25 
basis points in the discount rate, to 2¼ percent.  The 
Committee’s statement noted that recent information 
indicated that economic activity remained weak; house-
hold and business spending had been subdued, and 
labor markets had softened further.  Financial markets 
remained under considerable stress, and tight credit 
conditions and the deepening housing contraction were 
likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few 
quarters.  Although readings on core inflation had im-
proved somewhat, energy and other commodity prices 
had increased, and some indicators of inflation expecta-
tions had risen in recent months.  The Committee ex-
pected inflation to moderate in coming quarters, re-
flecting a projected leveling-out of energy and other 
commodity prices and an easing of pressures on re-
source utilization.  Still, uncertainty about the inflation 
outlook remained high, and the Committee noted that 
it would be necessary to continue to monitor inflation 
developments closely.  The Committee stated that the 
substantial easing of monetary policy to date, combined 
with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity, 
should help to promote moderate growth over time 
and to mitigate risks to economic activity.  The Com-
mittee indicated that it would continue to monitor eco-
nomic and financial developments and act as needed to 
promote sustainable economic growth and price stabil-
ity. 

The expected path of monetary policy moved down 
following the Committee’s decision at its April meeting 
to reduce the target federal funds rate by 25 basis 
points.  Although the decision had largely been antici-
pated by financial markets, investors had assigned some 
odds to an unchanged target rate.  Subsequently, 
money market futures rates rose substantially, on net, 
as stronger-than-expected data on spending and on 
labor markets along with somewhat improved condi-
tions in financial markets appeared to impart greater 
confidence about prospects for economic activity.  
Nominal Treasury yields also rose noticeably, and the 
Treasury yield curve flattened.  Measures of short-term 
inflation compensation derived from yields on infla-
tion-indexed Treasury securities increased over the in-
termeeting period, due in part to sharply higher prices 
for oil and agricultural commodities.  Measures of 

longer-term inflation compensation remained around 
the middle of their recent elevated range.  Some survey 
measures of households’ expectations of near-term 
inflation rose sharply, while survey measures of longer-
term expectations ranged from unchanged to slightly 
higher.  

Conditions eased somewhat in some U.S. financial 
markets over the intermeeting period but nonetheless 
remained strained.  Functioning of short-term funding 
markets showed some improvement; spreads in inter-
bank funding markets generally declined, as did spreads 
on lower-rated commercial paper.  However, liquidity 
in the market for interbank loans at maturities beyond 
three months remained thin, and the spreads quoted on 
those instruments were little changed.  Demand for 
funds from the Term Auction Facility remained sub-
stantial, but stop-out rates relative to minimum bid 
rates declined considerably relative to prior auctions, 
likely in response to increased auction sizes.  Deposi-
tory institutions’ use of primary credit borrowing in-
creased, on balance, over the intermeeting period.  
Credit outstanding through the Primary Dealer Credit 
Facility declined significantly over the intermeeting pe-
riod.  Conditions in the market for Treasury repurchase 
agreements appeared to improve somewhat, but condi-
tions were still poor for lower-quality collateral.  Sup-
ported by sales and redemptions of Treasury securities 
from the System Open Market Account and exchanges 
under the Term Securities Lending Facility, yields on 
overnight Treasury repurchase agreements were around 
typical spreads to the effective federal funds rate during 
much of the intermeeting period, but “haircuts” ap-
plied by lenders on non-Treasury collateral remained 
elevated.  Term Securities Lending Facility auctions 
held since the April FOMC meeting were generally un-
dersubscribed. 

In longer-term credit markets, yields on investment- 
and speculative-grade corporate bonds had risen sig-
nificantly since the end of April but by slightly less than 
yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, im-
plying a further modest narrowing of credit spreads.  
Corporate bond issuance surged in May, as some non-
financial firms reduced their reliance on short-term 
debt in favor of bond financing.  Commercial paper 
outstanding declined, and business lending by banks 
decelerated, partly reflecting continued low issuance of 
leveraged loans as well as tighter credit standards and 
terms at banks.  Over the intermeeting period, spreads 
of rates on conforming residential mortgages over 
comparable-maturity Treasury securities remained 
about flat.  Spreads on jumbo mortgages, however, 
widened somewhat and credit availability for jumbo-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



mortgage borrowers continued to be tight.  In the sec-
ondary market, issuance of mortgage-backed securities 
by government-sponsored enterprises was strong, but 
issuance of securities backed by nonconforming resi-
dential mortgages and commercial mortgages remained 
low.  Broad stock prices were somewhat volatile but 
declined modestly, on net, over the intermeeting pe-
riod.  The surge in oil prices weighed on equity prices 
outside of the energy sector, and a more pessimistic 
outlook for future earnings in the financial sector 
caused stocks of financial institutions to decline signifi-
cantly. 

Conditions in the money markets of many major for-
eign economies remained strained, showing little im-
provement since late April despite ongoing activities of 
foreign central banks aimed at easing liquidity pressures 
in funding markets.  Yields on sovereign debt in the 
advanced foreign economies moved up approximately 
in line with increases in comparable Treasury yields in 
the United States.  The trade-weighted foreign ex-
change value of the dollar against major currencies 
rose. 

M2 rose much more slowly in April and May than in 
the first quarter.  The deceleration seemed to reflect 
primarily an unwinding of heightened demand for the 
relative safety and liquidity of money market mutual 
funds that had boosted M2 in prior months. 

In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff 
raised its projection for the growth of real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) for 2008.  The available indica-
tors of spending, particularly those for consumption 
and business investment, suggested that economic ac-
tivity in the first half of the year had been somewhat 
firmer than previously expected.  The staff projection 
prepared for the meeting pointed to modest expansion 
in real GDP in the first half of 2008 followed by a 
slight slowdown in growth in the second half, when 
several factors were likely to restrain spending, includ-
ing lower household wealth, slower real income growth 
due to sharply higher oil prices, and tight credit condi-
tions.  The pace of economic activity was projected to 
pick up in 2009 as those effects waned and weakness in 
housing construction abated.  Despite this acceleration, 
the trajectory of economic growth anticipated through 
2009 implied noticeable slack in resource utilization. 

The staff’s projection for price inflation in core per-
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) for 2008 as a 
whole was unchanged; recent readings on core PCE 
inflation were better than anticipated and led the staff 
to lower its projection for the first half of the year.  But 
some of the recent improvement was seen as reflecting 

transitory factors, and the forecast of core inflation for 
the second half of this year and next year was marked 
up to incorporate the likely pass-through of the recent 
jumps in the prices of energy and other commodities, 
and the reversal of these transitory factors.  The further 
large increase in energy prices also prompted an up-
ward revision of the forecast of headline PCE inflation 
in the second half of 2008, and headline inflation was 
expected to exceed core inflation by a considerable 
margin this year.  However, in view of a projected lev-
eling-out of energy prices and the anticipated slack in 
resource utilization, headline inflation was expected to 
decline considerably in 2009 from its pace in the sec-
ond half of 2008, and core inflation was forecasted to 
edge lower. 

In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in June, all 
meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members 
and Reserve Bank presidents) provided projections for 
economic growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tion for the years 2008 through 2010.  The projections 
are described in the Summary of Economic Projec-
tions, which is attached as an addendum to these min-
utes.  A number of participants noted that, given the 
recent large adverse shocks to output and inflation, 
their projections even late in the forecast period did not 
fully reveal their perceptions of longer-run sustainable 
rates of economic growth and unemployment or the 
measured rates of inflation that would be consistent 
with price stability.  In this context, participants dis-
cussed several possible refinements of the Committee’s 
approach to projections that could provide a clearer 
indication of participants’ views about these variables 
and agreed to consider this matter further. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, FOMC participants noted that spending in recent 
months had evidently been less weak than anticipated, 
leading participants to revise up their assessment of 
economic growth in the first half of 2008.  Nonethe-
less, most participants judged that the slightly firmer 
path of spending did not presage a near-term strength-
ening of the expansion.  Economic activity would 
probably continue to expand slowly over the next sev-
eral quarters, restrained by a range of factors, including 
strains in financial markets and institutions and the re-
sulting tightness of  credit conditions; ongoing weak-
ness in the housing sector; and the increases in energy 
and agricultural commodity prices.  And, although the 
incoming data suggested reduced odds that these fac-
tors would cause an appreciable contraction of eco-
nomic activity in the near term, participants continued 
to see significant downside risks to growth.  At the 
same time, however, the outlook for inflation had dete-

Minutes of the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



riorated.  Recent increases in energy and some other 
commodity prices would boost inflation sharply in 
coming months.  A leveling-out of energy prices and 
continued slack in resource utilization were expected to 
lead inflation to moderate in 2009 and 2010.  However, 
participants had become more concerned about upside 
risks to the inflation outlook—including the possibility 
that persistent advances in energy and food prices 
could spur increases in long-run inflation expectations. 

Although financial market conditions generally ap-
peared to have improved somewhat over the intermeet-
ing period, most participants viewed markets as remain-
ing under considerable stress.  Some participants noted 
that the availability of the liquidity facilities that the 
Federal Reserve had introduced in recent months had 
probably bolstered the confidence of investors and 
lenders and thus was likely responsible for part of the 
improvement in market functioning.  Term spreads in 
interbank funding markets had declined, but remained 
elevated by historical standards.  The leveraged loan 
market had improved somewhat and corporate bond 
issuance had been strong.  However, the equity prices 
of many investment and commercial banks had de-
clined over the intermeeting period, reflecting increased 
concern about asset quality and the outlook for profits.  
The deteriorating condition of some financial guaran-
tors and mortgage insurers contributed to worries 
about banks.  Investors remained chary of securitized 
products, such as mortgage credits not guaranteed by a 
government-sponsored enterprise or agency.  A num-
ber of financial institutions had been successful in rais-
ing new capital, but reportedly on less favorable terms 
than before.  Participants judged that many financial 
institutions would need to continue to recapitalize and 
reduce their leverage.  Some anticipated that this proc-
ess could well be protracted, and that financial inter-
mediation consequently would be impeded for some 
time, holding back growth well into 2009.  Overall, fi-
nancial market conditions, while better in many re-
spects, appeared to remain fragile, and participants 
judged that potential further adverse financial market 
developments still posed downside risks to economic 
activity. 

Recent data pointed to more resilience in consumer 
spending in the second quarter than had been expected.  
However, most participants thought that much of the 
recent strength probably indicated only a more delayed 
slowing in consumer spending than had been expected 
rather than a more favorable trend.  Falling wealth and 
real income, tightening credit conditions, rising energy 
prices, and sharply declining consumer sentiment were 
seen as likely to restrain consumer spending later this 

year, particularly after the effects of the fiscal stimulus 
waned.  Lenders were exhibiting greater caution in ex-
tending credit to households, partly in response to ac-
tual and expected increases in delinquency rates on 
household credit.  Participants reported that second 
mortgages, automobile loans, and home equity lines of 
credit were becoming harder to obtain, and some exist-
ing home equity lines were being cut, even for consum-
ers with good credit scores.  The possibilities that the 
decline in house prices would be more protracted than 
previously anticipated, that spillovers from the decline 
in housing wealth to consumption could be larger than 
expected, and that the household saving rate might rise 
more steeply than currently projected were seen as pos-
ing downside risks to consumption spending going for-
ward. 

Participants judged that the outlook for the housing 
market remained bleak, with falling prices, slow sales, 
high inventories of unsold homes, and further declines 
in construction activity over coming months.  Although 
a few participants saw tentative signs that the housing 
market might be bottoming out in some parts of the 
country, most aggregate indicators of housing activity 
pointed to continued weakness.  Also, mortgage rates 
had increased, and the equity prices of housing-related 
firms had fallen over the intermeeting period, after hav-
ing stabilized earlier in the year, suggesting renewed 
pessimism among investors about prospects for the 
housing industry.  Rising foreclosures were seen as 
likely to continue to add to downward pressure on 
house prices. 

Business spending was expected to remain sluggish, as 
tight credit conditions, uncertainty about economic 
growth, and the rising costs of inputs―especially energy 
and raw materials―appeared to be making firms quite 
cautious and inclined to defer capital expenditures.   
Businesses had been able to raise a considerable vol-
ume of funds in bond markets of late, and profits and 
cash flow were still strong in the nonfinancial business 
sector.  But some regional banks that had experienced 
substantial credit losses were expected to adopt a sig-
nificantly more conservative lending posture, further 
limiting the availability of credit to small businesses.  
Although the available data indicated that spending on 
nonresidential construction projects had remained rela-
tively robust in recent months, participants thought 
that this strength might have reflected projects initiated 
some time ago, when the economic outlook and credit 
conditions were more favorable, and they expected 
poor business sentiment and tighter credit to lead 
commercial construction to soften later this year and 
next year.  Some anecdotal reports of recently delayed 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



or canceled new construction projects supported this 
view. 

Regarding economic activity in various business sec-
tors, participants reported continued overall softness in 
manufacturing, especially in the housing-related and 
motor vehicle sectors.  Flooding in the Midwest had 
disrupted transportation and damaged corn and soy-
bean crops.  However, production in the energy and 
steel sectors appeared to be strengthening, and industry 
contacts generally reported that demand for exported 
goods was buoyant.  Labor markets in most regions 
continued to weaken gradually.  Most participants an-
ticipated persistent slack in labor markets, with the un-
employment rate rising further through next year, be-
fore declining slightly in 2010. 

The current account deficit had narrowed significantly 
on balance in recent quarters, and still-solid foreign 
growth was expected to contribute to a further narrow-
ing of the real U.S. trade deficit in coming quarters.  
However, a few participants commented that this effect 
might fade over time, as they expected demand in for-
eign economies to slow. 

Participants were concerned about the inflationary con-
sequences of recent increases in the prices of energy, 
food, and imports, and they expected headline inflation 
to rise in the very near term.  However, core inflation 
had been stable of late, and participants anticipated that 
a leveling-out of energy prices and slack in labor and 
product markets would contribute to a moderation of 
inflation pressures over time.  Reports on the ability of 
firms to pass cost increases on to customers were 
mixed, but some participants commented that the 
global nature of inflationary pressures could make im-
ports more expensive and give firms greater scope to 
raise prices.  Some participants noted that wage growth 
had been quite moderate, reinforcing a view that 
longer-term inflation expectations and labor cost pres-
sures had remained fairly well contained.  However, 
others commented that wages might accelerate with a 
lag only after inflation expectations had moved higher, 
and that it would be very costly to subsequently bring 
those expectations back down.  Participants’ views of 
the recent evidence on inflation expectations varied.  
Some noted that the increase was greatest for short-
term survey measures of households’ inflation expecta-
tions, which may be influenced disproportionately by 
consumers’ perceptions of changes in the prices of 
food and gasoline; those participants judged that under-
lying inflation trends had not risen nearly as much and 
anticipated that such survey measures would reverse 
their recent increases as headline inflation moderated.  

However, others saw the signs of a rise in inflation ex-
pectations as more broad-based and were concerned 
that this development could signal an erosion of confi-
dence in the Committee’s commitment to price stability 
and, absent effective action by the Committee, could 
impart greater momentum to the inflation process.  
Participants agreed that the possibilities of greater pass-
through of cost increases into prices, higher long-run 
inflation expectations feeding into labor costs and 
other prices, and further increases in energy prices all 
posed upside risks to inflation that had intensified since 
the time of the April FOMC meeting. 

Some participants noted that certain measures of the 
real federal funds rate, especially those using actual or 
forecasted headline inflation, were now negative, and 
very low by historical standards.  In the view of these 
participants, the current stance of monetary policy was 
providing considerable support to aggregate demand 
and, if the negative real federal funds rate was main-
tained, it could well lead to higher trend inflation.  In 
this view, a significant portion of the easing in mone-
tary policy since last fall was aimed at providing insur-
ance against the risk of an especially severe weakening 
in economic activity and, with downside risks having 
diminished somewhat, some firming in policy would be 
appropriate very soon, if not at this meeting.  However, 
other participants observed that the high level of risk 
spreads and the restricted availability of credit sug-
gested that overall financial conditions were not espe-
cially accommodative; indeed, borrowing costs for 
many households and businesses were higher than they 
had been last summer. 

In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for 
the intermeeting period, members generally agreed that 
the risks to growth had diminished somewhat since the 
time of the last FOMC meeting while the upside risks 
to inflation had increased.  Nonetheless, the risks to 
growth remained tilted to the downside.  Conditions in 
some financial markets had improved, but many finan-
cial institutions continued to experience significant 
credit losses and balance sheet pressures, and in these 
circumstances credit availability was likely to remain 
constrained for some time. At the same time, however, 
the near-term outlook for inflation had deteriorated, 
and the risks that underlying inflation pressures could 
prove to be greater than anticipated appeared to have 
risen.  Members commented that the continued strong 
increases in energy and other commodity prices would 
prompt a difficult adjustment process involving both 
lower growth and higher rates of inflation in the near 
term.  Members were also concerned about the height-
ened potential in current circumstances for an upward 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



drift in long-run inflation expectations.  With increased 
upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations, 
members believed that the next change in the stance of 
policy could well be an increase in the funds rate; in-
deed, one member thought that policy should be 
firmed at this meeting.  However, in the view of most 
members, the outlook for both economic activity and 
price pressures remained very uncertain, and thus the 
timing and magnitude of future policy actions was quite 
unclear.  Against this backdrop, most members judged 
that an unchanged federal funds rate at this meeting 
represented an appropriate balancing of the risks to the 
economic outlook and was consistent, for now, with a 
policy path that would support an eventual decline in 
both inflation and unemployment.  Nonetheless, mem-
bers recognized that circumstances could change 
quickly and noted that they might need to respond 
promptly to incoming information about the evolution 
of risks. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with maintaining the federal funds rate at an av-
erage of around 2 percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to keep its target for the federal funds rate 
at 2 percent. 

Recent information indicates that overall eco-
nomic activity continues to expand, partly re-
flecting some firming in household spending.  
However, labor markets have softened further 
and financial markets remain under considerable 
stress.  Tight credit conditions, the ongoing 
housing contraction, and the rise in energy 
prices are likely to weigh on economic growth 
over the next few quarters. 

The Committee expects inflation to moderate 
later this year and next year.  However, in light 
of the continued increases in the prices of en-
ergy and some other commodities and the ele-
vated state of some indicators of inflation expec-
tations, uncertainty about the inflation outlook 
remains high. 

The substantial easing of monetary policy to 
date, combined with ongoing measures to foster 
market liquidity, should help to promote moder-
ate growth over time.  Although downside risks 
to growth remain, they appear to have dimin-
ished somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation 
and inflation expectations have increased.  The 
Committee will continue to monitor economic 
and financial developments and will act as 
needed to promote sustainable economic growth 
and price stability.” 

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner, 
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. 
Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  Mr. Fisher. 

Mr. Fisher dissented because he preferred an increase 
in the target federal funds rate at this meeting.  While 
the financial system was still frail and downside risks to 
growth remained, the risk that inflation would fail to 
moderate as expected by the Committee had increased 
substantially over the intermeeting period. Relatively 
strong demand for oil and other commodities abroad, 
as well as increased labor and other operating costs in 
the emerging economies, was boosting prices of glob-
ally traded goods and services.  Mr. Fisher was espe-
cially concerned about behavioral changes among busi-
ness operators that appeared to be accommodating 
inflationary pressures.  In particular, firms increasingly 
appeared to be planning to pass through their higher 
input costs to final goods prices in order to protect 
their profit margins.  Overall, Mr. Fisher viewed infla-
tion expectations as becoming less well anchored.  To 
help restrain inflation expectations and inflation, Mr. 
Fisher felt it would be appropriate for the Committee 
to tighten the stance of monetary policy. 

In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors, meeting participants 
turned to a consideration of policy issues regarding 
investment banks and other primary securities dealers.  
Participants discussed the financial activities and condi-
tion of primary dealers as well as the objectives of, pro-

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



cedures for, and experience to date in administering the 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and the Term 
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF).  (The PDCF and 
the TSLF had been established in March in response to 
unusual and exigent conditions in financial markets.)  
In view of the continuing significant strains in financial 
markets, participants also discussed the possibility of 
extending the PDCF and the TSLF past year-end.  In 
addition, they reviewed progress in negotiations with 
staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission re-
garding a memorandum of understanding intended to 
govern arrangements for sharing information on bro-
ker-dealers and for cooperation in the supervision of 
primary dealers.  Finally, participants exchanged views 
on longer-run issues regarding appropriate arrange-
ments for supervision and regulation of investment 
banks and other securities dealers and for the access of 
such  firms to central bank liquidity, as well as on possi-

ble measures to strengthen financial market functioning 
and thus enhance financial stability. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, August 5, 2008. 

The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.  
 
Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on May 20, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on April 29-30, 2008. 

 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



Summary of Economic Projections

In conjunction with the June 2008 FOMC meeting, the 
members of the Board of Governors and the presi-
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par-
ticipate in deliberations of the FOMC, provided projec-
tions for economic growth, unemployment, and infla-
tion in 2008, 2009, and 2010.  Projections were based 
on information available through the conclusion of the 
June meeting, on each participant’s assumptions re-
garding a range of factors likely to affect economic out-
comes, and on his or her assessment of appropriate 
monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary policy” is 
defined as the future policy that, based on current in-
formation, is deemed most likely to foster outcomes 
for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy the 
participant’s interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s 
dual objectives of maximum employment and price 
stability.  

FOMC participants generally expected that, over the 
remainder of this year, output would expand at a pace 
appreciably below its trend rate, owing primarily to 
continued weakness in housing markets, the substantial 
rise in energy prices in recent months, and the reduc-
tion in the availability of household and business credit 
resulting from continued strains in financial markets.  
As indicated in table 1 and figure 1, output growth fur-
ther ahead was projected to pick up sufficiently to be-
gin to reverse some of the increase in the unemploy-
ment rate by 2010.  In light of the recent surge in the 
prices of oil and agricultural commodities, total infla-
tion was expected to rise further in coming months and 
to be elevated for 2008 as a whole.  However, many 
participants expected that persistent economic slack 
and a flattening out of energy and other commodity 
prices in line with futures market prices would cause 
overall inflation to decline noticeably in 2009 and 2010.  
Most participants judged that greater-than-normal un-
certainty surrounded their projections for both output 
growth and inflation.  A significant majority of partici-
pants viewed the risks to their forecasts for output 
growth as weighted to the downside, and a similar 
number saw the risks to the inflation outlook as skewed 
to the upside. 

The Outlook 
The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
real GDP growth in 2008, at 1.0 percent to 1.6 percent, 
was noticeably higher than the central tendency of the 
projections provided in conjunction with the April 
FOMC meeting, which was 0.3 percent to 1.2 percent.  
The upward revision to the 2008 outlook stemmed 

primarily from better-than-expected data on consumer 
and business spending received between the April and 
June FOMC meetings.  Nonetheless, several partici-
pants noted that the recent firmness in consumer 
spending could well prove transitory and that the ongo-
ing housing market correction, tight credit conditions, 
and elevated energy prices would damp domestic de-
mand in the second half of this year.  Still, the substan-
tial easing of monetary policy since last year and the 
continued strength in exports should help to support 
economic growth; in addition, strains had eased some-
what in some financial markets since April.  Real GDP 
growth was expected to increase in 2009 as the adjust-
ment in the housing sector ran its course, financial 
markets gradually resumed more-normal functioning, 
and the downward pressure on real incomes stemming 
from increases in energy and food prices in the first 
half of 2008 began to fade.  In 2010, economic activity 
was projected to expand at or a little above participants’ 
estimates of the rate of trend growth. 

With output growth continuing to run below trend in 
the second half of 2008, most participants expected 
that the unemployment rate would move up somewhat 
over the remainder of this year.  The central tendency 
of participants’ projections for the average rate of un-
employment in the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.5 per-
cent to 5.7 percent, unchanged from the central ten-
dency of projections that were provided in conjunction 
with the April FOMC meeting and consistent with 
some slack in resource utilization.  The central ten-
dency of participants’ projections was for the unem-
ployment rate to stabilize in 2009 and to edge down in 
2010 as output and employment growth pick up. 

The surge in the prices of oil and agricultural com-
modities since April led participants to revise up no-
ticeably their projections for total inflation in the near 
term.  However, the central tendency of participants’ 
projections for core PCE inflation in 2008 was 2.2 per-
cent to 2.4 percent, unchanged from the central ten-
dency in April, as lower-than-expected rates of core 
inflation over recent months offset the expectations of 
some pass-through of the recent surge in energy prices 
into core inflation over the next few months.  Rates of 
both overall and core inflation were expected to decline 
over the next two years, reflecting a flattening out of 
the prices of oil and other commodities consistent with 
futures market prices, slack in resource utilization, and 
longer-term inflation expectations that were expected 
to remain generally well anchored. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



The contour of participants’ projections for output 
growth, unemployment, and inflation was importantly 
shaped by their judgments about the measured rates of 
inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 
mandate to promote maximum employment and price 
stability and about the time horizon over which policy 
should aim to attain those rates given current economic 
conditions.  Most participants judged that it might take 
a substantial period of time for output and inflation to 
recover from the recent shocks, which had elevated 
inflation and damped economic activity.  A number of 
participants projected that the rate of unemployment 
might remain slightly above its longer-run sustainable 
level even in 2010; total inflation in 2010 was also 
judged likely to continue to run a bit above levels that 
most participants saw as consistent with the price sta-
bility objective of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.  
Most participants saw further declines in both unem-
ployment and inflation as likely in the period beyond 
the forecast horizon.   
Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors 

and Reserve Bank presidents, June 2008 
Percent 

Variable 2008 2009 2010 
  Central tendency1 

Change in real GDP  . . . .  1.0 to 1.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.5 to 3.0 
April projection . . . .  0.3 to 1.2 2.0 to 2.8 2.6 to 3.1 

Unemployment rate . . . . . 5.5 to 5.7 5.3 to 5.8 5.0 to 5.6 
April projection . . . .  5.5 to 5.7 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.5 

PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . .  3.8 to 4.2 2.0 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0 
April projection . . . .  3.1 to 3.4 1.9 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation . . . . .  2.2 to 2.4  2.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.0 
April projection . . . .  2.2 to 2.4 1.9 to 2.1 1.7 to 1.9 

  Range2 
Change in real GDP . . . . . 0.9 to 1.8 1.9 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.5 

April projection . . . .  0.0 to 1.5 1.8 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.4 

Unemployment rate . . . . .  5.5 to 5.8 5.2 to 6.1 5.0 to 5.8 
April projection . . . .  5.3 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.3 4.8 to 5.9 

PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . .  3.4 to 4.6 1.7 to 3.0 1.6 to 2.1 
April projection . . . .  2.8 to 3.8 1.7 to 3.0 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation . . . . .  2.0 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 
April projection . . . .  1.9 to 2.5 1.7 to 2.2 1.3 to 2.0 

NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP)
and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the
fourth quarter of the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE infla-
tion are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for
PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate
are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of
the year indicated.  Each participant's projections are based on his or her
assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  

1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest
projections for each variable in each year. 

2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants'
projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
 

Risks to the Outlook 
Most participants viewed the risks to their projections 
for GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the 
associated risks to their projections for the unemploy-
ment rate as tilted to the upside.  The possibility that 
house prices could decline more steeply than antici-
pated, further reducing households’ wealth, restricting 
their access to credit, and eroding the capital of lending 
institutions, continued to be perceived as a significant 
downside risk to the outlook for economic growth.  
Although financial markets had shown some further 
improvement since April, conditions in those markets 
remained strained; a number of participants also 
pointed to the risk that further improvement could be 
quite slow and subject to relapse.  The potential for 
current tight credit conditions to exert an unexpectedly 
large restraint on household and business spending was 
also viewed as a significant downside risk to economic 
activity.  An adverse feedback loop, in which weaker 
economic activity led to a further worsening of finan-
cial conditions, which in turn could damp economic 
growth even further, continued to be viewed as a wor-
risome possibility, though less so than in April.  Indeed, 
some participants pointed to the apparent resilience of 
the U.S. economy in the face of recent financial distress 
and suggested that the adverse effects of financial de-
velopments on economic activity outside of the hous-
ing sector could prove to be more modest than antici-
pated. 

Most participants viewed the risks to their inflation 
projections as weighted to the upside.  Recent sharp 
increases in energy and food prices and the pass-
through of dollar depreciation into import prices could 
boost inflation in the near term by more than currently 
anticipated.  Although participants generally assumed 
that commodity prices will flatten out, roughly in line 
with the trajectory implied by futures prices, the fact 
that futures markets had persistently underpredicted 
commodity prices in recent experience was viewed as 
an upside risk to the outlook for inflation.  Participants 
also saw a risk that inflation expectations could become 
less firmly anchored, particularly if the current elevated 
rates of headline inflation did not moderate as quickly 
as they expected. 

Participants continued to view uncertainty about the 
outlook for economic activity as higher than normal, 
with a number pointing to uncertainty about the dura-
tion and effects of the ongoing financial strains on real 
activity.  In addition, participants expressed noticeably 
more uncertainty about their inflation projections than 
they had in January and April, a shift in perception that 
they attributed importantly to increased uncertainty 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



1

2

3

4

5

6

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2008–10  

20102009200820072006200520042003

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

Central tendency of projections

4

5

6

7

Percent

20102009200820072006200520042003

Unemployment rate

1

2

3

4

Percent

20102009200820072006200520042003

PCE inflation

1

2

3

4

Percent

20102009200820072006200520042003

Core PCE inflation

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



about the future course of energy and food prices and 
to greater uncertainty about the extent of pass-through 
of changes in those prices into core inflation.  (Table 2 
provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for real GDP 
growth, unemployment, and inflation since 1987.1) 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2008 2009 2010 

Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.3 ±1.4 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.3 ±0.7 ±1.0 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . . .  ±0.6 ±1.0 ±1.0 

NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections that were released in the summer
from 1987 through 2007 for the current and following two years by
various private and government forecasters.  As described in the box
“Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 
percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment,
and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of
projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David
Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the
Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, November).  

1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure

that has been most widely used in government and private economic 
forecasts.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

 
Diversity of Participants’ Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide more detail on the diver-
sity of participants’ views regarding likely economic 
outcomes over the projection period.  The dispersion 
of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 
2008 was noticeably narrower than in the forecasts 
provided in April, reflecting primarily the accumulation 

                                                 
1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this sum-
mary discusses the sources and interpretation of uncer-
tainty in economic forecasts and explains the approach 
used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending partici-
pants’ projections. 

of data about the actual performance of the economy 
in the first half of the year; their views about output 
growth in coming quarters and in 2009 continued to 
exhibit appreciable dispersion.  The dispersion of par-
ticipants’ projections for real activity next year seemed 
largely to reflect differing assessments of the effects of 
adverse financial market conditions on economic 
growth, the speed with which credit conditions might 
improve, and the depth and duration of the correction 
in the housing market.  Indeed, views differed notably 
on the pace at which output and employment would 
recover in 2009, with some participants expressing a 
concern that growth might be constrained by the per-
sistence of financial strains over a considerable period.  
The dispersion of participants’ longer-term projections 
was also affected to some degree by differences in their 
judgments about the economy’s trend growth rate and 
the unemployment rate that would be consistent over 
time with maximum employment.  The dispersion of 
the projections for PCE inflation in the near term re-
flected in large part differing views on the extent to 
which recent increases in energy and food prices would 
pass through into higher consumer prices.  In addition, 
participants held differing views on the degree to which 
inflation expectations were anchored and the role that 
expectations might play in the inflation process over 
the short and medium term.  Participants’ inflation pro-
jections further ahead were shaped by the views of the 
rate of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s 
dual objectives and the time it would take to achieve 
these goals given current economic conditions and ap-
propriate policy. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP and for the unemployment rate, 2008–10  

 Change in real GDP2008

April projections

0.0
0.1

0.2
0.3

0.4
0.5

0.6
0.7

0.8
0.9

1.0
1.1

1.2
1.3

1.4
1.5

1.6
1.7

1.8
1.9

2.0
2.1

2.2
2.3

2.4
2.5

2.6
2.7

2.8
2.9

3.0
3.1

3.2
3.3

3.4
3.5

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

0.0
0.1

0.2
0.3

0.4
0.5

0.6
0.7

0.8
0.9

1.0
1.1

1.2
1.3

1.4
1.5

1.6
1.7

1.8
1.9

2.0
2.1

2.2
2.3

2.4
2.5

2.6
2.7

2.8
2.9

3.0
3.1

3.2
3.3

3.4
3.5

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

0.0
0.1

0.2
0.3

0.4
0.5

0.6
0.7

0.8
0.9

1.0
1.1

1.2
1.3

1.4
1.5

1.6
1.7

1.8
1.9

2.0
2.1

2.2
2.3

2.4
2.5

2.6
2.7

2.8
2.9

3.0
3.1

3.2
3.3

3.4
3.5

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

 Unemployment rate2008

April projections

4.8
4.9

5.0
5.1

5.2
5.3

5.4
5.5

5.6
5.7

5.8
5.9

6.0
6.1

6.2
6.3

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

4.8
4.9

5.0
5.1

5.2
5.3

5.4
5.5

5.6
5.7

5.8
5.9

6.0
6.1

6.2
6.3

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

4.8
4.9

5.0
5.1

5.2
5.3

5.4
5.5

5.6
5.7

5.8
5.9

6.0
6.1

6.2
6.3

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation and for core PCE inflation, 2008–10  

 PCE inflation
2008

April projections

1.5
1.6

1.7
1.8

1.9
2.0

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6

2.7
2.8

2.9
3.0

3.1
3.2

3.3
3.4

3.5
3.6

3.7
3.8

3.9
4.0

4.1
4.2

4.3
4.4

4.5
4.6

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

1.5
1.6

1.7
1.8

1.9
2.0

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6

2.7
2.8

2.9
3.0

3.1
3.2

3.3
3.4

3.5
3.6

3.7
3.8

3.9
4.0

4.1
4.2

4.3
4.4

4.5
4.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

1.5
1.6

1.7
1.8

1.9
2.0

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6

2.7
2.8

2.9
3.0

3.1
3.2

3.3
3.4

3.5
3.6

3.7
3.8

3.9
4.0

4.1
4.2

4.3
4.4

4.5
4.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

 Core PCE inflation
2008

April projections

1.3
1.4

1.5
1.6

1.7
1.8

1.9
2.0

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

1.3
1.4

1.5
1.6

1.7
1.8

1.9
2.0

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

1.3
1.4

1.5
1.6

1.7
1.8

1.9
2.0

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by 
the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understand-
ing of the basis for policy actions.  Consider-
able uncertainty attends these projections, 
however.  The economic and statistical models 
and relationships used to help produce eco-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de-
scriptions of the real world.  And the future 
path of the economy can be affected by myr-
iad unforeseen developments and events.  
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, 
participants consider not only what appears to 
be the most likely economic outcome as em-
bodied in their projections, but also the range 
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of 
their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Re-
ports and those prepared by Federal Reserve 
Board staff in advance of meetings of the 
Federal Open Market Committee.  The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illus-
trate the considerable uncertainty associated 
with economic forecasts.  For example, sup-
pose a participant projects that real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) and total consumer 
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent.  If the 
uncertainty   attending   those   projections   is  
 

similar  to  that  experienced in the past and the 
risks around the projections are broadly bal-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would 
imply a probability of about 70 percent that 
actual GDP would expand 2.1 percent to 3.9 
percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3 
percent in the second year, and 1.6 percent to 
4.4 percent in the third year.  The correspond-
ing 70 percent confidence intervals for overall 
inflation would be 1.4 percent to 2.6 percent in 
the current year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent 
in the second and third years. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed on average over his-
tory, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
jections of each variable is greater than, smaller 
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge 
whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most 
likely outcome.  These judgments about the 
uncertainty and the risks attending each par-
ticipant’s projections are distinct from the di-
versity of participants’ views about the most 
likely outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty is con-
cerned with the risks associated with a particu-
lar projection, rather than with divergences 
across a number of different projections. 

 
    

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of June 24-25, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7




