









































Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, September 29, October 7, and 28-29, 2008 


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
October 28-29, 2008 

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, October 28, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, October 29, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Ms. Pianalto 
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock-

hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, 

Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, and 
Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struckmeyer,1 Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-

rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Associate Directors, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors 

 
Ms. Kole, Assistant Director, Division of Interna-

tional Finance, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. McCarthy, Visiting Reserve Bank Officer, Di-
vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Messrs. Bassett and Luecke, Section Chiefs, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Morin, Senior Economist, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Cleveland 
 

Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Boston 

 
Messrs. Altig and McAndrews, Ms. Mosser, 

Messrs. Rasche, Sullivan, and Williams, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of At-

1 Attended Wednesday’s session only. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



lanta, New York, New York, St. Louis, Chi-
cago, and San Francisco, respectively 

 
Messrs. Clark and Hornstein, Vice Presidents, Fed-

eral Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Rich-
mond, respectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
 
  

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. 

In the discussion of System open market operations 
over the period, it was noted that reserve management 
had become more complex as a result of the large pro-
vision of reserves associated with the recent expansion 
of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities; in particular, 
the effective federal funds rate had been persistently 
below the FOMC’s target.  While the payment of inter-
est on reserves seemed to be helpful in mitigating 
downward pressure on the funds rate, a number of in-
stitutions evidently were willing to sell funds at interest 
rates below that paid on excess reserve balances.  An-
ecdotal reports suggested that this was particularly the 
case for those institutions that are not eligible to receive 
interest on the balances they maintain at the Federal 
Reserve.  Going forward, however, the interest rate on 
excess reserve balances could be adjusted, and it might 
establish a more effective floor on the federal funds 
rate over time as more depository institutions revise 
their strategies in the federal funds market in light of 
the payment of interest on reserves. 

In view of a further widening in financial market strains 
internationally, the Committee considered proposals to 
establish temporary reciprocal currency (“swap”) ar-
rangements with several additional foreign central 
banks.  Members unanimously approved the following 
resolution, which effectively permitted the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee to establish a swap line with 
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 

“The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A. of the Au-
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations to 
include the New Zealand dollar in the list of for-
eign currencies in which the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York may transact for the System 
Open Market Account.”   

Meeting participants also discussed a proposal to set up 
temporary liquidity-related swap arrangements with the 
central banks of Mexico, Brazil, Korea, and Singapore.  
In their remarks, participants focused on the outlook 
for complementarity between these swaps and the new 
short-term liquidity facility that the International Mone-
tary Fund was considering; on the governance and 
structure of the swap lines; and on the particular coun-
tries included.  Several participants pointed to the in-
ternational reserves held by the countries and the im-
portance of ensuring that these temporary swap lines, 
like the others that had been established during this 
period, be used only for the purposes intended.  On 
balance, the Committee concluded that in current cir-
cumstances the swap arrangements with these four 
large and systemically important economies were ap-
propriate, and it unanimously approved the following 
resolutions. 

“The FOMC directs the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York to establish and maintain a recip-
rocal currency arrangement (“swap arrange-
ment”) for the System Open Market Account 
with each of (i) the Banco Central do Brasil, (ii) 
the Bank of Korea, (ii) the Banco de Mexico, 
and (iv) the Monetary Authority of Singapore.  
Each such swap arrangement would be for an 
aggregate amount not to exceed $30 billion.  
Drawings under the arrangement require ap-
proval.  Unless extended by the Committee, each 
such swap arrangement shall expire on April 30, 
2009. 

The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A. of the Au-
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations to 
include the Brazilian real, the Korean won, and 
the Singapore dollar in the list of foreign curren-
cies in which the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York may transact for the System Open Market 
Account. 

The FOMC delegates to the Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee the authority to approve individ-
ual drawing requests of up to $5 billion under 
each of the aforementioned swap arrangements 
with the Banco Central do Brasil, the Bank of 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Korea, the Banco de Mexico, and the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore.” 

A number of adverse financial developments influ-
enced economic and financial market conditions over 
the intermeeting period.   Lehman Brothers Holdings 
had filed for bankruptcy the day before the meeting of 
the Committee in September.  In large part because of 
losses on Lehman debt, the net asset value of a major 
money market mutual fund fell below $1 per share, 
spurring a substantial outflow from money market mu-
tual funds and straining their liquidity.  The rapid dete-
rioration of American International Group, Inc. (AIG), 
and Wachovia Corporation, along with the closing of 
Washington Mutual, led to intensified market concerns 
about the condition of financial institutions.  In this 
environment, investors pulled back from risk-taking, 
funding markets for terms beyond overnight largely 
ceased to function at times, credit risk spreads rose 
sharply, and equity prices registered steep declines. 

The information reviewed at the October meeting indi-
cated that economic conditions deteriorated in recent 
months.  The labor market weakened further in Sep-
tember as private payrolls fell at a faster pace than ear-
lier in the year and the unemployment rate remained 
above 6 percent.  Industrial production fell in Septem-
ber, although much of the drop was related to effects 
of recent hurricanes and a strike at an aircraft manufac-
turer.  Consumer spending declined, reflecting stagnant 
real income, tighter credit, declining wealth, and con-
cerns about economic conditions.  The housing market 
remained weak, with construction activity, new home 
sales, and home prices falling further.  Business spend-
ing on equipment and software appeared to have de-
clined again in the third quarter, and indicators of in-
vestment in structures weakened.  Economic activity in 
many foreign economies slowed in recent months.  
Headline consumer inflation measures, pulled down by 
declines in consumer energy prices, moderated in Au-
gust and September.  Core consumer inflation meas-
ures also eased somewhat in these two months. 

The labor market continued to weaken.  According to 
the September labor market report, the unemployment 
rate remained at 6.1 percent, but private payroll em-
ployment fell faster than the average pace earlier in the 
year.  Most major industry groups shed jobs.  The 
manufacturing, construction, and temporary help in-
dustries continued to experience sizable losses in em-
ployment; meanwhile, retail trade and financial services 
registered larger declines than earlier in the year.  Non-
business services added jobs, but at the slowest rate of 
the year.  The average workweek and aggregate hours 

declined in September, and weekly unemployment in-
surance claims continued to rise in October. 

Industrial production dropped sharply in September.  
Although much of the decline was due to the effects of 
the recent hurricanes and a strike at an aircraft manu-
facturer, most major industries experienced slow or 
declining output in recent months.  Motor vehicle as-
semblies were unchanged in the third quarter at a low 
level.  The pace of high-tech equipment production 
slowed in the third quarter relative to its rate in the first 
half of the year, reportedly in part because tight credit 
conditions were restraining demand.  Available infor-
mation suggested that demand and production in this 
sector were likely to remain relatively subdued over the 
coming months.  The output of other manufacturing 
sectors declined in the third quarter.  While standard 
indicators of near-term production suggested factory 
output would decline further over the next few 
months, the recovery of production in industries af-
fected by the hurricanes was expected to offset these 
declines to a degree.  The factory utilization rate fell in 
September to well below its long-run average. 

Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appar-
ently declined in September for the fourth consecutive 
month.  Motor vehicle sales fell back to their very low 
July pace, and preliminary reports indicated that the 
slump continued into October, as tighter credit condi-
tions were restraining demand.  Purchases of goods 
other than motor vehicles were estimated to have fallen 
noticeably.  Real outlays on services other than energy 
increased only modestly in July and August.  Real dis-
posable income, excluding the effects of tax rebates 
and the emergency unemployment benefits, was little 
changed in July and August from the second-quarter 
average.  Measures of consumer sentiment dropped in 
October to near or below their low levels of midyear, 
with the Conference Board measure exceptionally low. 

Residential construction activity continued to decline 
steeply through the third quarter.  In September, both 
single-family housing starts and permit issuance fell.  In 
the multifamily sector, starts edged up in September 
but remained toward the lower end of their two-year 
range.  New home sales in August and September were 
at a pace well below that of the first half of the year.  
Although the cutbacks in homebuilding had reduced 
the inventory of unsold houses, the slower rate of sales 
kept the months’ supply of new homes very elevated 
relative to the level that had prevailed before the down-
turn in the housing market.  Sales of existing single-
family homes in September were somewhat higher than 
they had been earlier in the year, likely supported by 

Minutes of the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



increases in foreclosure-related sales.  Tight conditions 
in mortgage markets continued to restrain housing de-
mand, especially for borrowers needing nonconforming 
mortgages.  Several indexes indicated that house prices 
declined substantially over the 12 months through Au-
gust. 

In the business sector, investment in equipment and 
software appeared to weaken further in the third quar-
ter.  Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods 
excluding aircraft were flat in the third quarter, while 
orders for those goods declined.  Demand for high-
tech equipment appeared to have softened considera-
bly, and spending on non-high-tech, non-transportation 
equipment was estimated to have fallen.  Transporta-
tion equipment investment was held down in the third 
quarter by falling sales for medium and heavy trucks 
and by a strike-induced drop in aircraft deliveries in 
September.  Nominal expenditures on nonresidential 
structures declined for the second consecutive month 
in August.  Forward-looking indicators turned more 
downbeat: Vacancy rates for commercial properties 
rose further, property values declined, and the architec-
tural billings index fell in September.  Furthermore, the 
latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank 
Lending Practices indicated that banks tightened lend-
ing standards for commercial real estate loans over the 
past three months. 

The book-value data for manufacturing and trade in-
ventories suggested that the real value of inventories 
continued to decline over the summer through August, 
but a number of indicators suggested that stocks in 
some industries remained above desired levels.  The 
days’ supply of light motor vehicles at dealers had risen, 
on balance, through the year and was rather high in 
September.  The ratio of book-value inventories to 
sales in the manufacturing and trade sectors, excluding 
motor vehicles, rose in August, particularly in a number 
of durable goods sectors.  In addition, the index of cus-
tomers’ inventories in the Institute of Supply Manage-
ment’s manufacturing survey indicated that inventories 
remained above desired levels. 

The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in August, 
with a decline in the value of imports more than offset-
ting a fall in the value of exports of goods and services.  
A drop in the value of petroleum imports, which re-
flected both lower volumes and a decrease in prices, 
exceeded an increase in non-oil imports that was driven 
by a rise in imports of consumer goods and industrial 
supplies.  Exports of automotive products fell sharply 
in August after a surge in July, and exports of con-
sumer goods, industrial supplies, and services moved 

down after strong increases in previous months.  Air-
craft exports surged, but sales of other capital goods 
declined. 

The data for the advanced foreign economies during 
the intermeeting period generally suggested that eco-
nomic activity was weakening further, and confidence 
indicators in these areas declined as the financial crisis 
worsened.  Labor market conditions deteriorated in 
these economies, with the exception of Canada.  Real 
gross domestic product (GDP) fell in the United King-
dom in the third quarter.  Headline inflation continued 
to be elevated in many economies, but the most recent 
consumer price indexes for Japan and for the euro area 
suggested some deceleration in prices. 

In emerging market economies, data received over the 
intermeeting period showed a continued slowing of real 
activity.  Real GDP growth in China moved down in 
the third quarter.  Industrial production contracted in 
recent months for many countries.  External balances 
deteriorated significantly in many emerging market 
economies as exports to advanced economies slowed.  
Headline inflation in emerging market economies 
eased, reflecting falling oil and food prices. 

Headline consumer prices in the United States were 
estimated to have risen only modestly in September, 
extending the recent moderation of overall inflation 
following the rapid increases earlier in the year.  Con-
sumer energy prices fell for the second consecutive 
month, while retail food prices continued to climb at a 
rapid pace, boosted by the substantial run-up in farm 
commodity prices through midyear.  Core consumer 
price inflation rose somewhat during the third quarter, 
reflecting the pass-through of previous increases in the 
costs of energy and materials and import prices.  Those 
upward price pressures diminished recently:  Prices of 
oil and other commodities fell sharply over the inter-
meeting period, and non-oil import prices as well as 
producer prices of intermediate materials excluding 
food and energy declined in September.  Some survey 
measures of inflation expectations declined during the 
period.  Available measures of hourly labor compensa-
tion increased at about the same moderate pace as over 
the past several years. 

At its September meeting, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) kept the target federal funds rate 
unchanged at 2 percent.  The Committee’s statement 
noted that strains in financial markets had increased 
significantly and that labor markets had weakened fur-
ther.  Economic growth appeared to have slowed re-
cently, which partly reflected a softening of household 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



spending.  Tight credit conditions, the ongoing housing 
contraction, and some slowing in export growth were 
likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few 
quarters.  The Committee stated that, over time, the 
substantial easing of monetary policy, combined with 
ongoing measures to foster market liquidity, should 
help promote moderate economic growth.  Inflation 
had been high, spurred by the earlier increases in the 
prices of energy and some other commodities.  The 
Committee expected inflation to moderate later this 
year and next year, but the inflation outlook remained 
highly uncertain.  The downside risks to growth and 
the upside risks to inflation were both of significant 
concern to the Committee.  The Committee indicated 
that it would continue to monitor economic and finan-
cial developments carefully and would act as needed to 
promote sustainable economic growth and price stabil-
ity. 

Over the intermeeting period, market participants 
marked down their expectations for the path of the 
federal funds rate for the next two years.  The Commit-
tee’s decision to leave the target federal funds rate un-
changed at the September FOMC meeting led some 
investors to scale back expectations for policy easing 
over the next year.  Subsequently, however, market 
expectations reversed in response to the heightened 
financial turmoil and to generally weaker-than-expected 
economic data.  The Committee’s decision to reduce 
the target federal funds rate 50 basis points as part of a 
coordinated action with other central banks on Octo-
ber 8, along with the accompanying statement, led in-
vestors to mark down further the expected path for the 
federal funds rate.  Yields on short-term nominal 
Treasury coupon securities declined over the intermeet-
ing period, reportedly as a result of substantial flight-to-
quality flows and heightened demand for liquidity.  In 
contrast, higher term premiums and expectations of 
increases in the supply of Treasury securities associated 
with the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act and 
other initiatives seemed to put upward pressure on 
longer-term nominal Treasury yields.  Yields on longer-
term inflation-indexed Treasury securities, which are 
relatively illiquid, rose more sharply than did those on 
nominal securities.  Measures of inflation compensation 
based on differences between nominal and inflation-
indexed Treasury yields were quite volatile over the 
intermeeting period and, because of shifting liquidity 
premiums, likely provided less information than usual 
concerning inflation expectations or inflation uncer-
tainty. 

In the wake of the failures or near failures of several 
large financial institutions, short-term funding markets 
came under significant additional pressure over the in-
termeeting period, and the Federal Reserve and other 
central banks took a number of actions to provide li-
quidity and improve market functioning.  In the over-
night federal funds market, financial institutions be-
came more selective about the counterparties with 
whom they were willing to trade.  The overnight Lon-
don interbank offered rate (Libor) rose substantially, 
and the spread of term Libor rates over comparable-
maturity overnight index swap (OIS) rates rose sharply 
from already-high levels.  The demand for commercial 
paper declined as prime money market mutual funds 
experienced large net outflows after the net asset value 
of one such fund fell below $1 per share.  As a conse-
quence, risk spreads on commercial paper rose consid-
erably and were very volatile.  Amid strong flows into 
government-only money market mutual funds, the de-
mand for short-dated Treasury bills rose, and these 
securities traded with very low yields despite sizable 
new issuance during the period.  The market for repur-
chase agreements (repos) also experienced significant 
dislocations during the intermeeting period.  Partly be-
cause of high demand for Treasury securities, the over-
night repo rate for Treasury general collateral was near 
zero for much of the period, and failures to deliver 
Treasury securities reached record highs.  Repo rates 
on agency collateral also were volatile, and liquidity in 
non-Treasury, non-agency repo markets was poor.  
Conditions in short-term funding markets improved 
somewhat following the announcements of a U.S. gov-
ernment guarantee of certain liabilities of U.S. banking 
organizations and similar actions by foreign authorities, 
the expansion of swap arrangements between the Fed-
eral Reserve and other central banks, and a number of 
initiatives by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to 
address the pressures on money market mutual funds 
and the commercial paper market. 

In longer-term credit markets, yields and spreads on 
investment-grade and speculative-grade corporate 
bonds increased, while indexes of credit default swap 
(CDS) spreads for investment-grade financial and non-
financial firms reached unprecedented levels.  Liquidity 
in the corporate bond and CDS markets was strained.  
Issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was 
moderate in September and October, while there was 
little issuance of speculative-grade bonds.  Commercial 
and industrial loans continued to expand rapidly in 
early October, as firms drew on existing bank lines of 
credit.  However, conditions deteriorated in the secon-

Minutes of the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



dary market for syndicated leveraged loans, with prices 
falling to new lows and bid-asked spreads widening 
notably.  Broad equity price indexes declined sharply 
over the intermeeting period, and option-implied vola-
tility on the S&P 500 index rose well above its previous 
record high.  The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey 
pointed to further tightening of terms and standards 
for consumer loans.  Consumer credit increased at its 
slowest pace in more than 15 years during the three 
months ending in August.  Conditions in the municipal 
bond market were also poor over much of the inter-
meeting period. 

The strains from the banking and credit crisis intensi-
fied and took on a more global aspect over the inter-
meeting period.  This development and the related ero-
sion of the economic outlook and reduction in infla-
tionary pressures led many central banks to reduce their 
policy rates, including in the internationally coordinated 
action announced on October 8.  Liquidity conditions 
in the money markets of major foreign economies dete-
riorated further.  Spreads between term Libor and OIS 
rates in euros and sterling rose from already-elevated 
levels, although by less than in dollars.  Sovereign bond 
yields in the advanced foreign economies were volatile; 
nominal yield curves in many countries steepened on 
net.  Equity market indexes fell sharply in the advanced 
economies as well as in emerging market economies, 
which until recently had not been hit as hard by the 
financial turmoil.  The dollar appreciated against most 
currencies, with the prominent exception of the Japa-
nese yen. 

In the United States, M2 accelerated sharply in Sep-
tember, and it appeared to be on pace for another large 
increase in October, apparently reflecting a heightened 
preference by households and firms for safe assets.  
Liquid deposits expanded strongly in September, but 
leveled off in early October.  Small time deposits in-
creased briskly in September and early October as 
banks and thrifts reportedly continued to bid aggres-
sively for these deposits.  Retail money funds, which 
were little changed in September, experienced signifi-
cant net inflows in early October.  In contrast, institu-
tional money funds, which are not included in M2, ex-
perienced substantial outflows during this period. 

In response to the extraordinary stresses in financial 
markets, the Federal Reserve together with other U.S. 
government agencies and many foreign central banks 
and governments implemented a number of unprece-
dented policy initiatives during the intermeeting period.  
Early in the period, the condition of AIG, a large com-
plex financial institution, deteriorated rapidly.  In view 

of the likely systemic implications and the potential for 
significant adverse effects on the economy of a disor-
derly failure of AIG, the Federal Reserve Board on 
September 16, with the support of the Treasury, au-
thorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to 
lend up to $85 billion to the firm to assist it in meeting 
its obligations and to facilitate the orderly sale of some 
of its businesses.  On October 8, the Federal Reserve 
announced a supplemental liquidity arrangement for 
AIG. 

The Federal Reserve Board also approved a number of 
new facilities to address strains in short-term funding 
markets.  On September 19, it announced the Asset-
Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund 
Liquidity Facility (AMLF), which extends nonrecourse 
loans at the primary credit rate to U.S. depository insti-
tutions and bank holding companies to finance the pur-
chase of high-quality asset-backed commercial paper 
(ABCP) from money market mutual funds.  On Octo-
ber 7, the Board announced the creation of the Com-
mercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), which provides 
a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of highly rated 
commercial paper through a special-purpose vehicle 
that purchases three-month unsecured commercial pa-
per and ABCP directly from eligible issuers.  On Octo-
ber 21, it publicized the creation of the Money Market 
Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF), under which the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York will provide fund-
ing to a series of special-purpose vehicles to facilitate 
an industry-supported initiative to finance the purchase 
of certain highly rated certificates of deposit, bank 
notes, and commercial paper from U.S. money market 
mutual funds.  The AMLF, CPFF, and MMIFF were 
intended to improve the liquidity in short-term debt 
markets and ease the strains in credit markets more 
broadly. 

In addition, to address the sizable demand for dollar 
funding in foreign jurisdictions, the FOMC authorized 
the expansion of its existing swap lines with the Euro-
pean Central Bank and Swiss National Bank; by the end 
of the intermeeting period, the formal quantity limits 
on these lines had been eliminated.  The quantity limits 
were also lifted on new swap lines set up with the Bank 
of Japan and the Bank of England.  The FOMC au-
thorized new swap lines with five other central banks 
during the period.  In domestic markets, the Federal 
Reserve raised the regular auction amounts of the 28- 
and 84-day maturity Term Auction Facility (TAF) auc-
tions to $150 billion each.  Also, the Federal Reserve 
announced two forward TAF auctions for $150 billion 
each, to be conducted in November to provide funding 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



over year-end.  In total, up to $900 billion of TAF 
credit over year-end was authorized. 

Despite the substantial provision of liquidity by the 
Federal Reserve and other central banks, functioning in 
many credit markets remained very poor, a situation 
that reflected market participants’ uncertainty about 
their liquidity needs and their future access to funding 
as well as concerns about the health of many financial 
institutions.  To strengthen confidence in U.S. financial 
institutions, the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) issued 
a joint statement on October 14, which included sev-
eral elements.  First, the Treasury announced a volun-
tary capital purchase plan under which eligible financial 
institutions could sell preferred shares to the U.S. gov-
ernment.  Second, the FDIC provided a temporary 
guarantee of the senior unsecured debt of all FDIC-
insured institutions and their holding companies, as 
well as all balances in non-interest-bearing transaction 
deposit accounts.  The statement included notice that 
nine major financial institutions had agreed to partici-
pate in both the capital purchase program and the 
FDIC guarantee program.  Third, the Federal Reserve 
announced details of the CPFF, which was scheduled 
to begin on October 27.  After this joint statement and 
the announcements of similar programs in a number of 
other countries, financial market pressures appeared to 
ease somewhat, though conditions remained strained. 

The expansion of existing liquidity facilities as well as 
the creation of new facilities contributed to a notable 
increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance 
sheet.  The amount of primary credit outstanding rose 
considerably over the intermeeting period, with both 
foreign and domestic depository institutions making 
use of the discount window.  TAF credit outstanding 
more than doubled over the period.  Credit extended 
through the Primary Dealer Credit Facility rose rapidly 
ahead of quarter-end; although it subsided subse-
quently, the amount of credit outstanding remained 
well above the levels seen before mid-September.  The 
Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions con-
ducted over the intermeeting period had very high de-
mand; in addition, dealers exercised most of the op-
tions for TSLF loans spanning the September quarter-
end. 

Two initiatives were introduced over the intermeeting 
period to help manage the expansion of the balance 
sheet and promote control of the federal funds rate.  
First, on September 17, the Treasury announced a tem-
porary Supplementary Financing Program at the re-
quest of the Federal Reserve.  Under this program, the 

Treasury issued short-term bills over and above its 
regular borrowing program, with the proceeds depos-
ited at the Federal Reserve.  This facility helped offset 
the provision of reserves to the banking system 
through the various liquidity facilities.  Second, employ-
ing authority granted under the Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Act, the Federal Reserve Board an-
nounced on October 6 that it would pay interest on 
required and excess reserve balances beginning on Oc-
tober 9.  The payment of interest on excess reserve 
balances was intended to assist in maintaining the fed-
eral funds rate close to the target set by the Committee.  
Initially, the interest rate on required reserves was set at 
the average target federal funds rate over each reserve 
maintenance period less 10 basis points, while the rate 
on excess reserves was set at the lowest target federal 
funds rate over each reserve maintenance period less 75 
basis points.  On October 22, the rate on excess re-
serves was adjusted to be the lowest target federal 
funds rate during the maintenance period less 35 basis 
points. 

In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff low-
ered its projection for economic activity in the second 
half of 2008 as well as in 2009 and 2010.  Real GDP 
appeared to have declined in the third quarter, and the 
few available indicators that reflected conditions fol-
lowing the intensification of the financial market tur-
moil in mid-September pointed to another decline in 
the fourth quarter.  The declines in stock-market 
wealth, low levels of consumer sentiment, weakened 
household balance sheets, and restrictive credit condi-
tions were likely to hinder household spending over the 
near term.  Business expenditures also probably would 
be held back by a weaker sales outlook and tighter 
credit conditions.  The staff expected that real GDP 
would continue to contract somewhat in the first half 
of 2009 and then rise in the second half, with the result 
that real GDP would be about unchanged for the year.  
Although futures markets pointed to a lower trajectory 
for oil prices than at the time of the September meet-
ing, real activity was expected to be restrained by fur-
ther contraction in residential investment, reduced 
household wealth, continued tight credit conditions, 
and a deterioration of foreign economic performance.  
In 2010, real GDP growth was expected to pick up to 
near the rate of potential growth, as the restraints on 
household and business spending from the financial 
market tensions were anticipated to begin to ease and 
the contraction in the housing market to come to an 
end.  With growth below its potential rate for an ex-
tended period, the unemployment rate was expected to 

Minutes of the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



rise significantly through early 2010.  The staff reduced 
its forecast for both core and overall PCE inflation, as 
the disinflationary effects of the receding cost pressures 
of energy, materials, and import prices and of resource 
slack were expected to be greater than at the time of 
the September FOMC meeting.  Core inflation was 
projected to slow considerably in 2009 and then to 
edge down further in 2010. 

In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all partici-
pants—that is, Federal Reserve Board members and 
Reserve Bank presidents—provided annual projections 
for economic growth, the unemployment rate, and in-
flation for the period 2008 through 2011.  The projec-
tions are described in the Summary of Economic Pro-
jections, which is attached as an addendum to these 
minutes. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, FOMC meeting participants indicated that the 
worsening financial situation, the slowdown in growth 
abroad, and incoming information on economic activity 
had led them to mark down significantly their outlook 
for growth.  While economic activity had evidently al-
ready been slowing over the summer, the turmoil in 
recent weeks had apparently resulted in tighter financial 
conditions and greater uncertainty among businesses 
and households about economic prospects, further lim-
iting their ability and willingness to make significant 
spending commitments.  Recent measures of business 
and consumer sentiment had fallen to historical lows.  
Participants generally expected the economy to con-
tract moderately in the second half of 2008 and the first 
half of 2009, and agreed that the downside risks to 
growth had increased.  While some expected an im-
proving financial situation to contribute to a recovery 
in growth by mid-2009, others judged that the period 
of economic weakness could persist for some time.  
Several participants indicated that they expected some 
fiscal stimulus in coming quarters, but they were uncer-
tain about the extent and duration of the resulting sup-
port to economic activity.  Participants agreed that in 
coming quarters inflation was likely to move down to 
levels consistent with price stability, reflecting the re-
cent declines in the prices of energy and other com-
modities, the appreciation of the dollar, and the ex-
pected widening of margins of resource slack.  Indeed, 
some saw a risk that over time inflation could fall be-
low levels consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 
objectives of price stability and maximum employment. 

Participants noted that financial conditions had wors-
ened significantly over the intermeeting period.  The 
failure or near failure of a number of major financial 

institutions had deepened market concerns about coun-
terparty credit risk and liquidity risk.  As a result, finan-
cial intermediaries had cut back on lending to some 
counterparties, particularly for terms beyond overnight, 
and in general were conserving liquidity and capital.  
Moreover, risk aversion of investors increased, driving 
credit spreads sharply higher.  Survey results and anec-
dotal information also suggested that credit conditions 
had tightened significantly further for businesses and 
households.  Equity prices had varied widely and were 
substantially lower, on net.  Participants saw the poten-
tial for financial strains to intensify if some investors, 
such as hedge funds, found it necessary to sell assets 
and as lending institutions built reserves against losses.  
Participants were concerned that the negative spiral in 
which financial strains lead to weaker spending, which 
in turn leads to higher loan losses and a further deterio-
ration in financial conditions, could persist for a while 
longer.  While the global efforts to recapitalize banks 
and guarantee deposits had helped stabilize the situa-
tion, risk spreads remained higher, asset prices lower, 
and credit conditions tighter than prior to the recent 
disruptions.  Moreover, some participants noted that 
the specifics and effectiveness of some government 
programs to support financial markets and institutions 
remained unclear. 

Participants indicated that the increase in financial tur-
moil had already had an impact on business decisions.  
Reports from contacts in many parts of the country 
suggested that the weaker and less certain economic 
outlook was leading businesses to cancel capital and 
other discretionary expenditures and lay off workers.  
Several participants noted that even businesses that had 
previously been largely unaffected by the financial tur-
bulence were now experiencing difficulties obtaining 
new credit, and some businesses were said to be draw-
ing down lines of credit preemptively rather than risk 
the lines becoming unavailable.  Contacts indicated that 
fewer commercial real estate construction projects were 
being undertaken.  Residential construction activity 
remained extremely subdued, with the stock of unsold 
homes still very elevated. 

Meeting participants noted that real consumer spending 
had been weakening through the summer, responding 
to lower employment and tighter credit.  Moreover, 
households, like businesses, were reportedly reacting to 
the shifting economic circumstances in recent weeks by 
cutting expenditures further.  Spending on consumer 
durables, such as automobiles, and discretionary items 
had been particularly hard hit, and retailers anticipated 
very weak holiday spending. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Participants noted that the financial turmoil had in-
creasingly become an international phenomenon, lead-
ing to a marked deterioration in global growth pros-
pects.  While advanced foreign economies had already 
shown signs of slowing, they had been significantly 
affected by the worsening of financial strains over the 
intermeeting period.  Moreover, a number of emerging 
market economies, which had heretofore been less in-
fluenced by the financial developments in industrial 
countries, had in recent weeks been significantly af-
fected, as the increasing strains in financial markets led 
global investors to pull back from exposures to such 
economies.  As a result, interest rates on emerging 
market debt had shot up and prices of emerging market 
equity had dropped sharply.  Participants saw the 
stronger dollar and weaker growth abroad as likely to 
restrain future growth in U.S. exports. 

Participants agreed that inflation was likely to diminish 
materially in coming quarters.  Commodity prices had 
fallen sharply, the dollar had strengthened notably, and 
considerable economic slack was anticipated.  More-
over, some survey measures of inflation expectations 
had declined as had those derived from inflation-linked 
Treasury securities, although recent movements in the 
latter measures were likely influenced in part by in-
creases in the premiums required to hold the relatively 
illiquid inflation-indexed securities.  Some participants 
indicated that their business contacts had reported re-
duced pricing power and lower markups.  Against this 
backdrop, participants generally expected inflation to 
decline to levels consistent with price stability.  A few 
participants noted that disruptions to the credit inter-
mediation process and the inefficiencies associated with 
shifts of resources among economic sectors could be 
expected to reduce aggregate supply as well as restrain 
aggregate demand; as a consequence, such factors 
could limit the effect of slower output growth on rates 
of resource slack and inflation.  Others, though, saw a 
risk that if resource utilization remained weak for some 
time, inflation could fall below levels consistent with 
the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate for promoting price 
stability and maximum employment, a development 
that would pose important policy challenges in light of 
the already-low level of the Committee’s federal funds 
rate target. 

Participants discussed a number of issues relating to 
broader monetary policy strategy.  Over the past year, 
the Federal Reserve’s response to the financial turbu-
lence had encompassed substantial monetary policy 
easing, the provision of large volumes of liquidity 
through standard and extraordinary means, and facili-

tating the resolution of troubled, systemically important 
financial institutions.  Participants judged that the pol-
icy actions had been helpful and well calibrated to their 
assessment of the developing situation.  Several partici-
pants observed that it would be crucial for such policy 
actions to be unwound appropriately as the financial 
situation normalized.  However, participants also ob-
served that unfolding economic developments could 
require the FOMC to further lower its target for the 
federal funds rate in the future and to review the ade-
quacy of its liquidity facilities. 

In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
ing period, Committee members agreed that significant 
easing in policy was warranted at this meeting in view 
of the marked deterioration in the economic outlook 
and anticipated reduction in inflation pressures.  The 
recent substantial tightening in financial conditions, the 
sharp downshift in spending here and abroad, and the 
rapid abatement of upside inflation risks all suggested 
that a forceful policy response would be appropriate.  
Some members were concerned that the effectiveness 
of cuts in the target federal funds rate may have been 
diminished by the financial dislocations, suggesting that 
further policy action might have limited efficacy in pro-
moting a recovery in economic growth.  And some also 
noted that the Committee had limited room to lower its 
federal funds rate target further and should therefore 
consider moving slowly.  However, others maintained 
that the possibility of reduced policy effectiveness and 
the limited scope for reducing the target further were 
reasons for a more aggressive policy adjustment; an 
easing of policy should contribute to a beneficial reduc-
tion in some borrowing costs, even if a given rate re-
duction currently would elicit a smaller effect than in 
more typical circumstances, and more aggressive easing 
should reduce the odds of a deflationary outcome.  
Members also saw the substantial downside risks to 
growth as supporting a relatively large policy move at 
this meeting, though even after today’s 50 basis point 
action, the Committee judged that downside risks to 
growth would remain.  Members anticipated that eco-
nomic data over the upcoming intermeeting period 
would show significant weakness in economic activity, 
and some suggested that additional policy easing could 
well be appropriate at future meetings.  In any event, 
the Committee agreed that it would take whatever steps 
were necessary to support the recovery of the econ-
omy. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-

Minutes of the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
age of around 1 percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to lower its target for the federal funds 
rate 50 basis points to 1 percent. 

The pace of economic activity appears to have 
slowed markedly, owing importantly to a decline 
in consumer expenditures.  Business equipment 
spending and industrial production have weak-
ened in recent months, and slowing economic 
activity in many foreign economies is damping 
the prospects for U.S. exports.  Moreover, the 
intensification of financial market turmoil is 
likely to exert additional restraint on spending, 
partly by further reducing the ability of house-
holds and businesses to obtain credit. 

In light of the declines in the prices of energy 
and other commodities and the weaker pros-
pects for economic activity, the Committee ex-
pects inflation to moderate in coming quarters 
to levels consistent with price stability. 

Recent policy actions, including today’s rate re-
duction, coordinated interest rate cuts by central 
banks, extraordinary liquidity measures, and offi-
cial steps to strengthen financial systems, should 
help over time to improve credit conditions and 
promote a return to moderate economic growth.  
Nevertheless, downside risks to growth remain.  
The Committee will monitor economic and fi-
nancial developments carefully and will act as 
needed to promote sustainable economic growth 
and price stability.” 

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Geith-
ner, Ms. Duke, Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Kroszner, 
Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  None. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, December 16, 2008. 

The meeting adjourned at 11:45 a.m. 

Conference Calls 
On September 29, 2008, the Committee met by confer-
ence call to review recent developments and to con-
sider changes to swap arrangements with foreign cen-
tral banks.  Amid signs of growing strains in money 
markets, the discussion focused on recent Federal Re-
serve actions and on potential expansions in official 
liquidity facilities.  In light of severe pressures in dollar 
funding markets abroad, the Committee unanimously 
approved both extending the liquidity-related swap ar-
rangements with foreign central banks an additional 
three months, through April 30, 2009, and increasing 
substantially the sizes of those existing arrangements.  
The enlarged facilities would support the provision of 
U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts of up to $30 billion by 
the Bank of Canada, $80 billion by the Bank of Eng-
land, $120 billion by the Bank of Japan, $15 billion by 
Danmarks Nationalbank, $240 billion by the European 
Central Bank, $15 billion by the Norges Bank, $30 bil-
lion by the Reserve Bank of Australia, $30 billion by 
Sveriges Riksbank, and $60 billion by the Swiss Na-
tional Bank.  In addition, the Committee was briefed 
on plans for implementation of a provision in pending 
legislation that would allow the Federal Reserve to be-
gin immediately to pay interest on reserves held by de-
pository institutions, and on the proposed acquisition 
of Wachovia by Citigroup. 

On October 7, 2008, the Committee again met by con-
ference call.  Stresses in financial markets had contin-
ued to increase:  Interest-rate spreads in interbank 
funding markets had widened markedly, corporate and 
municipal bond yields had risen, and equity prices had 
dropped sharply.  For the first time in many years, the 
net asset value of a major money market fund had 
fallen below $1 per share; this event sparked a flight 
out of prime money market funds and caused a severe 
impairment of the functioning of the commercial paper 
market.  Since the September 16 FOMC meeting, indi-
cators of economic activity in both the United States 
and in major foreign countries had come in weaker 
than expected.  In the United States, automobile sales, 
capital goods shipments, and private payrolls had fallen 
notably.  Elsewhere, indicators of economic activity 
and sentiment had deteriorated in a broad range of im-
portant foreign economies.  Prices of crude oil and 
other commodities had dropped substantially, and 
some measures of inflation expectations had declined.  
Participants agreed that downside risks to economic 
growth had increased and upside risks to inflation had 
diminished.  Participants discussed the considerable 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



expansion of Federal Reserve liquidity in recent 
months.  Most agreed that these actions to provide li-
quidity had had a beneficial impact.  Nonetheless, fi-
nancial conditions were exerting considerable restraint 
on economic activity. 

All members judged that a significant easing in policy at 
this time was appropriate to foster moderate economic 
growth and to reduce the downside risks to economic 
activity.  Members also welcomed the opportunity to 
coordinate this policy action with similar measures by 
the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Euro-
pean Central Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss 
National Bank.  By showing that policymakers around 
the globe were working closely together, had a similar 
view of global economic conditions, and were willing 
to take strong actions to address those conditions, co-
ordinated action could help to bolster consumer and 
business confidence and so yield greater economic 
benefits than unilateral action. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
age of around 1½ percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee has de-
cided to lower its target for the federal funds 
rate 50 basis points to 1½ percent.  The Com-
mittee took this action in light of evidence point-
ing to a weakening of economic activity and a 
reduction in inflationary pressures. 

Incoming economic data suggest that the pace 
of economic activity has slowed markedly in re-
cent months.  Moreover, the intensification of 
financial market turmoil is likely to exert addi-
tional restraint on spending, partly by further re-
ducing the ability of households and businesses 
to obtain credit.  Inflation has been high, but the 
Committee believes that the decline in energy 
and other commodity prices and the weaker 

prospects for economic activity have reduced 
the upside risks to inflation. 

The Committee will monitor economic and fi-
nancial developments carefully and will act as 
needed to promote sustainable economic growth 
and price stability.” 

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Geith-
ner, Ms. Duke, Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Kroszner, 
Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  None. 

Notation Votes 
By notation vote completed September 21, 2008 the 
Committee unanimously approved the following reso-
lution: 

“The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A. of the Au-
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations to 
include Australian dollars in the list of foreign 
currencies in which the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York may transact for the System Open 
Market Account.” 

By notation vote completed on October 6, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on September 16, 2008. 

By notation vote completed October 11, 2008 the 
Committee unanimously approved the following reso-
lution: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee author-
izes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
(FRBNY) to increase the amounts available 
from the System Open Market Account under 
the existing reciprocal currency arrangements 
(“swap” arrangements) with the Bank of Eng-
land, the European Central Bank, the Bank of 
Japan, and the Swiss National Bank to meet the 
amounts requested by those central banks in 
connection with their fixed-rate tender auctions. 
The FRBNY must report to the Committee each 
time the aggregate draws by one of these central 
banks increases the level outstanding for that 
bank by an increment of $200 billion over the 
level outstanding on October 10, 2008.” 

  

 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary  

Minutes of the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11



Summary of Economic Projections
 

In conjunction with the October 28-29, 2008 FOMC 
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of 
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, 
provided projections for economic growth, 
unemployment, and inflation in 2008, 2009, 2010, and 
2011.  Projections were based on information available 
through the conclusion of the meeting, on each 
participant’s assumptions regarding a range of factors 
likely to affect economic outcomes, and on his or her 
assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  
“Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future 
policy that, based on current information, is deemed 
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity 
and inflation that best satisfy the participant’s 
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives 
of maximum employment and price stability. 

Given the recent intensification and broadening of the 
global financial crisis, FOMC participants viewed the 
outlook for economic growth and employment as 
having worsened significantly since June.  As indicated 
in Table 1 and depicted in Figure 1, participants 
expected that real GDP growth would remain very 
weak next year and that the subsequent pace of 
recovery would be quite slow; they also anticipated that 
the unemployment rate would increase substantially 
further.  In view of the recent sharp declines in the 
prices of energy and other commodities and the 
widening slack in resource utilization, participants 
expected that inflation would drop markedly in coming 
quarters.  Participants generally judged that the degree 
of uncertainty surrounding their projections for both 
economic activity and inflation was greater than 
historical norms.  Most participants viewed the risks to 
the growth outlook as skewed to the downside, and 
nearly all of them saw the risks to the inflation outlook 
as either balanced or tilted to the downside. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2008 
had a central tendency of 0 to 0.3 percent, compared 
with the central tendency of 1 to 1.6 percent for the 
growth projections that were made last June.  The 
downward revisions in their growth forecasts for the 
year as a whole were due almost entirely to substantial 
shifts in their views of second-half growth.  A number 
of participants noted that incoming data on consumer 
spending and employment had been weaker than 
expected   during   the   summer,   even   prior   to   the 

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors
and Reserve Bank presidents, October 2008 

Percent 
Variable 2008 2009 2010 2011 

  Central tendency1 
Change in real GDP 0.0 to 0.3 -0.2 to 1.1 2.3 to 3.2 2.8 to 3.6

June projection. . . 1.0 to 1.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.5 to 3.0 n/a 

Unemployment rate 6.3 to 6.5 7.1 to 7.6 6.5 to 7.3 5.5 to 6.6
June projection. . . 5.5 to 5.7 5.3 to 5.8 5.0 to 5.6 n/a 

PCE inflation. . . . . . 2.8 to 3.1 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.8 1.4 to 1.7
June projection. . . 3.8 to 4.2 2.0 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0 n/a 

Core PCE inflation. . 2.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.3 to 1.7
June projection. . . 2.2 to 2.4 2.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.0 n/a 

  Range2 
Change in real GDP -0.3 to 0.5 -1.0 to 1.8 1.5 to 4.5 2.0 to 5.0

June projection. . . 0.9 to 1.8 1.9 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.5 n/a 

Unemployment rate 6.3 to 6.6 6.6 to 8.0 5.5 to 8.0 4.9 to 7.3
June projection. . . 5.5 to 5.8 5.2 to 6.1 5.0 to 5.8 n/a 

PCE inflation. . . . . . 2.7 to 3.6 1.0 to 2.2 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8
June projection. . . 3.4 to 4.6 1.7 to 3.0 1.6 to 2.1 n/a 

Core PCE inflation.  2.1 to 2.5 1.3 to 2.1 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8
June projection. . . 2.0 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 n/a 

NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) 
and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the 
fourth quarter of the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE 
inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price 
index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price 
index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the 
unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in 
the fourth quarter of the year indicated.  Each participant's projections 
are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  

1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest 
projections for each variable in each year. 

2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' 
projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 

 

intensification of the financial crisis.  Many participants 
highlighted the recent decline in consumer confidence 
and the extent to which households were swiftly 
curbing their outlays in response to large losses in 
stock-market and housing wealth and deterioration in 
labor market conditions.  Severe dislocations in credit 
markets were also seen as weighing heavily on 
consumer spending and business investment. 

Participants’ growth projections had a central tendency 
of -0.2 to 1.1 percent for 2009, 2.3 to 3.2 percent for 
2010, and 2.8 to 3.6 percent for 2011, as most 
participants expected that the near-term weakness in 
economic activity would continue into next year and 
that the subsequent recovery would be relatively 
gradual.  Growth in 2009 was likely to be restrained by 
persistent credit market strains and ongoing 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2008–11

201120102009200820072006200520042003

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

Percent

201120102009200820072006200520042003

Unemployment rate

1

2

3

4

Percent

201120102009200820072006200520042003

PCE inflation

1

2

3

4

Percent

201120102009200820072006200520042003

Core PCE inflation

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



adjustments in the housing sector, as well as by weak 
fundamentals for household and business spending.  
Indeed, many participants anticipated that financial 
market stresses would recede only slowly, 
notwithstanding the extraordinary measures that had 
been taken to enhance liquidity and stabilize financial 
markets and institutions.  Participants also noted that 
demand for exports was likely to be damped in coming 
quarters by the significantly weaker economic outlook 
for many U.S. trading partners.  Participants expected 
that more robust economic expansion would resume in 
2010, and most anticipated that growth would rise 
further in 2011 to a pace that would temporarily exceed 
its longer-run sustainable rate and hence would help 
reduce the degree of slack in resource utilization. 

Participants anticipated that labor market conditions 
would continue to deteriorate over the coming year.  
Their projections for the unemployment rate during the 
fourth quarter of this year had a central tendency of 6.3 
to 6.5 percent, an upward shift of more than ½ 
percentage point from their June projections and a 
further rise from September’s unemployment rate of 
6.1 percent—which was the latest available figure at the 
time of the FOMC meeting.  Looking further ahead, 
the central tendency of participants’ unemployment 
rate projections was 7.1 to 7.6 percent for 2009, 6.5 to 
7.3 percent for 2010, and 5.5 to 6.6 percent for 2011.  
Most participants judged that the unemployment rate in 
2011 would still be above its longer-run sustainable 
level and hence would be likely to decline further in the 
period beyond the forecast horizon. 

The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
total PCE inflation in 2008 declined to 2.8 to 3.1 
percent, about a percentage point lower than the 
central tendency of their projections last June.  
Participants noted that this downward revision in the 
near-term inflation outlook mainly reflected the recent 
sharp decline in the prices of energy and other 
commodities, apparently triggered by the global 
slowdown in economic activity.  Most participants also 
marked down their forecasts for inflation beyond 2008, 
reflecting their expectations of widening resource slack 
over coming quarters as well as gradual pass-through of 
the drop in the prices of energy and raw materials.  The 
central tendency of participants’ projections for total 
PCE inflation was 1.3 to 2 percent for 2009, 1.4 to 1.8 
percent for 2010, and 1.4 to 1.7 percent for 2011.  
Participants generally projected that inflation at the end 
of the projection period would be close to or a bit 
below their assessments of the measured rates of 
inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 

mandate for promoting price stability and maximum 
employment. 

Risks to the Outlook 
Participants continued to view uncertainty about the 
outlook for economic activity as higher than normal.1  
The risks to their projections for GDP growth were 
judged as being skewed to the downside and the 
associated risks to their projections for the 
unemployment rate were tilted to the upside.  
Participants emphasized the considerable degree of 
uncertainty about the future course of the financial 
crisis and its impact on the real economy.  Previous 
episodes of financial market turmoil might not provide 
much information about the likely trajectory going 
forward, given the severity of the current crisis and the 
extraordinary government measures that had been 
taken.  Several participants highlighted the risk of a 
persistent negative feedback loop between credit 
markets and economic activity, while others referred to 
the possibility that financial market functioning might 
normalize more rapidly and hence that the adverse 
effects of the crisis might be somewhat smaller than 
anticipated in their modal outlook.  Some participants 
noted that further monetary policy easing could 
eventually become constrained by the lower bound of 
zero on nominal interest rates, in which case an 
elevated degree of uncertainty might be associated with 
gauging the magnitude and stimulative effects of other 
policy tools such as quantitative easing. 

As in June, most participants continued to view the 
uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as 
higher than historical norms.  The majority of 
participants judged the risks to the inflation outlook as 
roughly balanced, and a number of others viewed these 
risks as skewed to the downside—a marked shift from 
June, when the risks to inflation were generally seen as 
tilted to the upside.  Many participants noted that their 
assessments regarding the downside risks to inflation 
were linked to their judgments regarding the magnitude 
of downside risks to economic activity.  Some 
participants also noted that heightened volatility of 
prices for energy and other commodities was 
contributing to the elevated degree of uncertainty 
regarding the inflation outlook. 

1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty since 
1987 for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, 
and total consumer price inflation.  At the end of this 
summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the 
sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic 
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the 
uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2008 2009 2010 2011 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.3 ±1.4 ±1.4 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.6 ±0.9 ±1.0 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections that were released in the autumn 
from 1987 through 2007 for the current and following three years by 
various private and government forecasters.  As described in the box 
“Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 
percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, 
and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of 
projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David 
Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the 
Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and 
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, November).  

1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure 

that has been most widely used in government and private economic 
forecasts.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous 
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

 
Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further detail on the 
diversity of participants’ views regarding likely 
outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment 
rate, respectively.  For both variables, the dispersion of 
participants’ projections for 2008 was noticeably 
narrower than in the forecasts provided in June, mainly 
due to the accumulation of incoming data regarding the 
performance of the economy to date.  In contrast, 
participants’  projections  for  2009 and 2010  exhibited  

substantially greater dispersion than in June, mainly 
reflecting the diversity of views regarding the duration 
of the financial crisis and the magnitude and 
persistence of its impact on the real economy.  The 
dispersion in participants’ projections was also affected 
to some degree by differences in their estimates of the 
longer-run rates of output growth and unemployment 
to which the economy would converge under 
appropriate policy and in the absence of any further 
shocks. 

Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding 
information regarding the diversity of participants’ 
views regarding the inflation outlook.  The dispersion 
in participants’ projections for 2009 and 2010 was 
substantially greater than in June, primarily reflecting 
differences in their views about how much slack in 
resource utilization was likely to develop and about the 
extent to which that slack would place downward 
pressure on increases in wages and prices.  Some 
participants indicated that their inflation projections for 
2011 were roughly in line with their assessments of the 
measured rate of inflation consistent with the Federal 
Reserve’s dual mandate for promoting price stability 
and maximum employment; other participants 
anticipated that inflation in 2011 would be a bit below 
their assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation 
rate, mainly reflecting the lagged effects of weak 
economic activity and the relatively sluggish pace of 
recovery. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2008–11

2008

June projections

-1.0-
-0.9

-0.8-
-0.7

-0.6-
-0.5

-0.4-
-0.3

-0.2-
-0.1

0.0-
0.1

0.2-
0.3

0.4-
0.5

0.6-
0.7

0.8-
0.9

1.0-
1.1

1.2-
1.3

1.4-
1.5

1.6-
1.7

1.8-
1.9

2.0-
2.1

2.2-
2.3

2.4-
2.5

2.6-
2.7

2.8-
2.9

3.0-
3.1

3.2-
3.3

3.4-
3.5

3.6-
3.7

3.8-
3.9

4.0-
4.1

4.2-
4.3

4.4-
4.5

4.6-
4.7

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

Percent range

October projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

-1.0-
-0.9

-0.8-
-0.7

-0.6-
-0.5

-0.4-
-0.3

-0.2-
-0.1

0.0-
0.1

0.2-
0.3

0.4-
0.5

0.6-
0.7

0.8-
0.9

1.0-
1.1

1.2-
1.3

1.4-
1.5

1.6-
1.7

1.8-
1.9

2.0-
2.1

2.2-
2.3

2.4-
2.5

2.6-
2.7

2.8-
2.9

3.0-
3.1

3.2-
3.3

3.4-
3.5

3.6-
3.7

3.8-
3.9

4.0-
4.1

4.2-
4.3

4.4-
4.5

4.6-
4.7

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

-1.0-
-0.9

-0.8-
-0.7

-0.6-
-0.5

-0.4-
-0.3

-0.2-
-0.1

0.0-
0.1

0.2-
0.3

0.4-
0.5

0.6-
0.7

0.8-
0.9

1.0-
1.1

1.2-
1.3

1.4-
1.5

1.6-
1.7

1.8-
1.9

2.0-
2.1

2.2-
2.3

2.4-
2.5

2.6-
2.7

2.8-
2.9

3.0-
3.1

3.2-
3.3

3.4-
3.5

3.6-
3.7

3.8-
3.9

4.0-
4.1

4.2-
4.3

4.4-
4.5

4.6-
4.7

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

-1.0-
-0.9

-0.8-
-0.7

-0.6-
-0.5

-0.4-
-0.3

-0.2-
-0.1

0.0-
0.1

0.2-
0.3

0.4-
0.5

0.6-
0.7

0.8-
0.9

1.0-
1.1

1.2-
1.3

1.4-
1.5

1.6-
1.7

1.8-
1.9

2.0-
2.1

2.2-
2.3

2.4-
2.5

2.6-
2.7

2.8-
2.9

3.0-
3.1

3.2-
3.3

3.4-
3.5

3.6-
3.7

3.8-
3.9

4.0-
4.1

4.2-
4.3

4.4-
4.5

4.6-
4.7

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2008–11

2008

June projections

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

5.2-
5.3

5.4-
5.5

5.6-
5.7

5.8-
5.9

6.0-
6.1

6.2-
6.3

6.4-
6.5

6.6-
6.7

6.8-
6.9

7.0-
7.1

7.2-
7.3

7.4-
7.5

7.6-
7.7

7.8-
7.9

8.0-
8.1

Percent range

October projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

5.2-
5.3

5.4-
5.5

5.6-
5.7

5.8-
5.9

6.0-
6.1

6.2-
6.3

6.4-
6.5

6.6-
6.7

6.8-
6.9

7.0-
7.1

7.2-
7.3

7.4-
7.5

7.6-
7.7

7.8-
7.9

8.0-
8.1

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

5.2-
5.3

5.4-
5.5

5.6-
5.7

5.8-
5.9

6.0-
6.1

6.2-
6.3

6.4-
6.5

6.6-
6.7

6.8-
6.9

7.0-
7.1

7.2-
7.3

7.4-
7.5

7.6-
7.7

7.8-
7.9

8.0-
8.1

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

4.8-
4.9

5.0-
5.1

5.2-
5.3

5.4-
5.5

5.6-
5.7

5.8-
5.9

6.0-
6.1

6.2-
6.3

6.4-
6.5

6.6-
6.7

6.8-
6.9

7.0-
7.1

7.2-
7.3

7.4-
7.5

7.6-
7.7

7.8-
7.9

8.0-
8.1

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2008–11

2008

June projections

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

3.3-
3.4

3.5-
3.6

3.7-
3.8

3.9-
4.0

4.1-
4.2

4.3-
4.4

4.5-
4.6

Percent range

October projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

3.3-
3.4

3.5-
3.6

3.7-
3.8

3.9-
4.0

4.1-
4.2

4.3-
4.4

4.5-
4.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

3.3-
3.4

3.5-
3.6

3.7-
3.8

3.9-
4.0

4.1-
4.2

4.3-
4.4

4.5-
4.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

2.7-
2.8

2.9-
3.0

3.1-
3.2

3.3-
3.4

3.5-
3.6

3.7-
3.8

3.9-
4.0

4.1-
4.2

4.3-
4.4

4.5-
4.6

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2008–11

2008

June projections

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

Percent range

October projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2009

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

0.7-
0.8

0.9-
1.0

1.1-
1.2

1.3-
1.4

1.5-
1.6

1.7-
1.8

1.9-
2.0

2.1-
2.2

2.3-
2.4

2.5-
2.6

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

 
The economic projections provided by 

the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public 
understanding of the basis for policy actions.  
Considerable uncertainty attends these 
projections, however.  The economic and 
statistical models and relationships used to 
help produce economic forecasts are 
necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real 
world.  And the future path of the economy 
can be affected by myriad unforeseen 
developments and events.  Thus, in setting the 
stance of monetary policy, participants 
consider not only what appears to be the most 
likely economic outcome as embodied in their 
projections, but also the range of alternative 
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, 
and the potential costs to the economy should 
they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy 
Reports and those prepared by Federal 
Reserve Board staff in advance of meetings of 
the Federal Open Market Committee.  The 
projection error ranges shown in the table 
illustrate the considerable uncertainty 
associated with economic forecasts.  For 
example, suppose a participant projects that 
real GDP and total consumer prices will rise 
steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 
percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty 
attending those projections  is  similar  to  that   
 

experienced in the past and the risks around 
the projections are broadly balanced, the 
numbers reported in table 2 would imply a 
probability of about 70 percent that actual 
GDP would expand between 2.4 percent to 3.6 
percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3 
percent in the second year, and 1.6 percent to 
4.4 percent in the third and fourth years.  The 
corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals 
for overall inflation would be 1.7 percent to 2.3 
percent in the current year and 1.0 percent to 
3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth 
years. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed on average over 
history, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their 
projections of each variable is greater than, 
smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels 
of forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge 
whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most 
likely outcome.  These judgments about the 
uncertainty and the risks attending each 
participant’s projections are distinct from the 
diversity of participants’ views about the most 
likely outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty is 
concerned with the risks associated with a 
particular projection, rather than with 
divergences across a number of different 
projections. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 28-29, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9


