











































FOMC Minutes, January 29-30, 2008


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
January 29-30, 2008 

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, January 29, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, January 30, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Mr. Mishkin 
Ms. Pianalto  
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. 

Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Hoenig, Poole, and Rosengren, Presidents 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, 

Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, 
Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Mr. Struckmeyer,1 Deputy Staff Director, Office of 

Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 

                                                 
1Attended Wednesday’s session. 

Mr. Parkinson,2 Deputy Director, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Clouse, Senior Associate Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Liang and Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, 

Associate Directors, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

                                                  
Ms. Barger2 and Mr. Greenlee,2 Associate Direc-

tors, Division of Banking Supervision and 
Regulation, Board of Governors 

                    
Mr. Gibson,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors  
 
Messrs. Durham and Perli, Assistant Directors, Di-

vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Bassett,3 Senior Economist, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Doyle,3 Senior Economist, Division of Inter-

national Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Kusko,3 Senior Economist, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 

                                                 
2Attended portion of the meeting relating to the analy-
sis of policy issues raised by financial market develop-
ments. 
3Attended portion of the meeting relating to the eco-
nomic outlook and monetary policy decision. 
 

                                                                                                                                                                                Page 1



Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Driscoll, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-

fairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 
 
Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presi-

dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and 
San Francisco, respectively 

 

Messrs. Altig and Angulo,2 Mses. Hirtle2 and  
Mosser, Messrs. Peters 2 and Rasche, Senior 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of At-
lanta, New York, New York, New York, New 
York, and St. Louis, respectively 

 
Mr. Hakkio, Senior Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Kansas City  
 
Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Chicago 
 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 

In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad-
vices of the election of the following members and al-
ternate members of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee for a term beginning January 29, 2008 had been 
received and that these individuals had executed their 
oaths of office. 
 
The elected members and alternate members were as 
follows: 
 
Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First 
Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, as alternate. 
 
Charles I. Plosser, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia, with Jeffrey M. Lacker, President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate. 
 

Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate.  
 
Richard W. Fisher, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas, with Dennis P. Lockhart, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate.  
 
Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis, with Janet L. Yellen, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate. 
 
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee were selected to serve 
until the selection of their successors at the first regu-
larly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2009:  
 
Ben S. Bernanke   Chairman 
Timothy F. Geithner  Vice Chairman  
Brian F. Madigan   Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker   Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore   Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith   Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez   General Counsel 
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr.  Deputy General Counsel 
Richard M. Ashton Assistant General  

Counsel 
D. Nathan Sheets Economist  
David J. Stockton   Economist  
  
Thomas A. Connors  
William B. English   
Steven B. Kamin  
Loretta J. Mester  
Arthur J. Rolnick  
Harvey Rosenblum  
Lawrence Slifman   
Mark S. Sniderman  
Joseph S. Tracy   
David W. Wilcox   Associate Economists 
 
By unanimous vote, the Committee made a few 
amendments to its rules and to the Program for Secu-
rity of FOMC Information.  The amendments primarily 
addressed the Committee’s practice of approving the 
minutes via notation vote, attendance at Committee 
meetings, and access to Committee information by Sys-
tem employees. 
  
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York was selected to execute transactions for the Sys-
tem Open Market Account. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

By unanimous vote, William C. Dudley was selected to 
serve at the pleasure of the Committee as Manager, 
System Open Market Account, on the understanding 
that his selection was subject to being satisfactory to 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
 
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic 
Open Market Operations was reaffirmed in the form 
shown below:  
 
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN 
MARKET OPERATIONS 
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008) 
 
  1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent do-
mestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the 
Committee: 
 
     (a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, in-
cluding securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and 
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaran-
teed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the 
United States in the open market, from or to securities 
dealers and foreign and international accounts main-
tained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a 
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System 
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such 
Account, to exchange maturing U.S. Government and 
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the indi-
vidual agencies or to allow them to mature without re-
placement;  
 
     (b) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to 
principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, from dealers for the account of the System 
Open Market Account under agreements for repur-
chase of such securities or obligations in 65 business 
days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly 
authorized by the Committee, shall be determined by 
competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limita-
tions on the volume of agreements with individual 
dealers. 
 
     (c) To sell U.S. Government securities and obliga-
tions that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed 
as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States to dealers for System Open Market Account un-
der agreements for the resale by dealers of such securi-
ties or obligations in 65 business days or less, at rates 

that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the 
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bid-
ding, after applying reasonable limitations on the vol-
ume of agreements with individual dealers. 
 
  2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
to lend on an overnight basis U.S. Government securi-
ties held in the System Open Market Account to deal-
ers at rates that shall be determined by competitive 
bidding.  The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall 
set a minimum lending fee consistent with the objec-
tives of the program and apply reasonable limitations 
on the total amount of a specific issue that may be auc-
tioned and on the amount of securities that each dealer 
may borrow.  The Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
may reject bids which could facilitate a dealer's ability 
to control a single issue as determined solely by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
 
  3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, while assisting in the provision of 
short-term investments for foreign and international 
accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York and accounts maintained at the Federal Re-
serve Bank of New York as fiscal agent of the United 
States pursuant to Section 15 of the Federal Reserve 
Act, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) 
for System Open Market Account, to sell U.S. Gov-
ernment securities to such accounts on the bases set 
forth in paragraph l(a) under agreements providing for 
the resale by such accounts of those securities in 65 
business days or less on terms comparable to those 
available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for 
New York Bank account, when appropriate, to under-
take with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed on 
purchases and sales of securities in paragraph l(b), re-
purchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency 
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repur-
chase agreements between its own account and such 
foreign, international, and fiscal agency  accounts main-
tained at the Bank.  Transactions undertaken with such 
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may 
provide for a service fee when appropriate. 
 
   4. In the execution of the Committee’s decision re-
garding policy during any intermeeting period, the 
Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, upon the instruction of the Chair-
man of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in excep-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 3



tional circumstances the degree of pressure on reserve 
positions and hence the intended federal funds rate.  
Any such adjustment shall be made in the context of 
the Committee’s discussion and decision at its most 
recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objec-
tives for price stability and sustainable economic 
growth, and shall be based on economic, financial, and 
monetary developments during the intermeeting pe-
riod.  Consistent with Committee practice, the Chair-
man, if feasible, will consult with the Committee before 
making any adjustment. 
 
By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Au-
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations with an 
amendment to paragraph 1.D. regarding the maximum 
open position in all foreign currencies.  Accordingly, 
the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations 
was adopted, as shown below: 
 
 
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY 
OPERATIONS 
(Amended January 29, 2008) 
  
  1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for 
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary 
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive 
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant 
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural in-
structions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 
 
     A. To purchase and sell the following foreign cur-
rencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home and 
abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Treasury, 
with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established 
by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with 
foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for Inter-
national Settlements, and with other international fi-
nancial institutions: 
 

Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
Euro 
Pounds sterling 
Japanese yen 
Mexican pesos 
Norwegian kroner 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

     B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding 
forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the foreign 
currencies listed in paragraph A above. 
 
     C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign 
banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency 
arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that 
drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall 
be fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount 
outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the 
Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, spe-
cifically authorizes a delay. 
 
     D. To maintain an overall open position in all for-
eign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion.  For this 
purpose, the overall open position in all foreign curren-
cies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net 
positions in individual currencies, excluding changes in 
dollar value due to foreign exchange rate movements 
and interest accruals.  The net position in a single for-
eign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that 
currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, 
minus outstanding contracts for future delivery of that 
currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements with due 
regard to sign. 
 
  2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain recip-
rocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for 
the System Open Market Account for periods up to a 
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign 
banks, which are among those designated by the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign 
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the 
Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity: 
 
 
     Foreign bank           Amount of arrangement 
                (millions of dollars equivalent) 
                                            
     Bank of Canada     2,000 
     Bank of Mexico    3,000 
 
 
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrange-
ments, and the proposed terms of any new arrange-
ments that may be authorized, shall be referred for re-
view and approval to the Committee. 
 
  3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken 
under paragraph 1.A. above shall, unless otherwise ex-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

pressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing 
market rates.  For the purpose of providing an invest-
ment return on System holdings of foreign currencies 
or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or 
received in connection with swap drawings, transac-
tions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at 
non-market exchange rates. 
 
  4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with for-
eign central banks for the coordination of foreign cur-
rency transactions.  In making operating arrangements 
with foreign central banks on System holdings of for-
eign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, 
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee.  Any agreements or understandings concerning 
the administration of the accounts maintained by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign 
banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for re-
view and approval to the Committee. 
 
  5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to en-
sure that adequate liquidity is maintained to meet an-
ticipated needs and so that each currency portfolio shall 
generally have an average duration of no more than 18 
months (calculated as Macaulay duration).  Such in-
vestments may include buying or selling outright obli-
gations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and inter-
est by, a foreign government or agency thereof; buying 
such securities under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities; selling such securities under agreements 
for the resale of such securities; and holding various 
time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions.  
In addition, when appropriate in connection with ar-
rangements to provide investment facilities for foreign 
currency holdings, U.S. Government securities may be 
purchased from foreign central banks under agree-
ments for repurchase of such securities within 30 cal-
endar days. 
 
  6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preced-
ing paragraphs shall be reported promptly to the For-
eign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee.  The 
Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the 
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such 
other member of the Board as the Chairman may des-
ignate (or in the absence of members of the Board 
serving on the Subcommittee, other Board members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the 
absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his 

alternate).  Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be 
called at the request of any member, or at the request 
of the Manager, System Open Market Account ("Man-
ager"), for the purposes of reviewing recent or con-
templated operations and of consulting with the Man-
ager on other matters relating to his responsibilities.  At 
the request of any member of the Subcommittee, ques-
tions arising from such reviews and consultations shall 
be referred for determination to the Federal Open 
Market Committee. 
 
  7. The Chairman is authorized: 
 
     A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with the 
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of respon-
sibility for foreign currency operations between the 
System and the Treasury; 
 
     B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully ad-
vised concerning System foreign currency operations, 
and to consult with the Secretary on policy matters re-
lating to foreign currency operations; 
 
     C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re-
ports and information to the National Advisory Coun-
cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 
 
  8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign cur-
rency operations to appropriate officials of the Treas-
ury Department. 
 
  9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in ac-
cordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Gov-
ernors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to For-
eign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated 
January 1, 1944. 

 

 
By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive 
was reaffirmed in the form shown below: 
 
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008) 
 
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall gener-
ally be directed at countering disorderly market condi-
tions, provided that market exchange rates for the U.S. 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 5



dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with IMF 
Article IV, Section 1. 
 
2. To achieve this end the System shall: 
 
      A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales 
of foreign exchange. 
 
      B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrange-
ments with selected foreign central banks. 
 
      C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks 
of other countries and with international monetary in-
stitutions. 
 
3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 
 
      A. To adjust System balances in light of probable 
future needs for currencies. 
 
      B. To provide means for meeting System and 
Treasury commitments in particular currencies, and to 
facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization 
Fund. 
 
      C. For such other purposes as may be expressly 
authorized by the Committee. 
 
4. System foreign currency operations shall be con-
ducted: 
 
      A. In close and continuous consultation and coop-
eration with the United States Treasury; 
 
      B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign 
monetary authorities; and 
 
      C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of 
the United States in the International Monetary Fund 
regarding exchange arrangements under IMF Article 
IV. 
 
 
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with 
Respect to Foreign Currency Operations were reaf-
firmed in the form shown below: 
 
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT 
TO FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008) 
 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization 
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee 
as set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency 
Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Man-
ager, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall 
be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearances with the 
Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and 
the Chairman of the Committee.  All operations under-
taken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported 
promptly to the Committee. 
 
  1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or 
with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that con-
sultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the 
time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in 
the System's overall open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $300 million on any day 
or $600 million since the most recent regular 
meeting of the Committee. 

 
B. Any operation that would result in a change on 

any day in the System's net position in a single 
foreign currency exceeding $150 million, or 
$300 million when the operation is associated 
with repayment of swap drawings. 

 
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial 

volume of trading in a particular currency by 
the System, even though the change in the Sys-
tem's net position in that currency might be 
less than the limits specified in 1.B. 

 
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 

not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or 
(ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange-
ment. 

 
  2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes 
that consultation with the full Committee is not feasible 
in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the 
Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcom-
mittee is not feasible in the time available): 
 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in 
the System's overall open position in foreign 
currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the 
most recent regular meeting of the Committee. 

 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 
15 percent of the size of the swap arrange-
ment. 

 
  3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcom-
mittee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings 
by the System and about any operations that are not of 
a routine character. 
 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.   

The information reviewed at the January meeting, 
which included the advance data on the national in-
come and product accounts for the fourth quarter, in-
dicated that economic activity had decelerated sharply 
in recent months.  The contraction in homebuilding 
intensified in the fourth quarter, the growth in con-
sumer spending slowed, and survey measures of both 
consumer and business sentiment were at low levels.  
In addition, industrial production contracted in the 
fourth quarter.  Conditions in the labor market deterio-
rated noticeably, with private payroll employment post-
ing a small decline in December and the unemployment 
rate rising.  Readings on both headline and core infla-
tion increased in recent months, although the twelve-
month change in prices of core personal consumption 
expenditures in December was about the same as its 
year-earlier value. 

On average, private nonfarm payroll employment in 
November and December rose at only about half of 
the average pace seen from July to October.  Over 
2007 as a whole, the deterioration in labor demand was 
most pronounced in the construction and financial ac-
tivities industries, which had been hardest hit by the 
difficulties in the housing and mortgage markets.  
Manufacturing employment declined yet again in De-
cember, while the decrease in employment in retail 
trade nearly reversed the sizable increase in that sector 
recorded in November.  Aggregate hours of production 
or nonsupervisory workers were unchanged in Decem-
ber.  The unemployment rate rose to 5.0 percent in 

December after having been at or near 4.7 percent 
since September.   

Industrial production declined in the fourth quarter, as 
a drag from motor vehicles and construction-related 
industries more than offset a positive contribution 
from other industries.  Output in high-tech industries 
moderated in the fourth quarter, largely because of a 
deceleration in production of computers and semicon-
ductors.  Utilities output climbed for a second consecu-
tive quarter, and mining output was boosted by in-
creases in natural gas extraction and in crude oil.   

The rise in real consumer spending moderated in the 
fourth quarter, with outlays on non-auto consumer 
goods increasing weakly.  Spending on services rose 
solidly in November (the most recent month available), 
led by energy services and commissions paid to stock-
brokers, but warmer-than-usual temperatures in De-
cember likely damped expenditures for energy services 
in that month.  Sales of light motor vehicles were mod-
erate during the fourth quarter.  Real disposable per-
sonal income was little changed in the fourth quarter, 
held down by higher consumer energy prices.  Also, the 
wealth-to-income ratio ticked down in the third quar-
ter, and appeared likely to decline again in the fourth 
quarter, as equity prices had fallen since the end of the 
third quarter and available indicators pointed to con-
tinued declines in house prices in the fourth quarter.  In 
December, readings on consumer sentiment remained 
at relatively low levels by historical standards. 

Both single-family housing starts and permit issuance 
fell in December.  Meanwhile, multifamily housing 
starts plunged in December, but permit issuance 
pointed to a rebound in multifamily starts in the near 
term.  New home sales dropped in November and De-
cember after having held relatively steady since August, 
keeping inventories of unsold homes at elevated levels.   
Sales of existing homes also moved down in December 
but, on balance, had declined less in recent months 
than sales of new homes.  Demand for housing 
through the end of 2007 likely continued to be re-
strained by tight financing conditions for jumbo and 
nonprime mortgages.   

Real spending on equipment and software rose at a 
sluggish rate in the fourth quarter after having posted a 
solid increase in the third quarter.  Sales of medium and 
heavy trucks edged up after falling to a four-year low.  
Spending on high-tech capital goods increased at a 
moderate pace over the second half of last year.  Out-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 7



side of the transportation and high-tech sectors, spend-
ing on equipment appeared to have declined last quar-
ter after having posted sizable gains over the summer.  
Orders and shipments rose somewhat in the fourth 
quarter, but imports in the first two months of the 
quarter were below their average in the third quarter.  
Nonresidential construction remained vigorous in the 
fourth quarter.  However, indicators of future spending 
in this sector pointed to a slowdown in coming 
months, with a decline in architectural billings, a rise in 
retail-sector vacancy rates, and survey reports that con-
tractors were experiencing more difficulty in obtaining 
funding.  More generally, surveys of business condi-
tions and sentiment deteriorated and suggested that 
capital spending would be reduced in the near term.   

Real nonfarm inventory investment excluding motor 
vehicles appeared to have stepped up from its average 
rate over the first three quarters of 2007.  In Novem-
ber, the ratio of manufacturing and trade book-value 
inventories (excluding motor vehicles) to sales ticked 
down.   

The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in 
October and then more substantially in November, as 
increases in imports in both months more than offset 
increases in exports.  The increases in imports almost 
entirely reflected a jump in the value of imported oil.  
Non-oil goods imports were boosted by a large in-
crease in imports of consumer goods and small in-
creases in several other categories, which more than 
offset a steep decline in imports of non-oil industrial 
supplies.  Imports of automotive products and capital 
goods recorded modest gains, with the increase in capi-
tal goods primarily reflecting a jump in imports of tele-
communications equipment.  Imports of services grew 
strongly.  Exports in both months were boosted by 
higher exports of services.  Exports of industrial sup-
plies also recorded a strong gain, aided by a large in-
crease in exports of fuels in November.  Higher ex-
ports of semiconductors, aircraft, and machinery 
pushed up exports of capital goods, while exports of 
agricultural goods increased only slightly following a 
large jump in the third quarter.  In contrast, exports of 
consumer goods fell from their third-quarter level. 

Economic growth in the advanced foreign economies 
appeared to have slowed in the fourth quarter, with 
recent data on household expenditures and retail sales 
weakening on balance and consumers and businesses 
considerably less upbeat about growth prospects.  In 
Japan, the estimate of real GDP growth in the third 

quarter was revised down, and business sentiment de-
clined in December amidst concerns about high oil 
prices.  In the euro area, retail sales growth declined in 
October and November, and consumer and business 
surveys in November and December pointed to eco-
nomic weakness.  In the United Kingdom, although 
real GDP grew solidly in the fourth quarter, the esti-
mate of third-quarter real GDP growth was revised 
down.  In Canada, indicators suggested that growth in 
economic activity moderated in the fourth quarter.  
Private employment shrank in December after having 
posted very strong growth in November.  Incoming 
data on emerging-market economies pointed, on bal-
ance, to a slowing of growth in the fourth quarter.  
Overall, growth in emerging Asia appeared to have 
moderated somewhat in the fourth quarter, with trade 
balances declining in several countries as exports 
slowed.  Readings on economic activity in Latin Amer-
ica were more mixed. Incoming data suggested that 
growth slowed in Mexico in the fourth quarter.  In Bra-
zil, third-quarter growth was solid, but indicators for 
the fourth quarter were mixed.  Economic activity ap-
peared to be strong in Argentina in both the third and 
fourth quarters. 

In the United States, headline consumer price inflation 
stepped up noticeably in November and December 
from the low rates posted in the summer.  Part of the 
increase reflected the rapid rise in energy prices, but 
prices of core personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE) also moved up faster in those months than they 
had earlier in the year.  The pickup in core PCE infla-
tion over the second half of 2007 reflected an accelera-
tion in prices that had been unusually soft earlier in the 
year, such as prices for apparel, prescription drugs, and 
nonmarket services.  For the year as a whole, core PCE 
prices increased at about the same rate as they had in 
2006.  Household survey measures of expectations for 
year-ahead inflation picked up in November and re-
mained at that level in December and January.  House-
holds’ longer-term inflation expectations rose in De-
cember but ticked down in January.  Average hourly 
earnings increased faster in November and December 
than they had in October, although over the twelve 
months that ended in December, this wage measure 
rose a bit more slowly than the elevated pace posted in 
2006.  

At its December meeting, the FOMC lowered its target 
for the federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 4¼ per-
cent.  In addition, the Board of Governors approved a 
decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate, to 4¾ 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

percent, leaving the gap between the federal funds rate 
target and the discount rate at 50 basis points.  The 
Committee’s statement noted that incoming informa-
tion suggested that economic growth was slowing, re-
flecting the intensification of the housing correction 
and some softening in business and consumer spend-
ing.  Moreover, strains in financial markets had in-
creased in recent weeks.  The Committee indicated that 
its action, combined with the policy actions taken ear-
lier, should help promote moderate growth over time.  
Readings on core inflation had improved modestly dur-
ing the year, but elevated energy and commodity prices, 
among other factors, might put upward pressure on 
inflation.  In this context, the Committee judged that 
some inflation risk remained and said that it would 
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.  
Recent developments, including the deterioration in 
financial market conditions, had increased the uncer-
tainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth 
and inflation.  The Committee stated that it would con-
tinue to assess the effects of financial and other devel-
opments on economic prospects and would act as 
needed to foster price stability and sustainable eco-
nomic growth. 

Over the intermeeting period, the expected path of 
monetary policy over the next year as measured by 
money market futures rates tilted down sharply, pri-
marily in response to softer-than-expected economic 
data releases.  The Committee’s action at its December 
meeting was largely anticipated by market participants, 
although some investors were surprised by the absence 
of any indication of accompanying measures to address 
strains in term funding markets.  Some of that surprise 
was reversed the next day, following the announcement 
of a Term Auction Facility (TAF) and associated swap 
lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss 
National Bank.  The subsequent release of the minutes 
of the meeting elicited little market reaction.  However, 
investors did mark down the expected path of policy in 
response to speeches by Federal Reserve officials; the 
speeches were interpreted as suggesting that signs of 
broader economic weakness and additional financial 
strains would likely require an easier stance of policy.  
The Committee’s decision to reduce the target federal 
funds rate 75 basis points on January 22 surprised mar-
ket participants and led investors to mark down further 
the path of policy over the next few months.  Consis-
tent with the shift in the economic outlook, the revi-
sion in policy expectations, and the reduction in the 
target federal funds rate, yields on nominal Treasury 
coupon securities declined substantially over the period 

since the December FOMC meeting.  The yield curve 
steepened somewhat further, with the two-year yield 
dropping more than the ten-year yield.  Near-term in-
flation compensation increased in early January amid 
rising oil prices, but it retreated in later weeks, along 
with oil prices, and declined, on net, over the period. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets improved 
notably over the intermeeting period, but strains re-
mained.  Spreads of rates on securities in interbank 
funding markets over risk-free rates narrowed some-
what following the announcement of the TAF on De-
cember 12 and eased considerably after year-end, al-
though they remained at somewhat elevated levels.  
Spreads of rates on asset-backed commercial paper 
over risk-free rates also fell, on net, and the level of 
such paper outstanding increased in the first two weeks 
of January for the first time since August.  In longer-
term corporate markets, yields on investment-grade 
corporate bonds fell less than those on comparable-
maturity Treasury securities, while yields on specula-
tive-grade bonds rose considerably.  As a result, corpo-
rate bond spreads climbed to their highest levels since 
early 2003, apparently reflecting increased concern 
among investors about the outlook for corporate credit 
quality over the next few years.  Nonetheless, gross 
bond issuance in December remained strong.  Com-
mercial bank credit expanded briskly in December, 
supported by robust growth in business loans and in 
nonmortgage loans to households, and in the face of 
survey reports of tighter lending conditions.  Over the 
intermeeting period, spreads on conforming mortgages 
over comparable-maturity Treasury securities remained 
about flat, as did spreads on jumbo mortgages, al-
though credit availability for jumbo-mortgage borrow-
ers continued to be tight.  Broad stock price indexes 
fell over the intermeeting period on perceptions of a 
deteriorating economic outlook and additional write-
downs by financial institutions.  Similar stresses were 
again evident in the financial markets of major foreign 
economies.  The trade-weighted foreign exchange value 
of the dollar against major currencies declined slightly, 
on balance, over the intermeeting period. 

Debt in the domestic nonfinancial sector was estimated 
to have increased somewhat more slowly in the fourth 
quarter than in the third.  The rate of increase of non-
financial business debt decelerated in the fourth quarter 
from its rapid third-quarter pace despite robust bond 
issuance as the rise in commercial and industrial lend-
ing moderated.  Household mortgage debt expanded at 
a slow rate in the fourth quarter, reflecting continued 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 9



weakness in home prices, declining home sales, and 
tighter credit conditions for some borrowers.  Non-
mortgage consumer credit appeared to expand at a 
moderate pace.  In December, the increase in M2 was 
up slightly from its November pace, boosted primarily 
by inflows into the relative safety and liquidity of 
money market mutual funds.  The rise in small time 
deposits moderated but remained elevated, as several 
thrift institutions offered attractive deposit rates to se-
cure funding.  In contrast, liquid deposits continued to 
increase weakly and currency contracted noticeably, the 
latter apparently reflecting an ongoing trend in overseas 
demand away from U.S. dollar bank notes and towards 
the euro and other currencies. 

In the forecast prepared for this meeting, the staff re-
vised up slightly its estimated increase in aggregate eco-
nomic activity in the fourth quarter of 2007 but revised 
down its projected increase for the first half of 2008.  
Although data on consumer spending and nonresiden-
tial construction activity for the fourth quarter had 
come in above the staff’s expectations, most of the in-
formation received over the intermeeting period was 
weaker than had been previously expected.  The drop 
in housing activity continued to intensify, conditions in 
labor markets appeared to have deteriorated noticeably 
near year-end, and factory output had weakened.  Con-
sumer confidence remained low, and indicators of 
business sentiment had worsened.  Equity prices had 
also fallen sharply so far in 2008, and, while the func-
tioning of money markets had improved, conditions in 
some other financial markets had become more restric-
tive.  The staff projection showed the weakness in 
spending dissipating over the second half of 2008 and 
2009, in response to the cumulative easing of monetary 
policy since August, the abatement of housing weak-
ness, a lessening drag from high oil prices, and the 
prospect of fiscal stimulus.  Still, projected resource 
utilization was lower over the next two years than in 
the previous forecast.  The projection for core PCE 
price inflation in 2008 was raised slightly in response to 
elevated readings in recent months.  The forecast for 
headline PCE price inflation also incorporated a some-
what higher rate of increase for energy prices for the 
first half of 2008; as a result, headline PCE price infla-
tion was now expected to exceed core PCE price infla-
tion slightly for that year.  The forecasts for both head-
line and core PCE price inflation for 2009 were un-
changed, with both receding from their 2008 levels. 

In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in January, all 
meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members 

and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projec-
tions for economic growth, unemployment, and infla-
tion for the period 2008 through 2010. The projections 
are described in the Summary of Economic Projec-
tions, which is attached as an addendum to these min-
utes.  

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, and in the projections that they had submitted for 
this meeting, participants noted that information re-
ceived since the December meeting had been decidedly 
downbeat on balance.  In particular, the drop in hous-
ing activity had intensified, factory output had weak-
ened, news on business investment had been soft, and 
conditions in labor markets appeared to have deterio-
rated.  In addition, consumer confidence had remained 
low and business confidence appeared to have wors-
ened.  Although the functioning of money markets had 
improved notably, strains remained evident in a num-
ber of other financial markets, and credit conditions 
had become generally more restrictive.  Against this 
backdrop, participants expected economic growth to 
remain weak in the first half of this year before picking 
up in the second half, aided in part by a more accom-
modative stance of monetary policy and by likely fiscal 
stimulus.  Further ahead, participants judged that eco-
nomic growth would continue to pick up gradually in 
2009 and 2010.  Nonetheless, with housing activity and 
house prices still declining and with financial conditions 
for businesses and households tightening further, sig-
nificant uncertainties surrounded this outlook and the 
risks to economic growth in the near term appeared to 
be weighted to the downside.  Indeed, several partici-
pants noted that the risks of a downturn in the econ-
omy were significant.  Inflation data had been disap-
pointing in recent months, and a few participants cited 
anecdotal reports that some firms were able to pass on 
costs to consumers.  However, with inflation expecta-
tions anticipated to remain reasonably well anchored, 
energy and other commodity prices expected to flatten 
out, and pressures on resources likely to ease, partici-
pants generally expected inflation to moderate some-
what in coming quarters.   

Meeting participants observed that conditions in short-
term funding markets had improved considerably since 
the December meeting, reflecting the easing of pres-
sures related to funding around the turn of the year as 
well as the implementation of the TAF.  However, 
broader financial conditions had tightened significantly, 
on balance, in the weeks leading up to the meeting, as 
evidence of further deterioration in housing markets 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

and investors’ more pessimistic view of the economic 
outlook adversely affected a range of financial markets.  
Many participants were concerned that the drop in eq-
uity prices, coupled with the ongoing decline in house 
prices, implied reductions in household wealth that 
would likely damp consumer spending.  Moreover, ele-
vated volatility in financial markets likely reflected in-
creased uncertainty about the economic outlook, and 
that greater uncertainty could lead firms and house-
holds to limit spending.  The availability of credit to 
consumers and businesses appeared to be tightening, 
likely adding to restraint on economic growth.  Partici-
pants discussed the risks to financial markets and insti-
tutions posed by possible further deterioration in the 
condition of financial guarantors, and many perceived a 
possibility that additional downgrades in these firms’ 
credit ratings could put increased strains on financial 
markets.  To be sure, some positive financial develop-
ments were evident.  Banks appeared to be making 
some progress in strengthening their balance sheets, 
with several financial institutions able to raise signifi-
cant amounts of capital to offset the large losses they 
had suffered in recent quarters.  Nevertheless, partici-
pants generally viewed financial markets as still vulner-
able to additional economic and credit weakness.  Some 
noted the especially worrisome possibility of an adverse 
feedback loop, that is, a situation in which a tightening 
of credit conditions could depress investment and con-
sumer spending, which, in turn, could feed back to a 
further tightening of credit conditions.  

In their discussion of individual sectors of the econ-
omy, meeting participants emphasized that activity in 
housing markets had continued to deteriorate sharply.  
With single-family permits and starts still falling, sales 
of new homes dropping precipitously, sales of existing 
homes flat, and inventories of unsold homes remaining 
elevated even in the face of falling house prices, several 
participants noted the absence of signs of stabilization 
in the sector.  Of further concern were the reduced 
availability of nonconforming loans and the apparent 
tightening by banks of credit standards on mortgages, 
both of which had the potential for intensifying the 
housing contraction.  The recent declines in interest 
rates had spurred a surge in applications for mortgage 
refinancing and would limit the upward resets on the 
rates on outstanding adjustable-rate mortgages, both of 
which would tend to improve some households’ fi-
nances.  Nonetheless, participants viewed the housing 
situation and its potential further effect on employ-
ment, income, and wealth as one of the major sources 
of downside risk to the economic outlook. 

Recent data as well as anecdotal information indicated 
that consumer spending had decelerated considerably, 
perhaps partly reflecting a spillover from the weakness 
in the housing sector.  Participants remarked that de-
clining house prices and sales appeared to be depress-
ing consumer sentiment and that the contraction in 
wealth associated with decreases in home and equity 
prices probably was restraining spending.  In addition, 
consumption expenditures were being damped by 
slower growth in real disposable income induced by 
high energy prices and possibly by a softening of the 
labor market.  The December employment report 
showed that job growth had slowed appreciably, and 
other indicators also pointed to emerging weakness in 
the labor market in the intermeeting period.  And 
spending in the future could be affected by an ongoing 
tightening in the availability of consumer credit amid 
signs that lenders were becoming increasingly cautious 
in view of some deterioration of credit performance on 
consumer loans and widening expectations of slower 
income growth.  Some participants, however, cited evi-
dence that workers in some sectors were still in short 
supply and saw signs that the labor market remained 
resilient.    

The outlook for business investment had turned 
weaker as well since the time of the December meeting.  
Several participants reported that firms in their districts 
were reducing capital expenditures in anticipation of a 
slowing in sales.  Manufacturing activity appeared to 
have slowed or contracted in many districts.  Although 
a few participants reported more upbeat attitudes 
among firms in the technology and energy sectors, 
business sentiment overall appeared to be declining.  
Moreover, a number of indicators pointed to a tighten-
ing in credit availability to businesses.  For example, the 
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending 
Practices indicated that banks had tightened lending 
standards and pricing terms on business loans.  Lend-
ing standards had been raised especially sharply on 
commercial real estate loans.  While real outlays for 
nonresidential construction apparently continued to 
rise through the fourth quarter, anecdotal evidence 
pointed to a weakening of commercial real estate 
spending in several districts, with some projects being 
canceled or scaled back.   

Most participants anticipated that a fiscal stimulus 
package, including tax rebates for households and bo-
nus depreciation allowances for businesses, would be 
enacted before long and would support economic 
growth in the second half of the year.  Some pointed 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 11



out, however, that the fiscal stimulus package might 
not help in the near term, when the risks of a downturn 
in economic activity appeared largest.  In addition, the 
effects of the proposed package would likely be tempo-
rary, with the stimulus reversing in 2009. 

With regard to the external sector, some participants 
noted that growth abroad had recently been strong and 
that increasing U.S. exports had been a significant 
source of strength for the U.S. economy of late.  How-
ever, available data suggested that economic activity 
outside the United States appeared to be decelerating 
somewhat.  Although slowing foreign growth would 
reduce a source of support for the U.S. economy at the 
same time that domestic spending was slackening, it 
could also damp commodity prices and help reduce 
global price pressures. 

Participants agreed that the inflation data that were 
received since the December meeting had been disap-
pointing.  But many believed that the slow growth in 
economic activity anticipated for the first half of this 
year and the associated slack in resource utilization 
would contribute to an easing of price pressures.  
Moreover, a leveling-off of energy and commodity 
prices such as that embedded in futures markets would 
also help moderate inflation pressures.  However, some 
participants cautioned that commodity prices had re-
mained stubbornly high for quite some time and that 
inferences drawn in the past from futures markets 
about likely trends in such prices had often proven in-
accurate.  Participants also related anecdotal evidence 
of firms facing increasing input cost pressures and in 
some cases being able to pass on those costs to con-
sumers.  Moreover, headline inflation had been gener-
ally above 2 percent over the past four years, and par-
ticipants noted that such persistently elevated readings 
could ultimately affect inflation expectations.  Some 
survey measures of inflation expectations had edged up 
in recent months, and longer-term financial market 
gauges of inflation compensation had climbed.  The 
latter probably reflected at least in part increased uncer-
tainty—inflation risk—rather than greater inflation ex-
pectations; increases in nominal wages did not appear 
to be incorporating higher inflation expectations.  On 
balance, expectations seemed to remain fairly well an-
chored, but participants agreed that continued stability 
of inflation expectations was essential.     

In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
ing period, most members believed that a further sig-
nificant easing in policy was warranted at this meeting 

to address the considerable worsening of the economic 
outlook since December as well as increased downside 
risks.  As had been the case in some previous cyclical 
episodes, a relatively low real federal funds rate now 
appeared appropriate for a time to counter the factors 
that were restraining economic growth, including the 
slide in housing activity and prices, the tightening of 
credit availability, and the drop in equity prices.  Mem-
bers judged that a 50 basis point reduction in the fed-
eral funds rate, together with the Committee’s previous 
policy actions, would bring the real short-term rate to a 
level that was likely to help the economy expand at a 
moderate pace over time.  Still, with no signs of stabili-
zation in the housing sector and with financial condi-
tions not yet stabilized, the Committee agreed that 
downside risks to growth would remain even after this 
action.  Members were also mindful of the need for 
policy to promote price stability, and some noted that, 
when prospects for growth had improved, a reversal of 
a portion of the recent easing actions, possibly even a 
rapid reversal, might be appropriate.  However, most 
members agreed that a 50 basis point easing at this 
meeting would likely not contribute to an increase in 
inflation pressures given the actual and expected weak-
ness in economic growth and the consequent reduction 
in pressures on resources.  Rather, members agreed 
that inflation was likely to moderate in coming quarters, 
but they also concurred that it would be necessary to 
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. 

The Committee agreed that the statement to be re-
leased after the meeting should indicate that financial 
markets remained under considerable stress, that credit 
had tightened further for some businesses and house-
holds, and that recent information pointed to a deepen-
ing of the housing contraction as well as to some sof-
tening in labor markets.  The Committee again viewed 
it as appropriate to indicate that it expected inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters but also to emphasize that 
it would be necessary to monitor inflation develop-
ments carefully.  The action taken at the meeting, com-
bined with the cumulative policy easing already in 
place, should help to promote moderate growth over 
time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity.  
However, members concurred that downside risks to 
growth remained, and that the Committee would con-
tinue to assess the effects of financial and other devel-
opments on economic prospects and would act in a 
timely manner as needed to address those risks. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 

Page 12                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
age of around 3 percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to lower its target for the federal funds 
rate 50 basis points to 3 percent. 

Financial markets remain under considerable 
stress, and credit has tightened further for some 
businesses and households.  Moreover, recent 
information indicates a deepening of the housing 
contraction as well as some softening in labor 
markets. 

The Committee expects inflation to moderate in 
coming quarters, but it will be necessary to con-
tinue to monitor inflation developments care-
fully. 

Today’s policy action, combined with those 
taken earlier, should help to promote moderate 
growth over time and to mitigate the risks to 
economic activity.  However, downside risks to 
growth remain.  The Committee will continue to 
assess the effects of financial and other devel-
opments on economic prospects and will act in a 
timely manner as needed to address those risks.”  

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner, 
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. 
Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:   Mr. Fisher. 

Mr. Fisher dissented because he preferred to leave the 
federal funds rate unchanged.  The rate had been low-
ered by 75 basis points just one week earlier in a deci-
sion he supported, which brought the funds rate down 
175 basis points since September.  Given these actions, 
he felt that monetary policy was already quite stimula-
tive, while headline inflation was too high at more than 

3 percent over the last year.  Demand-pull inflation 
pressures from emerging-market economies abroad 
appeared to be continuing, and anecdotal reports from 
business contacts suggested greater willingness domes-
tically to pass rising costs through to prices.  Moreover, 
Mr. Fisher was concerned that inflation expectations 
could become unanchored if the perception of negative 
real rates of interest were to become pervasive.  At the 
same time, the economy appeared to be still growing, 
albeit at a substantially weakened pace.  Given the pol-
icy tradeoffs confronting the FOMC at this time, Mr. 
Fisher saw the upside risks to inflation as being greater 
than the downside risks to longer-term economic 
growth, especially in light of the recent, aggressive eas-
ing of monetary policy and the lag before it would have 
its full effect on the economy.  

The Committee then turned to a discussion of selected 
longer-term regulatory and structural issues raised by 
recent financial market developments.  A staff presen-
tation began by noting that the difficulties in financial 
markets started with unexpectedly heavy losses on sub-
prime mortgages and related structured securities, 
which led investors to question the valuations of com-
plex structured instruments more generally and to pull 
back from such investments.  The resulting effects in 
markets put pressure on some large banking organiza-
tions, particularly through losses on subprime-
mortgage-related securities and other assets, and 
through the unplanned expansion of balance sheets 
triggered by the disruption of various markets in which 
assets were securitized.  The remainder of the presenta-
tion, and the discussion by meeting participants, fo-
cused on two issues:  first, the important role of credit 
ratings in the securitization process, including the 
methods used to set ratings and the way investors use 
ratings in making their investment decisions; and sec-
ond, how weaknesses in risk management practices at 
some large global financial services organizations ap-
pear to have led to outsized losses at those institutions, 
and the reasons that such weaknesses may have 
emerged at some firms and not at others.   

 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, March 18, 2008. 

The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on December 31, 2007, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on December 11, 2007. 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 13



Conference Calls 
On January 9, 2008, the Committee reviewed recent 
economic data and financial market developments.  
The available information suggested that the downside 
risks to growth had increased significantly since the 
time of the December FOMC meeting.  Participants 
discussed the possibility that the slowing in economic 
growth and associated softening in labor markets might 
exacerbate the tightening in credit conditions and the 
correction in housing market activity and prices, which 
could in turn weigh further on economic activity.  Par-
ticipants emphasized the risks that such adverse dy-
namics could pose to economic and financial stability.     

Participants noted that core price inflation had edged 
up in recent months, boosted in part by the pass-
through of higher energy costs to the prices of core 
consumer goods and services.  Inflation was expected 
to edge lower this year as energy prices leveled off and 
pressures on resources eased.  However, this slowing in 
inflation was dependent on inflation expectations re-
maining well anchored, and participants noted that 
considerable uncertainty surrounded the inflation out-
look.   

Most participants were of the view that substantial ad-
ditional policy easing in the near term might well be 
necessary to promote moderate economic growth over 
time and to reduce the downside risks to growth, and 
participants discussed the possible timing of such pol-
icy actions. 

On January 21, 2008, the Committee again met by con-
ference call.  Incoming information since the confer-
ence call on January 9 had reinforced the view that the 
outlook for economic activity was weakening.  Among 
other developments, strains in some financial markets 
had intensified, as it appeared that investors were be-
coming increasingly concerned about the economic 
outlook and the downside risks to activity.  Participants 
discussed the possibility that these developments could 
lead to an excessive pull-back in credit availability and 
in investment.  Although inflation was expected to 
moderate from recent elevated levels, participants 
stressed that this outlook relied upon inflation expecta-
tions remaining well anchored and that the inflation 
situation should continue to be monitored carefully.   

All members judged that a substantial easing in policy 
in the near term was appropriate to foster moderate 
economic growth and reduce the downside risks to 
economic activity.  Most members judged that an im-

mediate reduction in the federal funds rate was called 
for to begin aligning the real policy rate with a weaken-
ing economic situation.  Such an action, by demonstrat-
ing the Committee’s commitment to act decisively to 
support economic activity, might reduce concerns 
about economic prospects that seemed to be contribut-
ing to the deteriorating conditions in financial markets, 
which could feed back on the economy.  However, 
some concern was expressed that an immediate policy 
action could be misinterpreted as directed at recent 
declines in stock prices, rather than the broader eco-
nomic outlook, and one member believed it preferable 
to delay policy action until the scheduled FOMC meet-
ing on January 29-30.  Some members also noted that 
were policy to become very stimulative it would be im-
portant for the Committee to be decisive in reversing 
the course of interest rates once the economy had 
strengthened and downside risks had abated. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

"The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
age of around 3½  percent." 

The vote encompassed approval of the text below for 
inclusion in the statement to be released at 8:30 a.m. on 
Tuesday, January 22: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee has de-
cided to lower its target for the federal funds 
rate 75 basis points to 3½  percent. 

The Committee took this action in view of a 
weakening of the economic outlook and increas-
ing downside risks to growth.  While strains in 
short-term funding markets have eased some-
what, broader financial market conditions have 
continued to deteriorate and credit has tightened 
further for some businesses and households.  
Moreover, incoming information indicates a 
deepening of the housing contraction as well as 
some softening in labor markets. 

Page 14                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

The Committee expects inflation to moderate in 
coming quarters, but it will be necessary to con-
tinue to monitor inflation developments care-
fully. 

Appreciable downside risks to growth remain.  
The Committee will continue to assess the ef-
fects of financial and other developments on 
economic prospects and will act in a timely 
manner as needed to address those risks.” 

Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner, 
Evans, Hoenig, Kohn, Kroszner, Rosengren, and 
Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  Mr. Poole 

Absent and not voting:  Mr. Mishkin 

Mr. Poole dissented because he did not believe that 
current conditions justified policy action before the 
regularly scheduled meeting the following week.  

 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 15



Summary of Economic Projections 
 
In conjunction with the January 2008 FOMC meeting, 
the members of the Board of Governors and the presi-
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par-
ticipate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided 
projections for economic growth, unemployment, and 
inflation in 2008, 2009, and 2010.  Projections were 
based on information available through the conclusion 
of the January meeting, on each participant’s assump-
tions regarding a range of factors likely to affect eco-
nomic outcomes, and on his or her assessment of ap-
propriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary 
policy” is defined as the future policy that, based on 
current information, is deemed most likely to foster 
outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best 
satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the Federal 
Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and 
price stability. 

The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and 
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected that 
output would grow at a pace appreciably below its 
trend rate in 2008, owing primarily to a deepening of 
the housing contraction and a tightening in the avail-
ability of household and business credit, and that the 
unemployment rate would increase somewhat.  Given 
the substantial reductions in the target federal funds 
rate through the January FOMC meeting as well as the 
assumption of appropriate policy going forward, output 
growth further ahead was projected to pick up to a 
pace around or a bit above its long-run trend by 2010.  
Inflation was expected to decline in 2008 and 2009 
from its recent elevated levels as energy prices leveled 
out and economic slack contained cost and price in-
creases.  Most participants judged that considerable 
uncertainty surrounded their projections for output 
growth and viewed the risks to their forecasts as 
weighted to the downside.  A majority of participants 
viewed the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly bal-
anced, but a number of participants saw the risks to 
inflation as skewed to the upside.      

The Outlook 
The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
real GDP growth in 2008, at 1.3 to 2.0 percent, was 
considerably lower than the central tendency of the 
projections provided in conjunction with the October 
FOMC meeting, which was 1.8 to 2.5 percent.  These 
downward revisions to the 2008 outlook stemmed 
from a number of factors, including a further intensifi-
cation of the housing market correction, tighter credit 
conditions amid increased concerns about credit quality 

and ongoing turmoil in financial markets, and higher oil 
prices.  However, some participants noted that a fiscal 
stimulus package would likely provide a temporary 
boost to domestic demand in the second half of this 
year.  Beyond 2008, a number of factors were projected 
to buoy economic growth, including a gradual turn-
around in housing markets, lower interest rates associ-
ated with the substantial easing of monetary policy to 
date and appropriate adjustments to policy going for-
ward, and an anticipated reduction in financial market 
strains.  Real GDP was expected to accelerate some-
what in 2009 and by 2010 to expand at or a little above 
participants’ estimates of the rate of trend growth. 

With output growth running below trend over the next 
year or so, most participants expected that the unem-
ployment rate would edge higher.  The central tendency 
of participants’ projections for the average rate of un-
employment in the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.2 to 
5.3 percent, above the 4.8 to 4.9 percent unemploy-
ment rate forecasted in October and broadly suggestive 
of some slack in labor markets.  The unemployment 
rate was generally expected to change relatively little in 
2009 and then to edge lower in 2010 as output growth 
picks up, although in both years the unemployment 
rate was projected to be a little higher than had been 
anticipated in October.  

The higher-than-expected rates of overall and core in-
flation since October, which were driven in part by the 
steep run-up in oil prices, had caused participants to 
revise up somewhat their projections for inflation in 
the near term.  The central tendency of participants’ 
projections for core PCE inflation in 2008 was 2.0 to 
2.2 percent, up from the 1.7 to 1.9 percent central ten-
dency in October.  However, core inflation was ex-
pected to moderate over the next two years, reflecting 
muted pressures on resources and fairly well-anchored 
inflation expectations.  Overall PCE inflation was pro-
jected to decline from its current elevated rate over the 
coming year, largely reflecting the assumption that en-
ergy and food prices would flatten out.  Thereafter, 
overall PCE inflation was projected to move largely in 
step with core PCE inflation.  

Participants’ projections for 2010 were importantly 
influenced by their judgments about the measured rates 
of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 
mandate to promote maximum employment and price 
stability and about the time frame over which policy 
should aim to attain those rates given current economic 

                                                                                                                                                                                Page 1



conditions.  Many participants judged that, given the 
recent adverse shocks to both aggregate demand and 
inflation, policy would be able to foster only a gradual 
return of key macroeconomic variables to their longer-
run sustainable or optimal levels.  Consequently, the 
rate of unemployment was projected by some partici-

pants to remain slightly above its longer-run sustainable 
level even in 2010, and inflation was judged likely still 
to be a bit above levels that some participants judged 
would be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 
mandate.

 

Table 1:  Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors 
and Reserve Bank Presidents  

 

 (Percent) 

 2008 2009 2010 

Central Tendency1    
 Growth of real GDP  1.3 to 2.0 2.1 to 2.7 2.5 to 3.0 

October projections 1.8 to 2.5 2.3 to 2.7 2.5 to 2.6 

Unemployment rate 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.3 4.9 to 5.1 
October projections 4.8 to 4.9 4.8 to 4.9 4.7 to 4.9 

PCE inflation 2.1 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 
October projections 1.8 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 1.9 

Core PCE inflation 2.0 to 2.2 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 1.9 
October projections 1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 1.9 1.6 to 1.9 

    
Range2    

 Growth of real GDP  1.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 3.2 2.2 to 3.2 
October projections 1.6 to 2.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.2 to 2.7 

Unemployment rate 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.7 4.7 to 5.4 
October projections 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0 

PCE inflation 2.0 to 2.8 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 
October projections 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation 1.9 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.2 1.4 to 2.0 
October projections 1.7 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 

Note:  Projections of the growth of real GDP, of PCE inflation, and of core PCE in-
flation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth 
quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage 
rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures 
and the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy. 
Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate 
in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on 
his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  

1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for 
each variable in each year. 

2.  The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from 
lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*

* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

2

4

6

PercentReal GDP Growth

• • • • •

Central Tendency of Projections
Range of Projections

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
3

4

5

6

7

8
PercentUnemployment Rate

• • • • •

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5
PercentPCE Inflation

•
• •

•
•

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5
PercentCore PCE Inflation

•
• • • •

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 3



 

Risks to the Outlook 
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projec-
tions as weighted to the downside and the associated 
risks to their projections of unemployment as tilted to 
the upside.  The possibility that house prices could de-
cline more steeply than anticipated, further reducing 
households’ wealth and access to credit, was perceived 
as a significant risk to the central outlook for economic 
growth and employment.  In addition, despite some 
recovery in money markets after the turn of the year, 
financial market conditions continued to be strained—
stock prices had declined sharply since the December 
meeting, concerns about further potential losses at ma-
jor financial institutions had mounted amid worries 
about the condition of financial guarantors, and credit 
conditions had tightened in general for both house-
holds and firms.  The potential for adverse interactions, 
in which weaker economic activity could lead to a 
worsening of financial conditions and a reduced avail-
ability of credit, which in turn could further damp eco-
nomic growth, was viewed as an especially worrisome 
possibility.      

Regarding risks to the inflation outlook, several partici-
pants pointed to the possibility that real activity could 
rebound less vigorously than projected, leading to more 
downward pressure on costs and prices than antici-
pated.  However, participants also saw a number of 
upside risks to inflation.  In particular, the pass-through 
of recent increases in energy and commodity prices as 
well as of past dollar depreciation to consumer prices 
could be greater than expected.  In addition, partici-
pants recognized a risk that inflation expectations could 
become less firmly anchored if the current elevated 
rates of inflation persisted for longer than anticipated 
or if the recent substantial easing in monetary policy 
was misinterpreted as reflecting less resolve among 
Committee members to maintain low and stable infla-
tion.  On balance, a larger number of participants than 
in October viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts 
as broadly balanced, although several participants con-
tinued to indicate that their inflation projections were 
skewed to the upside. 

The ongoing financial market turbulence and tightening 
of credit conditions had increased participants’ uncer-
tainty about the outlook for economic activity.  Most 
participants judged that the uncertainty attending their 
January projections for real GDP growth and for the 
unemployment rate was above typical levels seen in the 
past.  (Table 2 provides an estimate of average ranges 
of forecast uncertainty for GDP growth, unemploy-

ment, and inflation over the past twenty years.1)  In 
contrast, the uncertainty attached to participants’ infla-
tion projections was generally viewed as being broadly 
in line with past experience, although several partici-
pants judged that the degree of uncertainty about infla-
tion was higher than normal. 

 

Table 2:  Average Historical Projection Error 
Ranges  

(Percentage Points) 

 2008 2009 2010 

 Real GDP1 ±1.2 ±1.4 ±1.4 
 Unemployment 

rate2 ±0.5 ±0.8 ±1.0 

 Total consumer 
prices3 

±1.0 ±1.0 ±0.9 

Note:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or mi-
nus the root mean squared error of projections that were 
released in the winter from 1986 through 2006 for the cur-
rent and following two years by various private and govern-
ment forecasters.  As described in the box “Forecast Uncer-
tainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 per-
cent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unem-
ployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by 
the average size of projection errors made in the past.  Fur-
ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip 
(2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook 
from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Econom-
ics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November).  

1. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the 
previous year to fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

2. Projection is the fourth quarter average of the civilian 
unemployment rate (percent). 

3. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price 
measure that has been most widely used in government and 
private economic forecasts.  Projection is percent change, 
fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of 
the year indicated. The slightly narrower estimated width of 
the confidence interval for inflation in the third year com-
pared with those for the second and third years is likely the 
result of using a limited sample period for computing these 
statistics. 

 

Diversity of Participants’ Views 
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diver-
sity of participants’ views.  The dispersion of partici-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth was markedly 
wider than in the forecasts submitted in October, 
which in turn were considerably more diverse than 

                                                 
1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary dis-
cusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic 
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty 
and risks attending participants’ projections. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



those submitted in conjunction with the June FOMC 
meeting and included in the Board’s Monetary Policy Re-
port to the Congress in July.  Mirroring the increase in di-
versity of views on real GDP growth, the dispersion of 
participants’ projections for the rate of unemployment 
also widened notably, particularly for 2009 and 2010.  
The dispersion of projections for output and employ-
ment seemed largely to reflect differing assessments of 
the effect of financial market conditions on real activ-
ity, the speed with which credit conditions might im-
prove, and the depth and duration of the housing mar-
ket contraction.  The dispersion of participants’ longer-
term projections was also affected to some degree by 
differences in their judgments about the economy’s 
trend growth rate and the unemployment rate that 
would be consistent over time with maximum em-

ployment.  Views also differed about the pace at which 
output and employment would recover toward those 
levels over the forecast horizon and beyond, given ap-
propriate monetary policy.  The dispersion of the pro-
jections for PCE inflation in the near term partly re-
flected different views on the extent to which recent 
increases in energy and other commodity prices would 
pass through into higher consumer prices and on the 
influence that inflation expectations would exert on 
inflation over the short and medium run.  Participants’ 
inflation projections further out were influenced by 
their views of the rate of inflation consistent with the 
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives and the time it would 
take to achieve these goals given current economic 
conditions and appropriate policy. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 5



Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)

Real GDP Unemployment Rate

1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.1  1.3  1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  

January Projections

October Projections

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 -
4.7  4.9  5.1  5.3  5.5  5.7  

January Projections

October Projections

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.1  1.3  1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2009

4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 -
4.7  4.9  5.1  5.3  5.5  5.7  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2009

1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.1  1.3  1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 -
4.7  4.9  5.1  5.3  5.5  5.7  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)

PCE Inflation Core PCE Inflation

1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 - 2.7 -
1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  

January Projections

October Projections

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  

January Projections

October Projections

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 - 2.7 -
1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2009

1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2009

1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 - 2.7 -
1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                                Page 7



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

 
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the 
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks help shape monetary policy and can aid public 
understanding of the basis for policy actions.  Considerable uncertainty attends these 
projections, however.  The economic and statistical models and relationships used to 
help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world. 
And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop-
ments and events.  Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider 
not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their 
projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occur-
ring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. 
 
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve 
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee.  The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated 
with economic forecasts.  For example, suppose a participant projects that real GDP 
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 
2 percent.  If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in 
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported 
in table 2 might imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand 
between 1.8 percent to 4.2 percent in the current year, and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in 
the second and third years.  The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for over-
all inflation would be 1 percent to 3 percent in the current and second years, and 1.1
percent to 2.9 percent in the third year. 
 
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed on average over history, 
participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projec-
tions of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2.  Participants also provide judgments 
as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most likely outcome.  These judgments about 
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from 
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty 
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with di-
vergences across a number of different projections. 
 
 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




