









































FOMC Minutes, December 15-16, 2008


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
December 15-16, 2008

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Mon-
day, December 15, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Tuesday, December 16, 2008 at 9:00 a.m.  
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Ms. Pianalto  
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock-

hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Ashton,1 Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, 

Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, Slifman, and 
Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Mr. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervi-

sion and Regulation, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Johnson,2 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

 

Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Clouse and Parkinson,1 Deputy Directors, 

Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research 
and Statistics, respectively, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Frierson,² Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Leahy,² Nelson,³ Reifschneider, and 

Wascher, Associate Directors, Divisions of In-
ternational Finance, Monetary Affairs, Re-
search and Statistics, and Research and Statis-
tics, respectively, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Gagnon,² Visiting Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Shanks,² Associate Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

 
Messrs. Perli and Reeve, Deputy Associate Direc-

tors, Divisions of Monetary Affair and Interna-
tional Finance, respectively, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Covitz, Assistant Director, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Goldberg,² Visiting Reserve Bank Officer, Di-

vision of International Finance, Board of Gov-
ernors 

 
Mr. Zakrajsek,² Assistant Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

 
________________ 

1 Attended Tuesday’s session. 
² Attended the portion of the meeting relating to the zero 

lower bound on nominal interest rates. 
3 Attended the meeting through the discussion of the zero 

lower bound on nominal interest rates. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1

m1vsh00
Typewritten Text



Messrs. Meyer² and Oliner, Senior Advisers, Divi-
sions of Monetary Affairs and Research and 
Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors 

 
 Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Messrs. Ahmed and Luecke, Section Chiefs, Divi-
sions of International Finance and Monetary 
Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Aaronson, Senior Economist, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Gapen and McCabe,² Economists, Divi-

sions of Monetary Affairs and Research and 
Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Beattie,² Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Werkema, First Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Chicago 

 
Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Boston  
 
Messrs. Altig, Hilton, Potter, Rasche, Rudebusch, 

Schweitzer, Sellon, Sullivan, and Weinberg, Se-
nior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta, New York, New York, St. Louis, San 
Francisco, Cleveland, Kansas City, Chicago, 
and Richmond, respectively 

 
Mr. Burke,² Assistant Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of New York 
 
Mr. Eggertsson,² Senior Economist, Federal Re-

serve Bank of New York 
________________ 

² Attended the portion of the meeting relating to the zero 
lower bound on nominal interest rates. 

 
 

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-

kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. 

The information reviewed at the December meeting 
pointed to a significant contraction in economic activity 
in the fourth quarter.  Conditions in the labor market 
deteriorated considerably in recent months as most 
major industry groups shed jobs.  Private payrolls con-
tinued to fall at a faster pace than earlier in the year, 
and the unemployment rate rose to 6.7 percent.  Indus-
trial production, excluding special hurricane- and strike-
related effects, fell further in November, and consumer 
spending declined across a broad range of spending 
categories over recent months.  The housing market 
weakened again as construction activity, new home 
sales, and home prices declined further.  In the busi-
ness sector, investment in equipment and software ap-
peared to continue to contract.  Financial markets saw 
a further pullback in risk-taking, spurred in part by the 
more pessimistic outlook for economic activity; this 
situation led to lower equity prices, higher risk spreads, 
and tighter constraints in credit markets, all of which 
intensified the decline in real activity.  On the inflation 
front, headline consumer prices declined in recent 
months, as energy prices continued to fall and con-
sumer food price increases moderated. 

The labor market continued to worsen.  According to 
the November employment report, payroll employ-
ment fell at a rapid pace over the preceding three 
months, with substantial losses across a wide range of 
industry groups, including manufacturing, construction, 
retail, financial activities, and business services.  Indica-
tors of hiring plans also dropped steeply in November, 
and other labor market indicators suggested that jobs 
remained in short supply.  The unemployment rate 
climbed to 6.7 percent in November, while the labor 
force participation rate fell after remaining steady for 
much of the year.  New claims for unemployment in-
surance rose sharply through early December. 

Industrial production, excluding special hurricane- and 
strike-related effects, fell markedly in November after 
sizable declines in the preceding two months.  The re-
cent contraction in industrial output was broadly based.  
The steep pace of decline in the production of con-
sumer goods reflected not only cutbacks in motor vehi-
cle assemblies but also drops in the output of other 
goods, such as appliances, furniture, and products re-
lated to home improvement.  The production of busi-
ness equipment was held down by declines in the out-
put of both industrial and high-tech equipment.  The 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



output of construction supplies extended its decline 
after a brief pause in the middle of the year, and the 
contraction in the production of materials intensified.  
In particular, steel production plummeted, and the out-
put of organic chemicals contracted noticeably.  For 
most major industry groups, factory utilization rates 
declined relative to their levels in July and remained 
below their long-run averages.  Available forward-
looking indicators pointed to a significant downturn in 
manufacturing output in coming months. 

Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) fell for 
the fifth straight month in October, with the slowdown 
evident in nearly all broad spending categories.  Sales of 
light motor vehicles, which slumped in October, fell 
further in November, but the available information on 
retail sales suggested a small increase in real outlays for 
other consumer goods.  The annualized three-month 
change in spending on services in October was just 
one-third of the rate registered in the first half of 2008.  
Preliminary data for October and November suggested 
that overall fourth-quarter real spending would receive 
a modest boost from recent price declines for gasoline.  
Real incomes were also boosted by the reversal in en-
ergy prices, though the negative wealth effects of con-
tinued declines in equity and house prices likely offset 
this somewhat.  Measures of consumer sentiment re-
leased in November and December remained low, and 
available evidence suggested further tightening in con-
sumer credit conditions in recent months.  

Real construction activity continued to decline in No-
vember.  Single-family housing starts and permit issu-
ance fell further.  In the multifamily sector, starts 
dropped sharply in November while permit issuance 
remained on a downtrend.  Housing demand remained 
weak, and although the number of unsold new single-
family homes continued to move lower, inventories 
remained elevated relative to the current pace of sales.  
Sales of existing single-family homes changed little, 
although a drop in pending home sales in October 
pointed to further declines in the near term.  The com-
parative strength of existing home sales appeared to be 
attributable partly to increases in foreclosure-related 
and other distressed sales.  Financing conditions for 
prime borrowers appeared to ease slightly after the 
Federal Reserve’s announcement that it would pur-
chase agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi-
ties (MBS) to support mortgage financing, while the 
market for nonconforming loans remained impaired.  
Several indexes indicated that house prices continued 
to decline substantially. 

In the business sector, investment in equipment and 
software appeared to be contracting at a faster rate in 
the fourth quarter than during the third quarter.  While 
the decline in the previous quarter was concentrated in 
computers and transportation equipment, declines in 
spending in the fourth quarter were more widespread.  
Shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air-
craft fell in October, and orders continued to decline 
sharply.  Investment demand seemed to be weighed 
down by weak fundamentals and increased uncertainty 
about the state of the economy, while prospects for 
future investment activity reflected in surveys of busi-
ness conditions and sentiment worsened in recent 
months.  In addition, credit conditions remained tight.  
Real nonresidential investment declined in the third 
quarter after nearly three years of robust expansion, 
and nominal expenditures edged down further in Oc-
tober.  Vacancy rates rose and property values fell in 
the first three quarters of the year. 

Real nonfarm inventories (excluding motor vehicles), 
which had dropped noticeably in the second quarter, 
fell again in the third quarter.  The book value of 
manufacturing and wholesale trade inventories (exclud-
ing motor vehicles) showed a further drawdown in Oc-
tober.  However, the ratio of these inventories to sales 
increased noticeably in September and October.  The 
purchasing managers survey for November indicated 
that many purchasing agents saw their customers’ in-
ventories as too high. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened in October, 
as a fall in imports was more than offset by a significant 
decline in exports.  Much of the decline in exports was 
the result of drops in agricultural goods and industrial 
supplies, which largely reflected a decrease in the prices 
of these goods.  The decline in imports was led by 
lower imports of non-oil industrial supplies, capital 
goods, and automotive products, although these de-
clines were partly offset by an increase in the value of 
oil imports. 

Economic activity in most advanced foreign economies 
contracted in the third quarter, driven by sharp declines 
in investment and by significant negative contributions 
of net exports, as the global recession took hold more 
strongly.  Incoming data pointed to an even weaker 
pace of activity in the fourth quarter.  In Canada, how-
ever, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a 
faster-than-expected pace in the third quarter, though 
consumption and investment continued to soften.  In 
the euro area and the United Kingdom, purchasing 
managers indexes fell in November to levels associated 
with severe contractions in economic activity.  Labor 

Minutes of the Meeting of December 15-16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



market conditions in the advanced economies deterio-
rated further, with most countries experiencing rising 
unemployment rates.  In Japan, real GDP fell in the 
third quarter as domestic demand declined and private 
investment fell for the second consecutive quarter.  
After peaking in the third quarter, consumer price infla-
tion moderated in all advanced foreign economies, 
primarily as a result of falling energy and food prices.  
Economic activity in most emerging market economies 
decelerated sharply in the third quarter, though a surge 
in agricultural output helped to support activity in Mex-
ico, and the Brazilian economy continued to expand 
rapidly.  In Asia, output decelerated significantly, as the 
pace of real activity moderated in China and several 
other economies saw declines in real GDP.  Recent 
readings on production, sales, and exports suggest that 
emerging market economies weakened further in the 
current quarter.  Headline inflation generally declined 
across emerging market economies, primarily because 
of lower food and energy prices and, in some cases, 
weaker economic activity. 

In the United States, headline consumer prices declined 
in recent months while core consumer price inflation 
slowed further.  With energy prices falling sharply and 
the rate of increase in food prices moderating, headline 
PCE prices fell in October, and data from the con-
sumer price index (CPI) indicated that the decline ex-
tended into November.  Core PCE prices were un-
changed in October, and based on the CPI, appeared 
to have been unchanged again in November.  The re-
cent slowing in core consumer price inflation was wide-
spread and likely reflected not only the weak pace of 
economic activity but also the easing of some earlier 
cost pressures as the prices of crude oil, gasoline, and 
other commodities declined.  Excluding food and en-
ergy, producer prices rose modestly again in Novem-
ber, as prices at earlier stages of processing continued 
to retreat for the third consecutive month.  Measures of 
inflation expectations continued to fall or hold steady 
during the intermeeting period.  Measures of nominal 
hourly labor compensation continued to increase mod-
erately in the third quarter. 

At its October 28-29 meeting, the Federal Open Mar-
ket Committee (FOMC) lowered its target for the fed-
eral funds rate 50 basis points to 1 percent.  The 
Committee’s statement noted that economic activity 
appeared to have slowed markedly, due importantly to 
a decline in consumer expenditures.  Business equip-
ment spending and industrial production had weakened 
in recent months, and slowing economic activity in 
many foreign economies was damping the prospects 
for U.S. exports.  Moreover, the intensification of fi-

nancial market turmoil was likely to exert additional 
restraint on spending, partly by further reducing the 
ability of households and businesses to obtain credit.  
The Committee noted that, in light of the declines in 
the prices of energy and other commodities and the 
weaker prospects for economic activity, it expected 
inflation to moderate in coming quarters to levels con-
sistent with price stability.  The Committee also noted 
that recent policy actions, including the rate reduction 
that was approved at the October 28-29 meeting, coor-
dinated interest rate cuts by central banks, extraordi-
nary liquidity measures, and official steps to strengthen 
financial systems, should help over time to improve 
credit conditions and promote a return to moderate 
economic growth.  Nevertheless, downside risks to 
economic activity remained and the Committee indi-
cated that it would monitor economic and financial 
developments carefully and act as needed to promote 
sustainable economic growth and price stability. 

Over the intermeeting period, investors marked down 
their expectations for the path of monetary policy.  
Policy expectations were largely unaffected by the out-
come of the October 28-29 FOMC meeting, as the 
Committee’s decision to reduce the target federal funds 
rate was broadly anticipated and the accompanying 
statement was reportedly in line with investor expecta-
tions. Subsequently, however, the expected future path 
of monetary policy dropped amid data releases that 
suggested a weaker outlook for economic activity and 
lower inflation than had been anticipated, along with 
continued strains in financial markets that weighed on 
investor sentiment. Yields on nominal Treasury coupon 
securities declined significantly over the intermeeting 
period in response to safe-haven demands as well as 
the downward revisions in the economic outlook and 
the expected policy path.  Meanwhile, yields on infla-
tion-indexed Treasury securities declined by smaller 
amounts, leaving inflation compensation lower.  Al-
though the decline in inflation compensation occurred 
amid sharp decreases in inflation measures and energy 
prices, it was likely amplified by increased investor pre-
ference for the greater liquidity of nominal Treasury 
securities relative to that of inflation-protected Treasury 
securities. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets remained 
strained for most of the intermeeting period, though 
some signs of improvement were evident.  The spreads 
of London interbank offered rates, or Libor, over 
comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates de-
clined noticeably across most maturities early in the 
intermeeting period; however, some of this decline was 
reversed once maturities began to lengthen past year-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



end.  Trading in longer-term interbank funding markets 
reportedly remained thin.  Credit outstanding under the 
Federal Reserve’s Term Auction Facility (TAF) in-
creased to about $448 billion because of expanded auc-
tion sizes.  Recent auctions for both 28-day and 84-day 
credit from the TAF were undersubscribed, and bid-
ding for the two forward TAF auctions during the in-
termeeting period was very light.  Meanwhile, primary 
credit outstanding remained high, although it had de-
clined somewhat in recent weeks.  Use of the Primary 
Dealer Credit Facility dropped significantly.  A number 
of the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auc-
tions were oversubscribed, as was the auction of op-
tions for 13-day Schedule 2 TSLF loans straddling the 
end of the year. 

Conditions in markets for repurchase agreements, or 
repos, arranged using certain types of collateral deterio-
rated over the intermeeting period, and liquidity for 
repos backed by non-Treasury, non-agency collateral 
remained poor.  Amid high demand for safe invest-
ments, the overnight Treasury general collateral (GC) 
repo rate remained very low and fell to around zero late 
in the intermeeting period.  Still, failures to deliver in 
the Treasury market declined substantially from the 
levels reached in October and overnight securities lend-
ing from the System Open Market Account portfolio 
fell sharply.  Heavy demand for safe instruments was 
also apparent in the Treasury bill market, where yields 
turned negative at times.  During the intermeeting pe-
riod, the Treasury announced that it would not roll 
over bills related to the Supplementary Financing Pro-
gram in order to preserve flexibility in the conduct of 
debt management policy, and uncertainty about supply 
reportedly exacerbated poor liquidity conditions in the 
bill market.  Despite the decline in spreads of agency 
and mortgage-backed repo rates over Treasury GC 
rates later in the period, strains in these markets re-
mained evident, with bid-asked spreads and haircuts 
very elevated. 

In contrast, conditions in the commercial paper (CP) 
market improved over the intermeeting period, likely as 
a reflection of recent measures taken in support of this 
market.  Spreads on 30-day A1/P1 and asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) continued to narrow after 
the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) became 
operational on October 27, although spreads subse-
quently reversed a portion of the declines as maturities 
crossed over year-end.  In contrast, spreads on com-
mercial paper not eligible for purchase under the CPFF 
remained elevated.  The dollar amounts of unsecured 
financial CP and ABCP outstanding rebounded from 
their October lows, though issuance into the CPFF 

more than accounted for this increase.  Credit out-
standing under the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper 
Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility fell by 
more than half over the intermeeting period.  The 
Money Market Investor Funding Facility program reg-
istered no activity. 

As financial market conditions worsened over the in-
termeeting period, investors seemed to become more 
concerned about the likelihood of a deep and pro-
longed recession.  In addition, the Treasury Depart-
ment’s announcement that funds from the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program would not be used to purchase 
securities backed by mortgage-related and other assets 
appeared to prompt negative price reactions in several 
financial markets.  Stock prices of financial corpora-
tions fell considerably, while broad equity indexes de-
clined, on net, amid high volatility.  Yields on invest-
ment-grade bonds moved lower, but risk spreads on 
these instruments over comparable-maturity Treasury 
securities widened substantially as yields on Treasury 
securities fell more.  Yields and risk spreads on specula-
tive-grade bonds soared, and credit default swap 
spreads on speculative-grade, as well as investment-
grade, corporate bonds widened further.  Gross issu-
ance of bonds by nonfinancial investment-grade com-
panies continued at a solid pace, but issuance of specu-
lative-grade bonds remained at zero.  Issuance of lever-
aged syndicated loans was also extremely weak.  Strains 
were evident in a number of other financial markets as 
well.  The functioning of Treasury markets remained 
impaired, and premiums for the on-the-run ten-year 
nominal Treasury security rose from levels that were 
already elevated.  The market for commercial mort-
gage-backed securities experienced a particularly pro-
nounced selloff. 

Reflecting investor concerns about the conditions of 
financial institutions, spreads on credit default swaps 
for U.S. banks widened sharply, and those for insur-
ance companies remained elevated.  To support market 
stability, the U.S. government on November 23 entered 
into an agreement with Citigroup to provide a package 
of capital, guarantees, and liquidity access.  In other 
developments, banking organizations began to take 
advantage of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion’s (FDIC) Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Pro-
gram; eleven institutions issued bonds under the pro-
gram. 

In view of the tightening of credit conditions for con-
sumers and small businesses, the Federal Reserve an-
nounced on November 25 the creation of the Term 
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to support the 

Minutes of the Meeting of December 15-16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



markets for asset-backed securities collateralized by 
student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, and loans 
guaranteed by the Small Business Administration.  The 
facility, developed jointly with the Treasury, was ex-
pected to be operational by February 2009, and discus-
sions with market participants about operational details 
of this facility were ongoing. 

The Federal Reserve also announced on November 25 
that, to help reduce the cost and increase the availability 
of residential mortgage credit, it would initiate a pro-
gram to purchase up to $100 billion in direct obliga-
tions of housing-related government-sponsored enter-
prises (GSEs) and up to $500 billion in MBS backed by 
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae.  Agency 
debt spreads, which had widened early in the period, 
narrowed somewhat after the announcement.  Subse-
quent purchases of agency debt by the Open Market 
Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York led to 
a further reduction in agency spreads.  Likely reflecting 
in part these developments, conditions in the primary 
residential mortgage market improved.  The interest 
rate on 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages de-
clined, which prompted a noticeable increase in mort-
gage refinancing. 

M2 expanded at a considerably slower rate in Novem-
ber than October.  Retail money funds contracted after 
a surge in October that reflected safe-haven inflows to 
Treasury-only funds.  Small time deposits increased 
somewhat more slowly than in October, although the 
rate of expansion remained quite rapid as banks con-
tinued to bid aggressively for these deposits.  Flows 
into demand deposits covered by the FDIC’s new tem-
porary guarantee program were significant and appar-
ently reflected shifts out of savings accounts as well as 
redirection of funds by banks’ customers away from 
other money market instruments.  Currency continued 
its strong increase, apparently boosted by solid foreign 
demand for U.S. banknotes. 

Liquidity conditions in the money markets of major 
foreign economies improved but remained strained 
over the intermeeting period.  Movements in stock 
prices were mixed in the advanced foreign economies, 
although equity prices generally rose in emerging mar-
ket economies.  In response to evidence of a slowdown 
in economic activity and a rapid waning of inflationary 
pressures, central banks around the world eased policy 
sharply.  Sovereign bond yields fell, reflecting prospects 
for lower inflation and lower policy rates for an ex-
tended period.  The dollar declined on balance against 
the currencies of major U.S. trading partners. 

In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff re-
vised down sharply its outlook for economic activity in 
2009 but continued to project a moderate recovery in 
2010.  Real GDP appeared likely to decline substan-
tially in the fourth quarter of 2008 as conditions in the 
labor market deteriorated more steeply than previously 
anticipated; the decline in industrial production intensi-
fied; consumer and business spending appeared to 
weaken; and financial conditions, on balance, continued 
to tighten.  Rising unemployment, the declines in stock 
market wealth, low levels of consumer sentiment, wea-
kened household balance sheets, and restrictive credit 
conditions were likely to continue to hinder household 
spending over the near term.  Homebuilding was ex-
pected to contract further.  Business expenditures were 
also likely to be held back by a weaker sales outlook 
and tighter credit conditions.  Oil prices, which 
dropped significantly during the intermeeting period, 
were assumed to rise over the next two years in line 
with the path indicated by futures market prices, but to 
remain below the levels of October 2008.  All told, real 
GDP was expected to fall much more sharply in the 
first half of 2009 than previously anticipated, before 
slowly recovering over the remainder of the year as the 
stimulus from monetary and assumed fiscal policy ac-
tions gained traction and the turmoil in the financial 
system began to recede.  Real GDP was projected to 
decline for 2009 as a whole and to rise at a pace slightly 
above the rate of potential growth in 2010.  Amid the 
weaker outlook for economic activity over the next 
year, the unemployment rate was likely to rise signifi-
cantly into 2010, to a level higher than projected at the 
time of the October 28-29 FOMC meeting.  The disin-
flationary effects of increased slack in resource utiliza-
tion, diminished pressures from energy and materials 
prices, declines in import prices, and further moderate 
reductions in inflation expectations caused the staff to 
reduce its forecast for both core and overall PCE infla-
tion.  Core inflation was projected to slow considerably 
in 2009 and then to edge down further in 2010. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, all meeting participants agreed that the economic 
downturn had intensified over the fall.  Although some 
financial markets exhibited signs of improved function-
ing, financial conditions generally remained very 
strained.  Credit conditions continued to tighten for 
both households and businesses, and ongoing declines 
in equity prices further reduced household wealth.  
Conditions in the housing market weakened again and 
house prices declined further.  Against this backdrop, 
measures of business and consumer confidence fell to 
new lows, and private spending continued to contract.  

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Employment and production indicators weakened fur-
ther as businesses responded very rapidly to the fall-off 
in demand.  Participants expected economic activity to 
contract sharply in the fourth quarter of 2008 and in 
early 2009.  Most projected that the economy would 
begin to recover slowly in the second half of 2009, 
aided by substantial monetary policy easing and by an-
ticipated fiscal stimulus.  Meeting participants generally 
agreed that the uncertainty surrounding the outlook 
was considerable and that downside risks to even this 
weak trajectory for economic activity were a serious 
concern.  Indeed, the severe ongoing financial market 
strains, the large reductions in household wealth, and 
the global nature of the economic slowdown were seen 
by some participants as suggesting the distinct possibil-
ity of a prolonged contraction, although that was not 
judged to be the most likely outcome.  Inflation pres-
sures had diminished appreciably as energy and other 
commodity prices dropped and economic activity 
slumped.  Looking forward, participants agreed that 
inflationary pressures looked set to moderate further in 
coming quarters, reflecting recent declines in commod-
ity prices and rising slack in resource markets, and sev-
eral saw risks that inflation could drop for a time below 
rates they viewed as most consistent over time with the 
Federal Reserve’s dual mandate for maximum em-
ployment and price stability. 

Meeting participants observed that financial strains 
continued to exert a powerful drag on economic activ-
ity and that the adverse feedback loop between finan-
cial conditions and economic performance had intensi-
fied.  Although improvements were evident in some 
markets, particularly those for highly rated commercial 
paper and for interbank funds, financial markets gener-
ally remained under severe stress.  Equity prices con-
tinued to drop amid high volatility, further reducing 
household wealth.  Rising risk spreads kept the cost of 
issuing corporate bonds at a high level—especially for 
lower-rated firms—even though Treasury yields had 
declined sharply since the October 28-29 meeting.  Se-
curitization markets, which over recent years had been 
an important channel in credit intermediation, re-
mained largely dysfunctional, with the exception of 
those for mortgages guaranteed by the GSEs.  The 
sharp drops and unusual volatility in the prices of many 
financial assets since the beginning of the fourth quar-
ter were likely to cause more losses for financial institu-
tions, and a number of participants noted that loan de-
linquencies were increasing significantly in the con-
sumer sector, adding to pressures on banks’ balance 
sheets and reinforcing banks’ cautious lending stance.  
As a consequence, credit conditions for both busi-

nesses and households had tightened further, with 
banks generally adopting stricter lending standards and 
declining to renew or paring back existing credit lines. 

Participants observed that the effects of the financial 
turmoil, increased uncertainty, and drops in confidence 
and demand were becoming increasingly evident in the 
business sector.  Business contacts across the country 
expected considerable near-term weakness in sales and 
declining pricing power.  Some meeting participants 
reported especially sharp drops in new orders in their 
Districts.  Even sectors that had performed relatively 
well until recently, such as mining and drilling, were 
experiencing reduced activity, mostly due to the decline 
in commodity prices.  Agricultural activity was also 
showing signs of weakness.  Business sentiment had 
deteriorated sharply since September, likely contribut-
ing to steep drops in employment and production.  
Participants anticipated that, with the deteriorating 
economic outlook and tightening of credit conditions, 
capital expenditures were likely to be soft in coming 
quarters. 

Many participants noted that the decline in household 
wealth resulting from large drops in equity and house 
prices, together with tighter credit conditions, rapidly 
increasing unemployment, and deteriorating consumer 
sentiment, was contributing to a sharp contraction in 
consumer spending.   Some participants pointed out 
that reduced consumer wealth and concerns about em-
ployment could lead to a further increase in saving, 
which, although desirable in the longer term, could put 
additional downward pressure on consumer spending 
in coming quarters.  The latest housing data suggested a 
continued substantial contraction in that sector.  The 
recent decline in mortgage rates had sparked some refi-
nancing and purchase activity, but the extent of the 
longer-term impact of lower rates on housing demand 
remained uncertain. 

Meeting participants noted that economic conditions 
had deteriorated substantially in recent months in both 
advanced and emerging market economies.  As a con-
sequence, demand for U.S. exports had weakened, held 
back also by the strengthening of the dollar since the 
summer.  Going forward, global demand was expected 
to remain weak, and thus growth in exports was 
unlikely to provide much support for U.S. activity.  
However, the weakness in the global economy was 
contributing to lower prices of energy and other com-
modities, which should boost real incomes and provide 
modest support to household spending. 

Participants agreed that falling prices for energy and 
other commodities and diminished economic activity 

Minutes of the Meeting of December 15-16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



had resulted in an appreciable reduction in inflationary 
pressures.  Those pressures were seen as likely to con-
tinue to abate because of the emergence of substantial 
slack in resource utilization and diminishing pricing 
power.  Participants were uncertain about the extent to 
which inflation would fall.  Some saw inflation leveling 
out near desired levels, while others expressed concern 
that inflation might decline below levels consistent with 
price stability in the medium term.  Participants gener-
ally agreed that inflation expectations were an impor-
tant determinant of future price dynamics.  Some noted 
that those expectations, especially at longer horizons, 
appeared well anchored.  However, some survey evi-
dence suggested that firms expected prices to continue 
to decline as they had over the previous few months.  
Several participants observed that monitoring measures 
of inflation expectations for signs of disinflationary 
dynamics would be especially important going forward. 

In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors, meeting participants 
discussed extensively how in current circumstances the 
Committee could best support the resumption of sus-
tainable economic growth and promote the mainte-
nance of price stability over the medium term.  Partici-
pants noted that very low levels of the federal funds 
rate had the potential to help buoy aggregate demand 
and economic activity, but they also had potential costs 
in terms of the functioning of certain financial markets 
and some financial institutions.  Most participants 
judged that the benefits in terms of support for the 
overall economy of federal funds rates close to, but 
slightly above, zero probably outweighed the adverse 
effects.   With the federal funds rate already trading at 
very low levels as a result of the large volume of excess 
reserves associated with the Federal Reserve’s liquidity 
operations, participants agreed that the Committee 
would need to focus on other tools to impart additional 
monetary stimulus to the economy in the near term.  
One broad class of such tools was the use of FOMC 
communication with the public to provide more infor-
mation regarding future policy intentions.  In particular, 
participants judged that communicating the Commit-
tee’s expectation that short-term interest rates were 
likely to stay exceptionally low for some time could be 
useful because it could lead to pricing of longer-term 
interest rates consistent with the path of monetary pol-
icy that policymakers saw as most likely.  Participants 
emphasized the importance of explicitly conditioning 
communication regarding future policy on the evolu-
tion of the economic outlook.  Another possible form 
of communication that participants discussed was a 
more explicit indication of their views on what longer-

run rate of inflation would best promote their goals of 
maximum employment and price stability.  The added 
clarity in that regard might help forestall the develop-
ment of expectations that inflation would decline below 
desired levels, and hence keep real interest rates low 
and support aggregate demand. 

Meeting participants also discussed how best to employ 
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to promote mone-
tary policy goals.  The Federal Reserve had already 
adopted a series of programs that were providing li-
quidity support to a range of institutions and markets, 
and participants generally agreed that a continued focus 
on the quantity and the composition of Federal Reserve 
assets would be necessary and desirable.  Specifically, 
participants discussed the merits of purchasing large 
quantities of longer-term securities such as agency debt, 
agency mortgage-backed securities, and Treasury secu-
rities.  The available evidence indicated that such pur-
chases would reduce yields on those instruments, and 
lower yields on those securities would tend to reduce 
borrowing costs for a range of private borrowers, al-
though participants were uncertain as to the likely size 
of such effects.  Participants also generally believed that 
the special liquidity and lending facilities implemented 
or announced recently would support the availability of 
credit to businesses and households and thus help sus-
tain economic activity.  Many participants thought that 
the Federal Reserve should continue to consider 
whether expanding some of the existing facilities and 
creating new facilities could be helpful.  Participants 
emphasized that the ultimate objective of special lend-
ing facilities and asset purchases was to support overall 
market functioning, financial intermediation, and eco-
nomic growth.  Participants acknowledged that the ef-
fective federal funds rate probably would need to re-
main very low for some time.  However, they also rec-
ognized that, as economic activity recovered and finan-
cial conditions normalized, the use of certain policy 
tools would need to be scaled back, the size of the bal-
ance sheet and level of excess reserves would need to 
be reduced, and the Committee’s policy framework 
would return to focus on the level of the federal funds 
rate. 

A number of participants observed that, under the ap-
proach of conducting monetary policy by acquiring a 
variety of assets as needed to address financial and ma-
croeconomic strains, the quantity of excess reserves 
and the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
would be determined by the Federal Reserve’s asset 
purchases and the usage of its lending facilities.  It was 
likely that, during the period of financial turmoil, the 
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would need 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



to be maintained at a high level.  Participants discussed 
the potential advantages and disadvantages of setting 
quantitative targets for bank reserves or the monetary 
base.  Some were of the view that quantitative targets 
for an increasing reserve base could be effective in pre-
venting deflationary dynamics and useful in communi-
cating to the public the Committee’s determination to 
take the steps needed to avoid such an outcome.  Sev-
eral other participants, however, noted that increases in 
excess reserves or the monetary base, by themselves, 
might not have a significant stimulative effect on the 
economy or prices because the normal bank interme-
diation mechanism appeared to be impaired, and banks 
may not be willing to lend their excess reserves.  Con-
versely, a decline in excess reserves or the monetary 
base would not necessarily be contractionary if it oc-
curred in the context of improving financial market 
conditions.  A few of those who supported quantitative 
base or reserve targets did so because they saw them as 
helping to coordinate the actions of the Board of Gov-
ernors, which is responsible for authorizing most spe-
cial liquidity and lending facilities, and the Committee, 
which is responsible for open market operations.  Most 
participants, however, were of the view that such coor-
dination would best be achieved by continued close 
cooperation and consultation between the Committee 
and the Board.  Going forward, consideration will be 
given to whether various quantitative measures would 
be useful in calibrating and communicating the stance 
of monetary policy. 

In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
ing period, Committee members recognized that the 
large volume of excess reserves had already resulted in 
federal funds rates significantly below the target federal 
funds rate and the interest rate on excess reserves.  
They agreed that maintaining a low level of short-term 
interest rates and relying on the use of balance sheet 
policies and communications about monetary policy 
would be effective and appropriate in light of the sharp 
deterioration of the economic outlook and the appre-
ciable easing of inflationary pressures.  Maintaining that 
level of the federal funds rate implied a substantial fur-
ther reduction in the target federal funds rate.  Even 
with the additional use of nontraditional policies, the 
economic outlook would remain weak for a time and 
the downside risks to economic activity would be sub-
stantial.  Moreover, inflation would continue to fall, 
reflecting both the drop in commodity prices that had 
already occurred and the buildup of economic slack; 
indeed some members saw significant risks that infla-
tion could decline and persist for a time at uncom-
fortably low levels. 

Members debated how best to communicate their deci-
sions regarding monetary policy actions.  Since the 
large amount of excess reserves in the system would 
limit the Federal Reserve’s control over the federal 
funds rate, several members thought that it might be 
preferable not to set a specific target for the federal 
funds rate.  Indeed, those members felt that lack of an 
explicit target could be helpful, in that it would focus 
attention on the shift in the policy framework from 
targeting the federal funds rate to the use of balance 
sheet policies and communications about monetary 
policy as a way of providing further monetary stimulus.  
A few members stressed that the absence of an explicit 
federal funds rate target would give banks added flexi-
bility in pricing loans and deposits in the current envi-
ronment of unusually low interest rates.  However, 
other members noted that not announcing a target 
might confuse market participants and lead investors to 
believe that the Federal Reserve was unable to control 
the federal funds rate when it could, in fact, still influ-
ence the effective federal funds rate through adjust-
ments of the interest rate on excess reserves and the 
primary credit rate.  The members decided that it 
would be preferable for the Committee to communi-
cate explicitly that it wanted federal funds to trade at 
very low rates; accordingly, the Committee decided to 
announce a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 
to ¼ percent.  Members also agreed that the statement 
should indicate that weak economic conditions were 
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal 
funds rate for some time.  The members emphasized 
that their expectation about the path of the federal 
funds rate was conditioned on their view of the likely 
path of economic activity. 

Members also discussed how best to communicate the 
focus of the Federal Reserve’s policy going forward.  
Members agreed that the statement should indicate that 
all available tools would be employed to promote the 
resumption of sustainable economic growth and to 
preserve price stability.  They also agreed that the 
statement should note that it was the Committee’s in-
tention to sustain the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet at a high level through open market opera-
tions and other measures to support financial markets 
and stimulate the economy.  In addition to the already-
announced asset purchases and liquidity programs, 
members concurred that the statement should indicate 
that the Committee stands ready to expand purchases 
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, 
and that it is evaluating the potential benefits of pur-
chasing longer-term Treasury securities. 

Minutes of the Meeting of December 15-16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



In light of the use of additional tools  for implementing 
monetary policy, the Committee revised the form of 
the directive to the Open Market Desk of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York.  In addition to specifying 
that it now seeks conditions in reserve markets consis-
tent with federal funds trading in a range of 0 to ¼ per-
cent, the Committee instructed the Desk to purchase 
up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE debt and up 
to $500 billion in agency-guaranteed MBS by the end of 
the second quarter of 2009.  Members agreed that they 
should not specify the precise timing of these pur-
chases, but that they should leave discretion to the 
Desk to intervene depending on market and broader 
economic conditions.  The directive also noted that the 
Manager of the System Open Market Account and the 
Secretary of the FOMC would keep the Committee 
informed of developments regarding the System’s bal-
ance sheet that could affect the attainment of the 
Committee’s statutory objectives.  At the conclusion of 
the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and 
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it 
was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the 
System Account in accordance with the following do-
mestic policy directive: 

 “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve 
markets consistent with federal funds trading in 
a range of 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee di-
rects the Desk to purchase GSE debt and agen-
cy-guaranteed MBS during the intermeeting pe-
riod with the aim of providing support to the 
mortgage and housing markets.  The timing and 
pace of these purchases should depend on con-
ditions in the markets for such securities and on 
a broader assessment of conditions in primary 
mortgage markets and the housing sector.  By 
the end of the second quarter of next year, the 
Desk is expected to purchase up to $100 billion 
in housing-related GSE debt and up to $500 bil-
lion in agency-guaranteed MBS.  The System 
Open Market Account Manager and the Secre-
tary will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
ing developments regarding the System’s bal-
ance sheet that could affect the attainment over 
time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum 
employment and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to establish a target range for the federal 
funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent. 

Since the Committee's last meeting, labor mar-
ket conditions have deteriorated, and the avail-
able data indicate that consumer spending, busi-
ness investment, and industrial production have 
declined.  Financial markets remain quite 
strained and credit conditions tight.  Overall, the 
outlook for economic activity has weakened fur-
ther. 

Meanwhile, inflationary pressures have dimin-
ished appreciably.  In light of the declines in the 
prices of energy and other commodities and the 
weaker prospects for economic activity, the 
Committee expects inflation to moderate fur-
ther in coming quarters. 

The Federal Reserve will employ all available 
tools to promote the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth and to preserve price stability.  
In particular, the Committee anticipates that 
weak economic conditions are likely to warrant 
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate 
for some time. 

The focus of the Committee's policy going for-
ward will be to support the functioning of fi-
nancial markets and stimulate the economy 
through open market operations and other 
measures that sustain the size of the Federal Re-
serve's balance sheet at a high level.  As previ-
ously announced, over the next few quarters the 
Federal Reserve will purchase large quantities of 
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities to 
provide support to the mortgage and housing 
markets, and it stands ready to expand its pur-
chases of agency debt and mortgage-backed se-
curities as conditions warrant.  The Committee 
is also evaluating the potential benefits of pur-
chasing longer-term Treasury securities.  Early 
next year, the Federal Reserve will also imple-
ment the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan 
Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to 
households and small businesses.  The Federal 
Reserve will continue to consider ways of using 
its balance sheet to further support credit mar-
kets and economic activity.” 

Votes for this action:  Mr. Bernanke, Mses. Cumming 
and Duke, Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Kroszner, Ms. 
Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  None. 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Ms. Cumming voted as the alternate for Mr. Geithner. 

The Committee also continued its discussion of possi-
ble refinements to the Committee’s approach to projec-
tions that could provide additional information about 
participants’ views of longer-run sustainable rates of 
economic growth and unemployment and the meas-
ured rates of inflation that would be consistent with 
price stability, but it made no decisions regarding these 
issues.  Finally, staff briefed the Committee on the pro-
gress of plans for implementing the Federal Reserve’s 
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, which had 
initially been announced on November 25, 2008. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, January 27-28, 
2009. 

The meeting adjourned at 3:00 p.m. on December 16, 
2008. 

Notation Votes 

By notation vote completed on November 18, 2008, 
the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of 
the FOMC meeting held on October 28-29, 2008.  

By notation vote completed on November 26, 2008, 
the Committee unanimously approved the extension 
until April 30, 2009, of its authorization for the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York to engage in transactions 
with primary dealers through the Term Securities Lend-
ing Facility, subject to the same collateral, interest rate, 
and other conditions previously established by the 
Committee. 
 

_____________________________ 

Brian F. Madigan 
Secretary 

Minutes of the Meeting of December 15-16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11




