









































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee - April 29-30, 2008


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
April 29-30, 2008 

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, April 29, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, April 30, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Mr. Mishkin 
Ms. Pianalto  
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock-

hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, 

Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, and 
Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Ms. J. Johnson,1 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 
 
 

Ms. Roseman,1 Director, Division of Reserve Bank 
Operations and Payment Systems, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 

Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson,1 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Hammond1 and Marquardt,1 Deputy Di-

rectors, Division of Reserve Bank Operations 
and Payment Systems, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Edwards,1 Associate Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Shanks,1 Associate Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-

rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
  
Ms. Martin,1 Associate General Counsel, Legal Di-

vision, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Carpenter,1 Assistant Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
_________________ 
1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the 

implications of interest on reserves for monetary 
policy implementation. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Allison,1 Senior Counsel, Legal Division, 

Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Gross,1 Special Assistant to the Board, Office 

of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Weinbach, Adviser, Division of Monetary Af-

fairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Hughes,1 Staff Assistant, Office of the Secre-

tary, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Boston 

 
Messrs. Hilton, McAndrews,1 Rasche, Rudebusch, 

Steindel, Sullivan, and Weinberg, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New 
York, New York, St. Louis, San Francisco, 
New York, Chicago, and Richmond, respec-
tively 

 
Messrs. Clark and Meyer,1 Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Philadel-
phia, respectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Roberds, Policy Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Atlanta 
_____________________ 
1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the impli-
cations of interest on reserves for monetary policy im-
plementation. 

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee extended for one 
year beginning in mid-December 2008 the reciprocal 
currency (“swap”) arrangements with the Bank of Can-
ada and the Banco de Mexico.  The arrangement with 
the Bank of Canada is in the amount of $2 billion 
equivalent and that with the Banco de Mexico is in the 
amount of $3 billion equivalent.  Both arrangements 
are associated with the Federal Reserve’s participation 
in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994.  
The vote to renew the System’s participation in the 
swap arrangements maturing in December was taken at 
this meeting because of the provision that each party 
must provide six months’ prior notice of an intention 
to terminate its participation. 

In view of continuing strains in interbank and other 
financial markets, the Committee took up proposals to 
expand several of the liquidity arrangements that had 
been put in place in recent months.  Chairman Ber-
nanke indicated his intention to increase the overall size 
of the Term Auction Facility under delegated authority 
from the Board of Governors, and he proposed in-
creases in the swap lines with the European Central 
Bank and Swiss National Bank to help address pres-
sures in short-term dollar funding markets.  Meeting 
participants discussed the possible costs and benefits of 
a proposed broadening of eligible collateral for the 
Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF).  On balance, 
the Committee agreed that expanding the range of eli-
gible collateral for the TSLF might help to increase the 
effectiveness of the facility and so further promote the 
orderly functioning of financial markets. 

By unanimous votes, the Committee approved the fol-
lowing three resolutions: 
 

The Federal Open Market Committee directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to in-
crease the amount available from the System 
Open Market Account under the existing recip-
rocal currency arrangement (“swap” arrange-
ment) with the European Central Bank to an 
amount not to exceed $50 billion.  Within that 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



aggregate limit, draws of up to $25 billion are 
hereby authorized.  The current swap arrange-
ment shall be extended until January 30, 2009, 
unless further extended by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. 

 
The Federal Open Market Committee directs 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to in-
crease the amount available from the System 
Open Market Account under the existing recip-
rocal currency arrangement (“swap” arrange-
ment) with the Swiss National Bank to an 
amount not to exceed $12 billion.  Within that 
aggregate limit, draws of up to $6 billion are 
hereby authorized.  The current swap arrange-
ment shall be extended until January 30, 2009, 
unless further extended by the Federal Open 
Market Committee. 

 
In connection with the Term Securities Lending 
Facility, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
may accept pledges of AAA-rated asset-backed 
securities (in addition to the other assets previ-
ously authorized by the FOMC) as collateral 
against loans of U.S. Government securities. 

 

The information reviewed at the April meeting, which 
included the advance data on the national income and 
product accounts for the first quarter, indicated that 
economic growth had remained weak so far this year.  
Labor market conditions had deteriorated further, and 
manufacturing activity was soft.  Housing activity had 
continued its sharp descent, and business spending on 
both structures and equipment had turned down.  Con-
sumer spending had grown very slowly, and household 
sentiment had tumbled further.  Core consumer price 
inflation had slowed in recent months, but overall infla-
tion remained elevated. 

Labor demand continued to weaken in March.  Private 
payroll employment fell in March at a rate similar to 
that in January and February.  The reduction in jobs 
was again widespread, with losses registered at firms in 
the construction, manufacturing, and professional and 
business services sectors.  Employment at firms in the 
nonbusiness services sector, which includes health care, 
continued to rise.  Aggregate hours of private produc-
tion or nonsupervisory workers moved up in March 
but posted a decline for the first quarter as a whole af-
ter having contracted slightly in the first two months of 
the year.  The unemployment rate rose to 5.1 percent in 
March, significantly above its level a year ago, and the 
labor force participation rate was little changed. 

Although industrial production rose in March, produc-
tion over the first quarter as a whole was soft, having 
declined, on average, in January and February.  Gains in 
manufacturing output of consumer and high-tech 
goods in March were partially offset by a sharp drop in 
production of motor vehicles and parts and by ongoing 
weakness in the output of construction-related indus-
tries.  The output of utilities rebounded in March fol-
lowing a weather-related drop in February, and mining 
output moved up after exhibiting weakness earlier in 
the year.  The factory utilization rate edged up in March 
but stayed well below its recent high in the third quar-
ter of 2007. 

Real consumer spending expanded slowly in the first 
quarter.  Real outlays on durable goods, including 
automobiles, were estimated to have declined in March, 
but expenditures on nondurable goods were thought to 
have edged up, boosted by a sizable increase in real 
outlays for gasoline.  For the quarter as a whole, how-
ever, real expenditures on both durable and nondurable 
goods declined.  Real disposable personal income also 
grew slowly in the first quarter, restrained by rapidly 
rising prices for energy and food.  The ratio of house-
hold wealth to disposable income appeared to have 
moved down again in the first quarter, damped by the 
appreciable net decline in broad equity prices over that 
period and by further reductions in house prices.  
Measures of consumer sentiment fell sharply in March 
and April; the April reading of consumer sentiment 
published in the Reuters/University of Michigan Sur-
vey of Consumers was near the low levels posted in the 
early 1990s. 

Residential construction continued its rapid contraction 
in the first quarter.  Single-family housing starts main-
tained their steep downward trajectory in March, and 
starts of multifamily homes declined to the lower por-
tion of their recent range.  Sales of new single-family 
homes declined in February to a very low rate and 
dropped further in March.  Even though production 
cuts by homebuilders helped to reduce the level of in-
ventories at the end of February, the slow pace of sales 
caused the ratio of unsold new homes to sales to in-
crease further.  Sales of existing homes remained weak, 
on average, in February and March, and the index of 
pending sales agreements in February suggested con-
tinued sluggish activity in coming months.  The recent 
softening in residential housing demand was consistent 
with reports of tighter credit conditions for both prime 
and nonprime borrowers. 

In the business sector, real spending on equipment and 
software contracted slightly in the first quarter after 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



having posted a small increase in the fourth quarter.  
Following declines in both shipments and orders of 
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft in January 
and February, shipments increased in March, but or-
ders were flat.  The deteriorating outlook for sales, re-
duced credit availability, and downbeat readings on 
business sentiment all pointed to further weakness in 
capital spending in the near term.  Real outlays for non-
residential structures also were estimated to have de-
clined in the first quarter.  Indicators suggested that the 
demand for commercial properties had fallen off sub-
stantially from record levels last year, and commercial 
property prices appeared to be decelerating.  Reduced 
credit availability and less-favorable lending terms had 
apparently weighed on activity in this sector. 

Real investment in nonfarm inventories excluding mo-
tor vehicles was estimated to have bounced back to a 
moderate annual rate in the first quarter, but motor 
vehicle inventories continued to fall.  Some of the drop 
in motor vehicle stocks was a result of the disruption to 
production from a labor dispute.  The ratio of book-
value inventories to sales in the manufacturing and 
trade sector (excluding motor vehicles) moved up a 
little, on average, in January and February.  Still, outside 
of categories tied to housing and construction, firms 
did not appear to be burdened with excess stocks. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened in Febru-
ary.  Imports rose sharply, more than offsetting contin-
ued robust growth of exports.  Most major categories 
of non-oil imports increased in February, and imports 
of natural gas, automobiles, and consumer goods 
surged.  Imports of services continued to rise at a ro-
bust pace.  By contrast, oil imports moved down.  In-
creases in exports in February were concentrated in 
agricultural goods, automobiles, and industrial supplies, 
particularly fuels.  Exports of capital goods declined for 
the second consecutive month, with weakness evident 
across a wide range of products. 

Real economic growth in the major advanced foreign 
economies was estimated to have slowed further in the 
first quarter and consumer and business sentiment was 
generally down.  In Japan, business sentiment fell sig-
nificantly and indicators of investment remained weak.  
In the euro area, growth was estimated to have re-
mained subdued in the first quarter, with Germany and 
France faring better than Italy and Spain.  Growth in 
the United Kingdom slowed in the first quarter, as 
credit conditions tightened.  Available data for Canada 
indicated a continued substantial drag from exports in 
the first quarter, although domestic demand appeared 
relatively robust.  In emerging market economies, eco-

nomic growth slowed some in the fourth quarter and 
was estimated to have held about steady in the first 
quarter.  In emerging Asia, real economic growth was 
estimated to have picked up in the first quarter from a 
robust pace in the fourth quarter, led by brisk expan-
sions in China and Singapore.  Growth in other emerg-
ing Asian economies generally remained subdued.  The 
pace of expansion in Latin America likely declined 
some in the first quarter, largely because the Mexican 
economy slowed in the wake of softer growth in the 
United States. 

Headline inflation in the United States was elevated in 
March.  Although the increase in food prices slowed in 
March relative to earlier in the year, energy prices rose 
sharply.  Excluding these categories, core inflation rose 
at a relatively subdued rate again in March.  The core 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index 
increased at a somewhat more moderate rate in the first 
quarter than in the fourth quarter of 2007.  Survey 
measures of households’ expectations for year-ahead 
inflation rose further in early April, but survey meas-
ures of longer-term inflation expectations moved rela-
tively little.  Average hourly earnings increased in 
March at a somewhat slower pace than in January and 
February.  This wage measure rose significantly less 
over the 12 months that ended in March than in the 
previous 12 months.  The employment cost index for 
hourly compensation continued to rise at a moderate 
rate in the first quarter. 

At its March 18 meeting, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) lowered its target for the federal 
funds rate 75 basis points, to 2¼ percent.  In addition, 
the Board of Governors approved a decrease of 75 
basis points in the discount rate, to 2½ percent.  The 
Committee’s statement noted that recent information 
indicated that the outlook for economic activity had 
weakened further; growth in consumer spending had 
slowed, and labor markets had softened.  It also indi-
cated that financial markets remained under consider-
able stress, and that the tightening of credit conditions 
and the deepening of the housing contraction were 
likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few 
quarters.  Inflation had been elevated, and some indica-
tors of inflation expectations had risen, but the Com-
mittee expected inflation to moderate in coming quar-
ters, reflecting a projected leveling-out of energy and 
other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on 
resource utilization.  Still, the Committee noted that 
uncertainty about the inflation outlook had increased, 
and that it would be necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.  The Committee said 
that its action, combined with those taken earlier, in-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



cluding measures to foster market liquidity, should help 
to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate 
the risks to economic activity.  The Committee noted, 
however, that downside risks to growth remained, and 
indicated that it would act in a timely manner as needed 
to promote sustainable economic growth and price 
stability. 

Conditions in U.S. financial markets improved some-
what, on balance, over the intermeeting period, but 
strains in some short-term funding markets increased.  
Pressures on bank balance sheets and capital positions 
appeared to mount further, reflecting additional losses 
on asset-backed securities and on business and house-
hold loans.  Against this backdrop, term spreads in in-
terbank funding markets and spreads on commercial 
paper issued by financial institutions widened signifi-
cantly.  Financial institutions continued to tap the Fed-
eral Reserve’s credit programs.  Primary credit borrow-
ing picked up noticeably after March 16, when the Fed-
eral Reserve reduced the spread between the primary 
credit rate and the target federal funds rate to 25 basis 
points.  Demand for funds from the Term Auction 
Facility stayed high over the period.  In addition, the 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility drew substantial demand 
through late March, although the amount outstanding 
subsequently declined somewhat.  Early in the period, 
historically low interest rates on Treasury bills and on 
general-collateral Treasury repurchase agreements indi-
cated a considerable demand for safe-haven assets.  
However, Federal Reserve actions that increased the 
availability of Treasury securities to the public appar-
ently helped to improve conditions in those markets.  
In five weekly auctions beginning on March 27, the 
Term Securities Lending Facility provided a substantial 
volume of Treasury securities in exchange for less-
liquid assets.  Yields on short-term Treasury securities 
and Treasury repurchase agreements moved higher, on 
balance, following these auctions; nonetheless, “hair-
cuts” applied by lenders on non-Treasury collateral 
remained elevated, and in some cases increased some-
what, toward the end of the period. 

In longer-term credit markets, yields on investment-
grade corporate bonds rose, but their spreads relative 
to Treasury securities decreased a bit from recent mul-
tiyear highs.  In contrast, yields on speculative-grade 
issues dropped, and their spreads relative to Treasury 
yields narrowed significantly.  Gross bond issuance by 
nonfinancial firms was robust in March and the first 
half of April and included a small amount of issuance 
by speculative-grade firms.  Supported by increases in 
business and residential real estate loans, commercial 
bank credit expanded briskly in March despite the re-

port of tighter lending conditions in the Senior Loan 
Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices 
conducted in April.  Part of the strength in commercial 
and industrial loans was apparently due to increased 
utilization of existing credit lines, the pricing of which 
reflects changes in lending policies only with a lag.  
Some banks surveyed in April reported that they had 
started to take actions to limit their exposure to home 
equity lines of credit, draws on which had grown rap-
idly in recent months.  After having tightened consid-
erably in March, conditions in the conforming segment 
of the residential mortgage market recovered some-
what.  Spreads of rates on conforming residential 
mortgages over those on comparable-maturity Treasury 
securities decreased, and credit default swap premiums 
for the government-sponsored enterprises declined 
substantially.  Broad stock price indexes increased 
markedly over the intermeeting period, mainly in re-
sponse to earnings reports and announcements of re-
capitalizations from major financial institutions that 
evidently lessened investors’ concerns about the possi-
bility of severe difficulties materializing at those firms. 

Conditions in the money markets of major foreign 
economies remained strained, particularly in the United 
Kingdom and the euro area.  Term interbank funding 
spreads rose in these areas, despite steps taken by their 
central banks to help ease liquidity pressures.  Yields on 
sovereign debt in the advanced foreign economies 
moved up in a range that was about in line with the 
increases in comparable Treasury yields in the United 
States.  The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of 
the dollar against major currencies rose. 

M2 expanded briskly again in March, as households 
continued to seek the relative liquidity and safety of 
liquid deposits and retail money market mutual funds.  
The increases in these components were also supported 
by declines in opportunity costs stemming from mone-
tary policy easing.  

Over the intermeeting period, the expected path of 
monetary policy over the next year as measured by 
money market futures rates moved up significantly on 
net, apparently because economic data releases and 
announcements by large financial firms imparted 
greater confidence among investors about the pros-
pects for the economy’s performance in coming quar-
ters.  Futures rates also moved up in response to both 
the Committee’s decision to lower the target for the 
federal funds rate by 75 basis points at the March 18 
meeting, which was a somewhat smaller reduction than 
market participants had expected, and the Committee’s 
accompanying statement, which reportedly conveyed 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



more concern about inflation than had been antici-
pated.  The subsequent release of the minutes of the 
March FOMC meeting elicited limited reaction.  Con-
sistent with the higher expected path for policy and 
easing of safe-haven demands, yields on nominal 
Treasury coupon securities rose substantially over the 
period, and the Treasury yield curve flattened.  Meas-
ures of inflation compensation for the next five years 
derived from yields on inflation-indexed Treasury secu-
rities were quite volatile around the time of the March 
FOMC meeting and on balance increased somewhat 
over the intermeeting period, although they remained 
in the lower portion of their range over the past several 
months.  Measures of longer-term inflation compensa-
tion declined, returning to around the middle of their 
recent elevated range. 

In the forecast prepared for this meeting, the staff 
made little change to its projection for the growth of 
real gross domestic product (GDP) in 2008 and 2009.  
The available indicators of recent economic activity had 
come in close to the staff’s expectations and had con-
tinued to suggest that a substantial softening in eco-
nomic activity was under way.  The staff projection 
pointed to a contraction of real GDP in the first half of 
2008 followed by a modest rise in the second half of 
this year, aided in part by the fiscal stimulus package.  
The forecast showed real GDP expanding at a rate 
somewhat above its potential in 2009, reflecting the 
impetus from cumulative monetary policy easing, con-
tinued strength in net exports, a gradual lessening in 
financial market strains, and the waning drag from past 
increases in energy prices.  Despite this pickup in the 
pace of activity, the trajectory of resource utilization 
anticipated through 2009 implied noticeable slack.  The 
projection for core PCE price inflation in 2008 as a 
whole was unchanged; it was reduced a bit over the 
first half of the year to reflect the somewhat lower-
than-expected readings of recent core PCE inflation 
and raised a bit over the second half of the year to in-
corporate the spillover from larger-than-anticipated 
increases in prices of crude oil and non-oil imports 
since the previous FOMC meeting.  The forecast of 
headline PCE inflation in 2008 was revised up in light 
of the further run-up in energy prices and somewhat 
higher food price inflation; headline PCE inflation was 
expected to exceed core PCE price inflation by a con-
siderable margin this year.  In view of the projected 
slack in resource utilization in 2009 and flattening out 
of oil and other commodity prices, both core and head-
line PCE price inflation were projected to drop back 
from their 2008 levels, in line with the staff’s previous 
forecasts. 

In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in April, all 
meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members 
and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projec-
tions for economic growth, the unemployment rate, 
and inflation for the period 2008 through 2010.  The 
projections are described in the Summary of Economic 
Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these 
minutes. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, FOMC participants noted that the data received 
since the March FOMC meeting, while pointing to 
continued weakness in economic activity, had been 
broadly consistent with their expectations.  Conditions 
across a number of financial markets were judged to 
have improved over the intermeeting period, but finan-
cial markets remained fragile and strains in some mar-
kets had intensified.  Although participants anticipated 
that further improvement in market conditions would 
occur only slowly and that some backsliding was possi-
ble, the generally better state of financial markets had 
caused participants to mark down the odds that eco-
nomic activity could be severely disrupted by a further 
substantial deterioration in the financial environment.  
Economic activity was anticipated to be weakest over 
the next few months, with many participants judging 
that real GDP was likely to contract slightly in the first 
half of 2008.  GDP growth was expected to begin to 
recover in the second half of this year, supported by 
accommodative monetary policy and fiscal stimulus, 
and to increase further in 2009 and 2010.  Views varied 
about the likely pace and vigor of the recovery through 
2009, although all participants projected GDP growth 
to be at or above trend in 2010.  Incoming information 
on the inflation outlook since the March FOMC meet-
ing had been mixed.  Readings on core inflation had 
improved somewhat, but some of this improvement 
was thought likely to reflect transitory factors, and en-
ergy and other commodity prices had increased further 
since March.  Total PCE inflation was projected to 
moderate from its current elevated level to between 1½ 
percent and 2 percent in 2010, although participants 
stressed that this expected moderation was dependent 
on food and energy prices flattening out and critically 
on inflation expectations remaining reasonably well 
anchored. 

Conditions across a number of financial markets had 
improved since the previous FOMC meeting.  Equity 
prices and yields on Treasury securities had increased, 
volatility in both equity and debt markets had ebbed 
somewhat, and a range of credit risk premiums had 
moved down.  Participants noted that the better tone 
of financial markets had been helped by the apparent 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



willingness and ability of financial institutions to raise 
new capital.  Investors’ confidence had probably also 
been buoyed by corporate earnings reports for the first 
quarter, which suggested that profit growth outside of 
the financial sector remained solid, and also by the 
resolution of the difficulties of a major broker-dealer in 
mid-March.  Moreover, the various liquidity facilities 
introduced by the Federal Reserve in recent months 
were thought to have bolstered market liquidity and 
aided a return to more orderly market functioning.  But 
participants emphasized that financial markets re-
mained under considerable stress, noted that the func-
tioning of many markets remained impaired, and ex-
pressed concern that some of the recent recovery in 
markets could prove fragile.  Strains in short-term 
funding markets had intensified over the intermeeting 
period, in part reflecting continuing pressures on the 
liquidity positions of financial institutions.  Despite a 
narrowing of spreads on corporate bonds, credit condi-
tions were seen as remaining tight.  The Senior Loan 
Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices 
conducted in April indicated that banks had tightened 
lending standards and pricing terms on loans to both 
businesses and households.  Participants stressed that it 
could take some time for the financial system to return 
to a more normal footing, and a number of participants 
were of the view that financial headwinds would proba-
bly continue to restrain economic activity through 
much of next year.  Even so, the likelihood that the 
functioning of the financial system would deteriorate 
substantially further with significant adverse implica-
tions for the economic outlook was judged by partici-
pants to have receded somewhat since the March 
FOMC meeting. 

The housing market had continued to weaken since the 
previous meeting, and participants saw little indication 
of a bottoming out in either housing activity or prices.  
Housing starts and the demand for new homes had 
declined further, house prices in many parts of the 
country were falling faster than they had towards the 
end of 2007, and inventories of unsold homes re-
mained quite elevated.  A small number of participants 
reported tentative signs that housing activity in a few 
areas of the country might be beginning to pick up, and 
a narrowing of credit risk spreads on AAA indexes of 
sub-prime mortgages in recent weeks was also noted.  
Nonetheless, the outlook for the housing market re-
mained bleak, with housing demand likely to be af-
fected by restrictive conditions in mortgage markets, 
fears that house prices would fall further, and weaken-
ing labor markets.  The possibility that house prices 
could decline by more than anticipated, and that the 

effects of such a decline could be amplified through 
their impact on financial institutions and financial mar-
kets, remained a key source of downside risk to partici-
pants’ projections for economic growth. 

Growth in consumer spending appeared to have 
slowed to a crawl in recent months and consumer sen-
timent had fallen sharply.  The pressure on households’ 
real incomes from higher energy prices and the erosion 
of wealth resulting from continuing declines in house 
prices likely contributed to the deceleration in con-
sumer outlays.  Reports from contacts in the banking 
and financial services sectors indicated that the avail-
ability of both consumer credit and home equity lines 
had tightened considerably further in recent months 
and that delinquency rates on household credit had 
continued to drift upwards.  Consumer sentiment and 
spending had also been held down by the softening in 
labor markets—nonfarm payroll employment had 
fallen for the third consecutive month in March and 
the unemployment rate had moved up.  The restraint 
on spending emanating from weakness in labor markets 
was expected to increase over coming quarters, with 
participants projecting the unemployment rate to pick 
up further this year and to remain elevated in 2009. 

Consumption spending was likely to be supported in 
the near term by the fiscal stimulus package, which was 
expected to boost spending temporarily in the middle 
of this year.  Some participants suggested that the weak 
economic environment could increase the propensity 
of households to use their tax rebates to pay down ex-
isting debt and so might diminish the impact of the 
package.  However, it was also noted that the tighten-
ing in credit availability might mean a significant num-
ber of households may be credit constrained and this 
might increase the proportion of the rebates that is 
spent.  The timing and magnitude of the impact of the 
stimulus package on GDP was also seen as depending 
on the extent to which the boost to consumption 
spending is absorbed by a temporary run-down in 
firms’ inventories or by an increase in imports rather 
than by an expansion in domestic output. 

The outlook for business spending remained decidedly 
downbeat.  Indicators of business sentiment were low, 
and reports from business contacts suggested that firms 
were scaling back their capital spending plans.  Several 
participants reported that uncertainty about the eco-
nomic outlook was leading firms to defer spending pro-
jects until prospects for economic activity became 
clearer.  The tightening in the supply of business credit 
was also seen as holding back investment, with some 
firms apparently reluctant to reduce their liquidity posi-

Minutes of the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



tions in the current environment.  Spending on non-
residential construction projects continued to slow, 
although the extent of that slowing varied across the 
country.  A few participants reported that the commer-
cial real estate market in some areas remained relatively 
firm, supported by low vacancy rates. 

The strength of U.S. exports remained a notable bright 
spot.  Growth in exports, which had been supported by 
solid advances in foreign economies and by declines in 
the foreign exchange value of the dollar, had partially 
insulated the output and profits of U.S. companies, 
especially those in the manufacturing sector, from the 
effects of weakening domestic demand.  Several par-
ticipants voiced concern, however, that the pace of 
activity in the rest of the world could slow in coming 
quarters, suggesting that the impetus provided from net 
exports might well diminish. 

The information received on the inflation outlook since 
the March FOMC meeting had been mixed.  Recent 
readings on core inflation had improved somewhat, 
although participants noted that some of that im-
provement probably reflected transitory factors.  
Moreover, the increase in crude oil prices to record 
levels, together with rapid increases in food and import 
prices in recent months, was likely to put upward pres-
sure on inflation over the next few quarters.  Prices 
embedded in futures contracts continued to point to a 
leveling-off of energy and commodity prices.  Although 
these futures contracts probably remained the best ba-
sis for projecting movements in commodity prices, par-
ticipants emphasized the considerable uncertainty at-
tending the likely path of commodity prices and cau-
tioned that commodity prices in recent years had often 
advanced more quickly than had been implied by fu-
tures contracts.  Several participants reported that busi-
ness contacts had expressed growing concerns about 
the increase in their input costs and that there were 
signs that an increasing number of firms were seeking 
to pass on these higher costs to their customers in the 
form of higher prices.  Other participants noted, how-
ever, that the extent of the pass-through of higher en-
ergy and food prices to core retail prices appeared rela-
tively limited to date, and that profit margins in the 
nonfinancial sector remained reasonably high, suggest-
ing that there was some scope for firms to absorb cost 
increases without raising prices.  Available data and 
anecdotal reports indicated that gains in labor compen-
sation remained moderate, and some participants sug-
gested that wage growth was unlikely to pick up sharply 
in coming quarters if, as anticipated, labor markets re-
mained relatively soft.  However, several participants 
were of the view that wage inflation tended to lag in-

creases in prices and so may not provide a useful guide 
to emerging price pressures. 

On balance, participants expected the recent increases 
in oil and food prices to continue to boost overall con-
sumer price inflation in the near term; thereafter, total 
inflation was projected to moderate, with all partici-
pants expecting total PCE inflation of between 1½ per-
cent and 2 percent by 2010.  Participants stressed that 
the expected moderation in inflation was dependent on 
the continued stability of inflation expectations.  A 
number of participants voiced concern that long-term 
inflation expectations could drift upwards if headline 
inflation remained elevated for a protracted period or if 
the recent substantial policy easing was misinterpreted 
by the public as suggesting that Committee members 
had a greater tolerance for inflation than previously 
thought.  The possibility that inflation expectations 
could increase was viewed as a key upside risk to the 
inflation outlook.  However, participants emphasized 
that appropriate monetary policy, combined with effec-
tive communication of the Committee’s commitment 
to price stability, would mitigate this risk. 

Participants stressed the difficulty of gauging the ap-
propriate stance of policy in current circumstances.  
Some participants noted that the level of the federal 
funds target, especially when compared with the cur-
rent rate of inflation, was relatively low by historical 
standards.  Even taking account of current financial 
headwinds, such a low rate could suggest that policy 
was reasonably accommodative.  However, other par-
ticipants observed that the pronounced strains in bank-
ing and financial markets imparted much greater uncer-
tainty to such assessments and meant that measures of 
the stance of policy based on the real federal funds rate 
were not likely to provide a reliable guide in the current 
environment.  Several participants expressed the view 
that the easing in monetary policy since last fall had not 
as yet led to a loosening in overall financial conditions, 
but rather had prevented financial conditions from 
tightening as much as they otherwise would have in 
response to escalating strains in financial markets.  This 
view suggested that the stimulus from past monetary 
policy easing would be felt mainly as conditions in fi-
nancial markets improved. 

In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for 
the intermeeeting period, most members judged that 
policy should be eased by 25 basis points at this meet-
ing.  Although prospects for economic activity had not 
deteriorated significantly since the March meeting, the 
outlook for growth and employment remained weak 
and slack in resource utilization was likely to increase.  

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



An additional easing in policy would help to foster 
moderate growth over time without impeding a mod-
eration in inflation.  Moreover, although the likelihood 
that economic activity would be severely disrupted by a 
sharp deterioration in financial markets had apparently 
receded, most members thought that the risks to eco-
nomic growth were still skewed to the downside.  A 
reduction in interest rates would help to mitigate those 
risks.  However, most members viewed the decision to 
reduce interest rates at this meeting as a close call.  The 
substantial easing of monetary policy since last Sep-
tember, the ongoing steps taken by the Federal Reserve 
to provide liquidity and support market functioning, 
and the imminent fiscal stimulus would help to support 
economic activity.  Moreover, although downside risks 
to growth remained, members were also concerned 
about the upside risks to the inflation outlook, given 
the continued increases in oil and commodity prices 
and the fact that some indicators suggested that infla-
tion expectations had risen in recent months.  None-
theless, most members agreed that a further, modest 
easing in the stance of policy was appropriate to bal-
ance better the risks to achieving the Committee’s dual 
objectives of maximum employment and price stability 
over the medium run. 

The Committee agreed that that the statement to be 
released after the meeting should take note of the sub-
stantial policy easing to date and the ongoing measures 
to foster market liquidity.  In light of these significant 
policy actions, the risks to growth were now thought to 
be more closely balanced by the risks to inflation.  Ac-
cordingly, the Committee felt that it was no longer ap-
propriate for the statement to emphasize the downside 
risks to growth.  Given these circumstances, future pol-
icy adjustments would depend on the extent to which 
economic and financial developments affected the me-
dium-term outlook for growth and inflation.  In that 
regard, several members noted that it was unlikely to be 
appropriate to ease policy in response to information 
suggesting that the economy was slowing further or 
even contracting slightly in the near term, unless eco-
nomic and financial developments indicated a signifi-
cant weakening of the economic outlook. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 
 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 

growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
age of around 2 percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to lower its target for the federal funds 
rate 25 basis points to 2 percent. 

Recent information indicates that economic ac-
tivity remains weak. Household and business 
spending has been subdued and labor markets 
have softened further. Financial markets remain 
under considerable stress, and tight credit condi-
tions and the deepening housing contraction are 
likely to weigh on economic growth over the 
next few quarters.   

Although readings on core inflation have im-
proved somewhat, energy and other commodity 
prices have increased, and some indicators of in-
flation expectations have risen in recent months. 
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in 
coming quarters, reflecting a projected leveling-
out of energy and other commodity prices and 
an easing of pressures on resource utilization. 
Still, uncertainty about the inflation outlook re-
mains high. It will be necessary to continue to 
monitor inflation developments carefully.  

The substantial easing of monetary policy to 
date, combined with ongoing measures to foster 
market liquidity, should help to promote moder-
ate growth over time and to mitigate risks to 
economic activity. The Committee will continue 
to monitor economic and financial develop-
ments and will act as needed to promote sustain-
able economic growth and price stability.  

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner, 
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. 
Stern and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  Messrs. Fisher and 
Plosser. 

Messrs. Fisher and Plosser dissented because they pre-
ferred no change in the target federal funds rate at this 
meeting.  Although the economy had been weak, it had 
evolved roughly as expected since the previous meet-
ing.  Stresses in financial markets also had continued, 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



but the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities were helpful 
in that regard and the more worrisome development in 
their view was the outlook for inflation.  Rising prices 
for food, energy, and other commodities; signs of 
higher inflation expectations; and a negative real federal 
funds rate raised substantial concerns about the pros-
pects for inflation.  Mr. Plosser cited the recent rapid 
growth of monetary aggregates as additional evidence 
that the economy had ample liquidity after the aggres-
sive easing of policy to date.  Mr. Fisher was concerned 
that an adverse feedback loop was developing by which 
lowering the funds rate had been pushing down the 
exchange value of the dollar, contributing to higher 
commodity and import prices, cutting real spending by 
businesses and households, and therefore ultimately 
impairing economic activity.  To help prevent inflation 
expectations from becoming unhinged, both Messrs. 
Fisher and Plosser felt the Committee should put addi-
tional emphasis on its price stability goal at this point, 
and they believed that another reduction in the funds 
rate at this meeting could prove costly over the longer 
run. 

In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors, meeting participants 
turned to a discussion of the implications of the pay-
ment of interest on reserves for monetary policy im-
plementation.  Following passage of the Financial Ser-
vices Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, which will permit 
the Federal Reserve to reduce reserve requirements and 
to pay interest on reserves beginning in 2011, the staff 
had undertaken work to explore and evaluate alterna-
tive approaches to monetary policy implementation 
using these new authorities.  After a staff presentation 
summarizing the work to date, policymakers discussed 
the potential advantages and disadvantages of several 
of the alternative approaches.  Considerations included 

reducing the burden and complexity associated with the 
current system of reserve requirements and ensuring 
that the Committee’s interest rate targets could be re-
liably achieved.  Participants noted that frameworks for 
monetary policy implementation employed in other 
countries span a wide range and that the experiences of 
these countries provided useful information for the 
Federal Reserve’s consideration of alternative ap-
proaches.  They agreed that further study was required 
to narrow the range of options under consideration and 
that it would be important to consult closely with de-
pository institutions and others in the design of a new 
system. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, June 24-25, 
2008. 

The meeting adjourned at 1:00 p.m. 

Notation Votes 
By notation vote completed on March 20, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved a resolution that 
added non-agency AAA-rated commercial-mortgage-
backed securities to the list of collateral acceptable in 
connection with the Term Securities Lending Facility.  

By notation vote completed on April 7, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on March 18, 2008. 

 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Summary of Economic Projections 
 
In conjunction with the April 2008 FOMC meeting, the 
members of the Board of Governors and the presi-
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par-
ticipate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided 
projections for the rates of economic growth, unem-
ployment, and inflation in 2008, 2009, and 2010.  Pro-
jections were based on information available through 
the conclusion of the April meeting, on each partici-
pant’s assumptions regarding a range of factors likely to 
affect economic outcomes, and on his or her assess-
ment of appropriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate 
monetary policy” is defined as the future policy that, 
based on current information, is deemed most likely to 
foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation 
that best satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the 
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
ployment and price stability. 

The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and 
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected eco-
nomic growth to be much weaker in 2008 than last 
year, owing primarily to a continued contraction of 
housing activity, a reduction in the availability of 
household and business credit, and rising energy prices.  
The unemployment rate was expected to increase sig-
nificantly.  However, output growth further ahead was 
projected to pick up by enough to begin to reverse 
some of the increase in the unemployment rate by 
2010.  In light of the recent surge in the prices of oil 
and other commodities, inflation was expected to re-
main elevated in 2008.  Inflation was projected to mod-
erate in 2009 and 2010 as the prices of crude oil and 
other commodities level out and economic slack damps 
cost and price pressures.  Most participants judged that 
the uncertainty around their projections for both out-
put growth and inflation was greater than normal.  
Most viewed the risks to output as weighted to the 
downside.  Participants were roughly evenly divided as 
to whether the risks to the inflation outlook are broadly 
balanced or skewed to the upside.    

The Outlook 
The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
real GDP growth in 2008, at 0.3 to 1.2 percent, was 
considerably lower than the central tendency of the 
projections provided in conjunction with the January 
FOMC meeting, which was 1.3 to 2.0 percent.  Partici-
pants viewed activity as likely to be particularly weak in 
the first half of 2008; some rebound was anticipated in 
the second half of the year.  Incoming data on spend-
ing and employment already indicated a softening 

economy this year.  Real incomes were being held 
down by higher oil prices; falling house prices had re-
duced household wealth; and households and busi-
nesses were facing tighter credit conditions.  Exports 
were seen as a notable source of strength this year ow-
ing to continued economic growth overseas and the 
depreciation of the dollar over the past year or so.  
Many participants also said that the substantial easing 
of monetary policy since last year and the fiscal stimu-
lus package should help to support spending in the 
second half of the year.  Beyond 2008, factors pro-
jected to buoy economic growth included the contin-
ued effects of an accommodative stance of monetary 
policy in conjunction with a gradual easing of financial 
market strains, a stabilization in housing markets, and a 
leveling-off of oil and commodity prices.  Participants 
were encouraged by steps taken at major financial insti-
tutions to bolster their balance sheets and to raise new 
capital.  Some expressed the view that financial market 
sentiment may have swung excessively to the pessimis-
tic side, and that risk spreads would come down and 
credit would become more available as risk aversion 
diminishes.  Also, demand and supply in the housing 
market should become better aligned as the decline in 
house prices increases the affordability of homeowner-
ship and the decline in housing starts reduces the sup-
ply of new homes.  Most participants expected real 
GDP to grow roughly at their estimates of its trend rate 
in 2009 and somewhat above trend in 2010. 

With output growth well below trend this year, most 
participants expected that the unemployment rate 
would move up.  The central tendency of participants’ 
projections for the average rate of unemployment in 
the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.5 to 5.7 percent, 
above the 5.2 to 5.3 percent unemployment rate fore-
casted in January and consistent with significant slack 
in labor markets and the economy.  Most participants 
expected the unemployment rate to edge down in 2009 
and 2010.  

The steep run-up in the prices of oil and other com-
modities since January was the primary factor leading 
participants to revise up sharply their projections for 
overall inflation in the near term.  In contrast, the cen-
tral tendencies of the projections for core PCE infla-
tion in 2008 increased only moderately, from 2.0 to 2.2 
percent in January to 2.2 to 2.4 percent in April, reflect-
ing the effects of higher food and energy prices on 
other goods and services and the rise in import prices 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



associated with the decline in the dollar and higher in-
flation in our trading partners.  

Rates of both overall and core inflation were expected 
to decline over the next two years, reflecting a flatten-
ing out of the prices of oil and other commodities con-
sistent with futures market prices and the effects of 
significant economic slack.  Participants’ projections for 
2010 were importantly influenced by their judgments 
about the measured rates of inflation consistent with 
the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate to promote maxi-
mum employment and price stability and about the 
time frame over which policy should aim to attain 

those rates given current economic conditions.  Many 
participants judged that, given the recent adverse 
shocks to both aggregate demand and inflation, policy 
would be able to foster only a gradual return of key 
macroeconomic variables to their longer-run sustain-
able or optimal levels.  Consequently, the rate of un-
employment was projected by many participants to 
remain above its longer-run sustainable level even in 
2010, and inflation was viewed likely still to be a bit 
above levels that some participants judged would be 
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 

 
 

Table 1:  Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors and  
Reserve Bank Presidents  

 

 (Percent) 
 2008 2009 2010 

Central Tendency1    
 Growth of real GDP  0.3 to 1.2 2.0 to 2.8 2.6 to 3.1 

January projections 1.3 to 2.0 2.1 to 2.7 2.5 to 3.0 

Unemployment rate 5.5 to 5.7 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.5 
January projections 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.3 4.9 to 5.1 

PCE inflation 3.1 to 3.4 1.9 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0 
January projections 2.1 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation 2.2 to 2.4 1.9 to 2.1 1.7 to 1.9 
January projections 2.0 to 2.2 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 1.9 

    
Range2    

 Growth of real GDP  0.0 to 1.5 1.8 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.4 
January projections 1.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 3.2 2.2 to 3.2 

Unemployment rate 5.3 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.3 4.8 to 5.9 
January projections 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.7 4.7 to 5.4 

PCE inflation 2.8 to 3.8 1.7 to 3.0 1.5 to 2.0 
January projections 2.0 to 2.8 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation 1.9 to 2.5 1.7 to 2.2 1.3 to 2.0 
January projections 1.9 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.2 1.4 to 2.0 

Note:  Projections of the growth of real GDP, of PCE inflation, and of core PCE inflation are percent 
changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE infla-
tion and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal 
consumption expenditures and the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and 
energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth 
quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate 
monetary policy.  

1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each 
year. 

2.  The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from lowest to highest, for 
that variable in that year. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*

* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
PercentReal GDP Growth

• • • • •

Central Tendency of Projections
Range of Projections

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
3

4

5

6

7

8
PercentUnemployment Rate

• •
•

• •

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5
PercentPCE Inflation

•

• •

•

•

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
0

1

2

3

4

5
PercentCore PCE Inflation

•
• • • •

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 

Risks to the Outlook 
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projec-
tions as weighted to the downside and the associated 
risks to their projections of the unemployment rate as 
tilted to the upside.  The possibility that house prices 
could decline more steeply than anticipated, putting 
further downward pressure on residential investment 
and consumption, was perceived as a significant risk to 
the outlook for economic growth and employment.  
Another risk was the possibility that foreign economies 
might slow more than expected, damping U.S. exports.  
Financial market conditions continued to pose serious 
risks—stock prices had declined on net since the Janu-
ary meeting and credit conditions had tightened further 
for both households and firms.  Although several par-
ticipants noted that financial strains had eased some-
what in April, most agreed that overall financial condi-
tions remained tighter than at the beginning of the year.  
The potential for adverse interactions, in which weaker 
economic activity could lead to a worsening of financial 
conditions and a reduced availability of credit, which in 
turn could further damp economic growth, continued 
to be viewed as a worrisome possibility.     

Regarding risks to the inflation outlook, participants 
pointed to the possibility that economic slack could put 
either more or less downward pressure on costs and 
prices than anticipated.  Some noted that downside 
risks to aggregate demand implied a risk of greater eco-
nomic slack and corresponding downside risks to price 
pressures.  However, many participants (noticeably 
more than in January) saw the upside risks to inflation 
as greater than the downside risks to inflation.  In par-
ticular, the pass-through of recent increases in energy 
and commodity prices as well as of past dollar deprecia-
tion to consumer prices could be greater than expected.  
In addition, some participants expressed concern that 
commodity prices may not flatten out as implied by 
futures prices, thus putting further upward pressure on 
prices.  Finally, inflation expectations could become 
less firmly anchored if the current elevated rates of in-
flation were to persist for longer than anticipated or if 
the public were to misinterpret the recent substantial 
policy easing as reflecting less resolve among Commit-
tee members to maintain low and stable inflation.   

Participants continued to view uncertainty about the 
outlook for economic activity as higher than normal, 
with some noting that economic slowdowns are gener-
ally associated with heightened uncertainty as are epi-
sodes of unusual credit restraint.  In addition, partici-
pants expressed notably more uncertainty about their 
inflation projections than they had in January, reflecting 

in part the difficulty of assessing the opposing effects 
of increased economic slack and higher energy prices.  
(Table 2 provides estimates of average ranges of fore-
cast uncertainty for GDP growth, unemployment, and 
inflation since 1987.1)   

 

Table 2:  Average Historical Projection Error 
Ranges  

(Percentage Points) 

 2008 2009 2010 

 Real GDP1 ±1.0 ±1.3 ±1.4 
 Unemployment 

rate2 ±0.4 ±0.7 ±1.0 

 Total consumer 
prices3 

±0.7 ±1.0 ±1.0 

Note:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus 
the root mean squared error of projections that were released in 
the spring from 1987 through 2007 for the current and follow-
ing two years by various private and government forecasters.  
As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain 
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual 
outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices 
will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors 
made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider 
and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Eco-
nomic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November).  
       1.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to fourth quarter of the year indicated. 
       2.  Projection is the fourth-quarter average of the civilian 
unemployment rate (percent). 
       3.  Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price 
measure that has been most widely used in government and 
private economic forecasts.  Projection is percent change, 
fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the 
year indicated.  

 

Diversity of Participants’ Views 
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diver-
sity of participants’ views.  The dispersions of partici-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2008 and 
2009 were roughly equally wide in January and April, 
but for 2010 the dispersion was a bit wider in April.  
Relative to the projections made in June 2007, just be-
fore the onset of financial market turbulence, the diver-
sity in views about real activity had widened considera-

                                                 
1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary dis-
cusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic 
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty 
and risks attending participants’ projections. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

bly.2  This increased dispersion was also apparent in 
projections for the unemployment rate.  The dispersion 
of projections for output and employment in 2008 
seemed largely to reflect differing assessments of the 
effect of financial market conditions on real activity, 
the speed with which credit conditions might improve, 
and the depth and duration of the housing market con-
traction.  For 2009, views differed notably about the 
pace at which output and employment would recover, 
with some participants concerned that financial strains 
could prove more persistent than most participants 
expected.  The dispersion of participants’ longer-term 
projections was also affected to some degree by differ-
ences in their judgments about the economy’s trend 
growth rate and the unemployment rate that would be 

                                                 
2 The June 2007 projections were included in the Board’s Monetary 
Policy Report to the Congress in July 2007. 

consistent over time with maximum employment.  The 
dispersion of the projections for PCE inflation in 2008 
and 2009 had widened somewhat since January, reflect-
ing different views on the extent to which recent in-
creases in the prices of oil and other commodities 
would pass through into higher consumer prices, on 
whether the prices of oil and other commodities would 
flatten out as implied in futures market prices, and on 
the influence that inflation expectations would exert on 
inflation over the short and medium run.  Participants’ 
inflation projections further out were influenced by 
their views of the rate of inflation consistent with the 
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives and the time it would 
take to achieve these goals given current economic 
conditions and appropriate policy. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)

Real GDP Unemployment Rate

0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  3.0  3.2  3.4  
0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.3  1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  3.5  

 April Projections

 January Projections

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

4.7 - 4.9 - 5.1 - 5.3 - 5.5 - 5.7 - 5.9 - 6.1 - 6.3 -
4.8  5.0  5.2  5.4  5.6  5.8  6.0  6.2  6.4  

 April Projections

 January Projections

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  3.0  3.2  3.4  
0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.3  1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  3.5  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants2009

4.7 - 4.9 - 5.1 - 5.3 - 5.5 - 5.7 - 5.9 - 6.1 - 6.3 -
4.8  5.0  5.2  5.4  5.6  5.8  6.0  6.2  6.4  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants2009

0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  3.0  3.2  3.4  
0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.3  1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  3.5  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

4.7 - 4.9 - 5.1 - 5.3 - 5.5 - 5.7 - 5.9 - 6.1 - 6.3 -
4.8  5.0  5.2  5.4  5.6  5.8  6.0  6.2  6.4  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)

PCE Inflation Core PCE Inflation

1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  3.5  3.7  
1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  3.0  3.2  3.4  3.6  3.8  

 April Projections

 January Projections

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 -
1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  

 April Projections

 January Projections

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2008

1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  3.5  3.7  
1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  3.0  3.2  3.4  3.6  3.8  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants2009

1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 -
1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants2009

1.5  1.7  1.9  2.1  2.3  2.5  2.7  2.9  3.1  3.3  3.5  3.7  
1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8  3.0  3.2  3.4  3.6  3.8  

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 -
1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2  2.4  2.6  

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16

Number of Participants
2010

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of April 29-30, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

 
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the 
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions.  Consider-
able uncertainty attends these projections, however.  The economic and statistical mod-
els and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect 
descriptions of the real world.  And the future path of the economy can be affected by 
myriad unforeseen developments and events.  Thus, in setting the stance of monetary 
policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic out-
come as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the 
likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. 
 
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve 
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee.  The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated 
with economic forecasts.  For example, suppose a participant projects that real GDP 
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 
2 percent.  If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in 
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported 
in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand 
between 2.0 percent to 4.0 percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3 percent in the 
second year, and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in the third year.  The corresponding 70 per-
cent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.3 percent to 2.7 percent in the 
current year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. 
 
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed on average over history, 
participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projec-
tions of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2.  Participants also provide judgments 
as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most likely outcome.  These judgments about 
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from 
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty 
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with di-
vergences across a number of different projections. 
 
 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




