









































FOMC Minutes, September 16, 2008


 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
September 16, 2008 

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, September 16, 2008 at 8:30 a.m.  
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Ms. Pianalto  
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock-

hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Connors, English, Kamin, Rolnick, Rosen-

blum, Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate 
Economists 

 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 
Mr. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervi-

sion and Regulation, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

 
Mr. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 

Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-

rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Carlson, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-

fairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of San Francisco 
 
Mr. Judd, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of San Francisco  
 
Mr. Altig, Ms. Baum, Messrs. Rasche, Schweitzer, 

Sellon, and Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, 
St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Boston, 
respectively 

 
Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Chicago 
 
Mr. Chatterjee, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



 

Mr. Wolman, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond 

 
 

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. 

In light of severe stresses in dollar funding markets, the 
Committee considered a proposal intended to provide 
the flexibility necessary to respond promptly to re-
quests from foreign central banks to engage in tempo-
rary reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrangements to be 
used in supporting dollar liquidity in their jurisdictions.  
After the discussion, the Committee voted unani-
mously to authorize its Foreign Currency Subcommit-
tee to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as 
needed to expand existing swap arrangements and to 
enter into new arrangements with foreign central banks 
to address strains in money markets.  This authority 
extends through January 30, 2009. 

The information reviewed at the September meeting 
indicated that economic activity decelerated considera-
bly in recent months.  The labor market deteriorated 
further in August as private payrolls declined and the 
unemployment rate moved markedly higher.  Industrial 
output was little changed in July, but fell sharply in Au-
gust.  Consumer spending weakened noticeably in re-
cent months.  Meanwhile, residential investment con-
tinued to decline steeply through midyear.  In contrast, 
business investment in equipment and structures gen-
erally held up through July.  On the inflation front, 
overall consumer prices rose rapidly for a third straight 
month in July but then edged down in August, because 
of a sharp drop in energy prices.  Core consumer price 
inflation remained elevated in July and eased somewhat 
in August. 

The labor market continued to weaken.  According to 
the August employment report, private payroll em-
ployment fell by a bit more than the average seen ear-
lier this year.  Most major industry groups shed jobs; 
manufacturing posted a particularly noticeable loss.  
Job losses in the construction industry diminished over 
July and August despite the ongoing contraction in 

residential investment.  Hiring in nonbusiness services, 
which include the education and health industries, and 
in natural resources and mining increased in line with 
recent trends.  The average workweek held steady and 
aggregate hours edged lower.  The unemployment rate 
jumped 0.4 percentage point, to 6.1 percent, in August, 
while the labor force participation rate held steady. 

Industrial production fell sharply in August after edging 
up in July.  Motor vehicle assemblies dropped in Au-
gust as automakers scaled back production following a 
sharp decline in vehicle sales in July.  The output of 
high-tech equipment rose at a moderate rate in the first 
half of the year, but indicators of production gains in 
the high-tech sector pointed toward relatively subdued 
growth in the third quarter.  The output of other manu-
facturing sectors declined for a third consecutive 
month in August, and indicators of near-term produc-
tion suggested that the industrial sector was likely to 
remain soft over the next few months.  For most major 
industry groups, factory utilization rates in August re-
mained below their long-run averages. 

Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) turned 
down in June and declined more noticeably in July; 
over the two months, outlays for motor vehicles 
dropped markedly and spending on other goods weak-
ened substantially.  The recent weakness in consumer 
spending on goods excluding motor vehicles contrasted 
sharply with solid growth in the spring.  Outlays for 
services were reported to have increased modestly in 
June and July.  Total nominal retail sales decreased in 
August.  Real disposable income was boosted signifi-
cantly by the tax rebates in the second quarter; exclud-
ing the temporary rebates, real disposable income fell in 
that quarter and continued to move lower in July.  
Early September readings on consumer sentiment rose 
from the low levels recorded over the past several 
months. 

Residential construction activity continued to decline 
steeply through midyear.  In July, both single-family 
housing starts and permit issuance fell further.  In the 
multifamily sector, starts dropped back in July to a rate 
more in line with its historical range.  June’s spike in 
multifamily starts was related to more-stringent build-
ing codes that took effect in New York City on July 1, 
which apparently led developers to pull forward the 
start date of some planned apartment projects.  Recent 
cutbacks in new residential construction reduced the 
level of new home inventories, and the relative stability 
in sales of new homes allowed those inventory reduc-
tions to begin to bring down the months’ supply of 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

new homes for sale.  Even so, the months’ supply of 
new homes for sale remained extremely elevated rela-
tive to the level that prevailed before the downturn in 
the housing market.  Sales of existing single-family 
homes were relatively flat since the end of last year.  
Tight conditions in mortgage markets over the summer 
continued to restrain housing demand, especially for 
borrowers seeking nonconforming mortgages.  Several 
indexes indicated that house prices had declined sub-
stantially over the past 12 months, and these prices ap-
peared to remain on a downward trajectory. 

In the business sector, investment in equipment and 
software fell in the second quarter, largely reflecting a 
sharp drop in spending on motor vehicles.  In contrast, 
growth of real outlays for nontransportation equipment 
posted a moderate gain.  The data on nominal orders 
and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding 
aircraft rose substantially in July, although some of the 
gain in nominal shipments may have reflected unusually 
large price increases.  Moreover, as in previous months, 
orders and shipments were likely supported in July by 
increased foreign demand.  Real nonresidential invest-
ment increased at a robust rate in the second quarter; 
however, nominal expenditures declined in July, and 
forward-looking indicators remained downbeat.  Va-
cancy rates for commercial properties moved higher in 
the first half of the year and the architectural billings 
index continued to register weak readings. 

Real nonfarm inventories excluding motor vehicles fell 
in the second quarter.  The book value of manufactur-
ing and trade inventories (excluding motor vehicles) 
stepped up modestly in July from the second-quarter 
level, but the ratio of these inventories to sales held 
steady. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened in July, as a 
surge in the value of imports of goods and services 
more than offset strong growth in exports.  Imports in 
July were led by a rapid increase in imports of oil, re-
flecting both higher volumes and higher prices, and 
were supported by a rise in imports of industrial sup-
plies, capital goods, and services.  The strength in ex-
ports was broadly based but benefited in particular 
from robust exports of automotive products. 

Economic indicators pointed to a marked deceleration 
of economic activity in the advanced foreign econo-
mies.  In the second quarter, gross domestic product 
(GDP) was flat in Canada and the United Kingdom 
and fell in both Japan and the euro area.  In July, em-
ployment continued to weaken in Japan, and retail sales 
fell in the euro area.  Headline inflation in the major 

advanced foreign economies stayed elevated.  Data re-
ceived over the intermeeting period showed a further 
slowing of growth in emerging market economies.  For 
Mexico, anemic growth in the second quarter followed 
a slight contraction in the first.  In Asia, output decel-
erated significantly in the second quarter, as growth 
moderated in China and weakened more sharply in 
several other economies.  Headline inflation rose in 
some developing countries but fell in others. 

Headline consumer prices in the United States declined 
slightly in August after having risen rapidly during the 
preceding three months.  Energy prices dropped 
steeply, and the rate of increase in food prices moder-
ated somewhat.  Core consumer prices rose a bit more 
slowly in August than they had in June and July.  Ex-
cluding food and energy, producer prices rose modestly 
in August, although prices for capital goods other than 
motor vehicles and high-tech equipment posted a large 
increase.  During recent months, some cost pressures 
eased as the prices of crude oil and other commodities 
declined and non-oil import prices decelerated.  Some 
measures of inflation expectations were down notably 
over the intermeeting period.  Measures of hourly labor 
compensation continued to increase moderately with 
no sign of acceleration. 

At its August meeting, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) kept the target federal funds rate 
unchanged at 2 percent.  The Committee’s statement 
noted that economic activity expanded in the second 
quarter, partly reflecting growth in consumer spending 
and exports.  However, labor markets had softened 
further and financial markets remained under consider-
able stress.  Tight credit conditions, the ongoing hous-
ing contraction, and elevated energy prices were likely 
to weigh on economic growth over the next few quar-
ters.  The Committee stated that, over time, the sub-
stantial easing of monetary policy, combined with on-
going measures to foster market liquidity, should help 
to promote moderate economic growth.  Inflation had 
been high, spurred by the earlier increases in the prices 
of energy and some other commodities, and some indi-
cators of inflation expectations had been elevated.  The 
Committee expected inflation to moderate later this 
year and next year, but the inflation outlook remained 
highly uncertain.  Although downside risks to growth 
remained, the upside risks to inflation were also of sig-
nificant concern to the Committee.  The Committee 
indicated that it would continue to monitor economic 
and financial developments and would act as needed to 
promote sustainable economic growth and price stabil-
ity. 

Minutes of the Meeting of September 16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 

Over the intermeeting period, investors marked down 
considerably their expectations for the path of mone-
tary policy.  Policy expectations were largely unaffected 
by the outcome of the August FOMC meeting, as the 
Committee’s decision to leave the target federal funds 
rate unchanged was broadly anticipated and the ac-
companying statement was reportedly in line with in-
vestor expectations.  Subsequently, the expected future 
path of monetary policy dropped amid increasing con-
cerns about the health of financial institutions.  The 
market’s expectation for the onset of policy tightening 
was also pushed back as labor market conditions weak-
ened and oil prices declined further, developments that 
were seen as tempering inflation pressures.  Yields on 
nominal Treasury coupon securities declined over the 
intermeeting period while yields on inflation-indexed 
Treasury securities were roughly unchanged, which left 
inflation compensation noticeably lower.  The decrease 
in inflation compensation was most pronounced at 
shorter horizons, likely reflecting the drop in oil prices. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets remained 
strained for most of the intermeeting period and dete-
riorated considerably just before the FOMC meeting.  
The spreads of London interbank offered rates, or Li-
bor, over comparable-maturity overnight index swap 
rates, especially those beyond the one-month horizon, 
moved up from already-high levels.  In the commercial 
paper market, spreads on lower-rated nonfinancial and 
asset-backed commercial paper fluctuated in an ele-
vated range, as did spreads on financial paper.  Deposi-
tory institutions continued to bid aggressively for 28-
day funds at the Term Auction Facility (TAF) during 
the intermeeting period, and demand for funds was 
strong at both of the 84-day TAF auctions.  The 
amount of overnight primary credit outstanding was 
about unchanged at a high level, while term primary 
credit continued to rise.  No credit was extended 
through the Primary Dealer Credit Facility until the 
final week of the intermeeting period.  Conditions in 
markets for repurchase agreements, or repos, against 
some types of collateral deteriorated over the inter-
meeting period, and liquidity in non-Treasury, non-
agency term repo markets remained poor. 

In longer-term credit markets, yields on investment-
grade corporate bonds were not much changed, but 
yields on speculative-grade bonds rose somewhat.  Risk 
spreads on corporate bonds jumped, as comparable-
maturity Treasury yields dropped; most of the increase 
in risk spreads occurred late in the intermeeting period.  
Corporate bond issuance moderated a bit further in 
August, while growth of bank lending to businesses 

was tepid.  Broad equity indexes declined over the in-
termeeting period.  Financial sector equity indexes were 
volatile and ended the period down sharply. 

Liquidity conditions in the money markets of major 
foreign economies deteriorated over the intermeeting 
period.  Sovereign bond yields moved down, mainly 
reflecting declines in inflation compensation.  On a 
trade-weighted basis, the dollar rose against the curren-
cies of our major trading partners. 

M2 contracted slightly in August following a generally 
weak performance over the previous few months.  The 
August data showed a considerable reallocation among 
the components of M2.  Liquid deposits and retail 
money funds fell while small time deposits surged as 
some banks and thrifts bid aggressively for these de-
posits. 

On September 7, the Treasury Department and the 
Federal Housing Finance Agency announced that Fan-
nie Mae and Freddie Mac had been placed into conser-
vatorship and that Treasury would establish a backstop 
lending facility for the government-sponsored enter-
prises (GSEs), purchase preferred stock in the GSEs as 
necessary to ensure that they maintain a positive net 
worth, and initiate a program to purchase mortgage-
backed securities (MBS).  Following the announcement, 
spreads on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac debt and on 
agency MBS narrowed, while share prices for their 
common and preferred stock fell.  Auctions of GSE 
debt following the conservatorship announcement re-
portedly attracted heavy demand, but market partici-
pants indicated that liquidity in the secondary market 
for GSE debt remained somewhat lower than normal.  
Before the conservatorship announcement, interest 
rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages had declined less 
than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, 
leaving mortgage spreads at the top of their range of 
the past two decades.  Following the Treasury an-
nouncement, rates and spreads on new conforming 
fixed-rate mortgages dropped sharply. 

In the days immediately before the FOMC meeting, 
Lehman Brothers Holdings filed for bankruptcy, Bank 
of America announced that it would acquire Merrill 
Lynch, and market concerns about the health of other 
financial institutions increased.  To address potential 
liquidity pressures in financial markets associated with 
these developments, the Federal Reserve announced 
several additional initiatives, including an expansion of 
collateral eligible for the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
and the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), in-
creases in the size and frequency of TSLF auctions, and 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

a temporary relaxation of the limitations on broker-
dealers’ access to funding from affiliated depository 
institutions.  In addition, a consortium of 10 major 
banks announced the creation of a liquidity pool from 
which participants could draw collateralized loans.  De-
spite these enhanced liquidity measures, short-term 
funding markets remained severely strained, reflecting 
investors’ heightened concerns about the financial con-
dition of other large financial firms, including American 
International Group, a prominent insurance and finan-
cial services company.  To further support market li-
quidity and to help keep the federal funds rate near its 
target, the Federal Reserve conducted very large re-
serve-adding open market operations the day before 
and the morning of the FOMC meeting.  Market ex-
pectations for the path of monetary policy moved 
down sharply.  Yields on nominal Treasury securities 
dropped steeply, and credit spreads on corporate bonds 
widened significantly.  Equity markets were volatile and 
equity prices dropped considerably. 

In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff left 
its projection for real GDP growth in the second half 
of 2008 little changed from the previous meeting, but it 
marked down its forecast for 2009 slightly.  Real GDP 
was estimated to have increased at a solid pace in the 
second quarter; however, the available indicators 
pointed to a sharp deceleration in economic activity in 
the third quarter.  Consumer spending softened appre-
ciably in recent months, and housing construction re-
mained on a steep downtrend.  Some of the weakness 
in the household sector appeared to reflect the ongoing 
deterioration in the labor market, but the effects of the 
earlier run-up in oil prices, weakened balance sheets, 
and restrictive financial conditions also likely put the 
finances of many households and businesses under 
pressure.  The staff continued to expect that real GDP 
would advance slowly in the fourth quarter of 2008 and 
at a faster rate in 2009, but still less than that of its po-
tential.  Real GDP growth was expected to pick up to 
slightly above the rate of potential growth in 2010, as 
the restraint on household and business spending asso-
ciated with financial market turmoil gradually eases and 
the contraction in the housing sector comes to an end.  
The staff’s outlook for both core and overall PCE in-
flation over the next two years also changed little.  The 
staff continued to project that core inflation would 
edge lower in 2009 and 2010 as the prices of imports, 
energy, and other commodities decelerate and the mar-
gin of resource slack remains relatively wide. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, FOMC participants noted that financial market 

strains had intensified in the days before the meeting 
and that these strains could potentially weigh further on 
economic activity.  Participants agreed that economic 
growth was likely to be sluggish in the second half of 
2008.  Several participants had marked down their 
near-term outlook for economic activity and some 
judged that downside risks had increased, but most 
continued to expect a gradual recovery in 2009.  De-
spite concern that recent high inflation readings sug-
gested that price pressures could persist, participants 
generally thought that the outlook for inflation had 
improved, mainly reflecting the recent declines in the 
prices of oil and other commodities, the stronger for-
eign exchange value of the dollar, and the weakening of 
the labor market. 

Participants noted that stresses on financial markets 
and institutions had increased.  The announcement of 
government support for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 
appeared to have had a positive impact on financial 
markets, most importantly on the primary and secon-
dary markets for residential mortgages.  However, the 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and market concerns 
about other financial institutions were causing a wide 
variety of financial firms to experience increasing diffi-
culty in obtaining funding and raising capital, a devel-
opment that was likely to lead to a further tightening of 
credit availability to households and firms.  Meeting 
participants were highly uncertain about future financial 
developments and their implications for the broader 
economy.  There was agreement that the liquidity facili-
ties established by the Federal Reserve over the past 
year had been helpful in ameliorating strains in financial 
markets, but it was also noted that the capital of banks 
and other financial institutions would need to be bol-
stered in order to strengthen the functioning of the 
financial system and ease constraints on credit. 

Strains on the financial system, and their interactions 
with housing developments and the real economy more 
broadly, continued to restrain aggregate demand and 
pose substantial downside risks to the expected path 
for economic activity.  The fall in employment in Au-
gust highlighted concerns that an adverse dynamic was 
taking hold, in which economic weakness increased 
financial firms’ losses, leading to tighter credit condi-
tions and thus causing a further softening in economic 
activity.  However, some participants cited indications 
that the pace of decline in house prices might begin to 
slow in coming months, which would serve to limit the 
strains on lenders.  Mortgage rates had fallen after ac-
tion on the GSEs, inventories of houses for sale had 
fallen, and reports from contacts in some parts of the 

Minutes of the Meeting of September 16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



 

nation suggested a possible bottoming of the housing 
sector might not be far off, although the differences in 
the prospects for housing across states and regions 
seemed to be large.  All in all, the contraction in the 
housing sector and the adverse implications for the 
performance of mortgage-related financial assets con-
tinued to represent a drag on economic performance. 

Recent readings on consumer spending had been weak 
despite the tax rebates, which were mostly paid out by 
mid-July; these indicators suggested that consumption 
may remain soft as the effects of the stimulus fade over 
the near term.  Falling real estate prices were likely to 
continue to reduce household wealth, and the eroding 
quality of consumer loans had the potential to lead to a 
further tightening of credit conditions.  Many partici-
pants worried that the deterioration in labor market 
conditions over the summer would damp the growth of 
income and depress consumer confidence, further 
holding back consumption. 

Business spending had held up well over the summer, 
and inventories appeared to be well managed.  How-
ever, reports from business contacts suggested that new 
commercial real estate projects were difficult to finance.  
With credit conditions generally tight and economic 
prospects relatively uncertain, investment spending was 
likely to be on the soft side going forward. 

Foreign economic growth had slowed in recent months 
and the dollar had risen broadly; both of these devel-
opments suggested that the contributions to U.S. GDP 
growth from net exports would likely be less strong 
than it had been of late.  Some participants noted that 
financial strains were increasing in many foreign coun-
tries.  However, a beneficial side effect of the global 
slowdown was the falling prices of oil and other com-
modities, which would help to bolster real incomes of 
U.S. households. 

Participants generally were somewhat more confident 
about the outlook for some moderation in inflation 
over the forecast horizon.  Recent substantial declines 
in the prices of oil and other commodities should help 
to contain broader price pressures in coming quarters.  
In addition, the effects of the stronger dollar on import 
prices along with increased economic slack would tend 
to damp inflation.  Various measures of inflation ex-
pectations had declined since the last meeting, and 
nominal wage increases had continued to be moderate.  
Indeed, with solid growth in productivity, unit labor 
costs had been well contained.  Still, reports from busi-
ness contacts suggested that firms were continuing to 
attempt to pass through to their customers previous 

increases in the costs of energy and other raw materials 
and would resist reversing previous price increases.  
Participants noted that recent readings on core and 
headline inflation had been elevated, and they ex-
pressed concern that high inflation might become em-
bedded in expectations and retain considerable mo-
mentum. 

Members agreed that keeping the federal funds rate 
unchanged at this meeting was appropriate.  The cur-
rent low real federal funds rate appeared necessary to 
provide adequate counterweight to the restraining ef-
fects of tight credit conditions and of continued de-
clines in the housing market on spending and output.  
Committee members generally saw the current stance 
of monetary policy as consistent with a gradual 
strengthening of economic growth beginning next year, 
although they recognized that recent financial devel-
opments had boosted the downside risks to the eco-
nomic outlook.  Inflation risks appeared to have dimin-
ished in response to the declines in the prices of energy 
and other commodities, the recent strengthening of the 
dollar, and the outlook for somewhat greater economic 
slack, and Committee members were a bit more opti-
mistic that inflation would moderate in coming quar-
ters.  However, the possibility that core inflation would 
not moderate as anticipated was still a significant con-
cern.  With substantial downside risks to growth and 
persisting upside risks to inflation, members judged 
that leaving the federal funds rate unchanged at this 
time suitably balanced the risks to the outlook.  Some 
members emphasized that if intensifying financial 
strains led to a significant worsening of the growth out-
look, a policy response could be required; however, 
such a response was not called for at this meeting.  In-
deed, it was noted that, with elevated inflation still a 
concern and growth expected to pick up next year if 
financial strains diminish, the Committee should also 
remain prepared to reverse the policy easing put in 
place over the past year in a timely fashion. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

with maintaining the federal funds rate at an av-
erage of around 2 percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to keep its target for the federal funds rate 
at 2 percent.  

Strains in financial markets have increased sig-
nificantly and labor markets have weakened fur-
ther.  Economic growth appears to have slowed 
recently, partly reflecting a softening of house-
hold spending.  Tight credit conditions, the on-
going housing contraction, and some slowing in 
export growth are likely to weigh on economic 
growth over the next few quarters.  Over time, 
the substantial easing of monetary policy, com-
bined with ongoing measures to foster market 
liquidity, should help to promote moderate eco-
nomic growth. 

Inflation has been high, spurred by the earlier 
increases in the prices of energy and some other 
commodities.  The Committee expects inflation 
to moderate later this year and next year, but the 
inflation outlook remains highly uncertain. 

The downside risks to growth and the upside 
risks to inflation are both of significant concern 
to the Committee.  The Committee will monitor  

economic and financial developments carefully 
and will act as needed to promote sustainable 
economic growth and price stability.” 

Votes for this action:  Mr. Bernanke, Mses. Cumming 
and Duke, Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Kroszner, Ms. 
Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  None. 

Ms. Cumming voted as the alternate for Mr. Geithner. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, October 28-29, 
2008. 

The meeting adjourned at 12:30 p.m. 

 

Notation Vote 

By notation vote completed on August 25, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on August 5, 2008. 

 

 

 

_____________________________ 

Brian F. Madigan 
Secretary 

 

Minutes of the Meeting of September 16, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7




