











































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 24 and August 5, 2008


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
August 5, 2008

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, August 5, 2008 at 8:30 a.m.  
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Kroszner 
Mr. Mishkin 
Ms. Pianalto  
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern 
Mr. Warsh 
 
Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. 

Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
 
Messrs. Connors, English, Kamin, Sniderman, and 

Wilcox, Associate Economists 
 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 

Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 
Board Members, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Ms. Liang, Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, As-

sociate Directors, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Levin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Wei, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston 

 
Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presi-

dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and 
San Francisco, respectively  

 
Messrs. Altig, Hakkio, Rasche, and Sullivan, Senior 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of At-
lanta, Kansas City, St. Louis, and Chicago, re-
spectively 

 
Messrs. Danzig and Duca, Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, re-
spectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 
 

Mr. Sill, Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia 

 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Mr. Del Negro, Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

 
  

The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange 
markets.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
riod since the previous meeting.  The Manager also 
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting.  By unani-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. 

The information reviewed at the August meeting indi-
cated that the economy expanded at a moderate pace in 
the second quarter, but recent financial market devel-
opments highlighted some of the stresses that the 
economy faced going forward.  Both consumer and 
business spending recorded gains in the second quarter, 
and net exports contributed importantly to the rise in 
real gross domestic product (GDP).  However, residen-
tial construction continued to fall sharply, the labor 
market weakened further, and industrial production 
declined.  Core consumer price inflation remained rela-
tively stable, while headline inflation was elevated as a 
result of large increases in food and energy prices. 

Labor demand continued to contract in July.  Private 
nonfarm payroll employment fell in July at a pace only 
a bit less than the average monthly rate during the first 
six months of the year.  By industry, the pattern of job 
losses was roughly similar to those earlier in the year, 
although July’s report showed a smaller decline in con-
struction than earlier. Nonbusiness services, which in-
clude health and education, remained the only notable 
source of net additions to employment.  Both the aver-
age workweek and aggregate hours edged down in July.  
The unemployment rate rose in July and was about 1 
percentage point above its level of a year earlier, while 
the labor force participation rate was about unchanged.  

Industrial production declined in the second quarter 
after having been flat over the previous two quarters.  
Motor vehicle assemblies tumbled in the second quar-
ter because of soft demand and the effects of strikes.  
Production of high-tech equipment continued to ex-
pand at a moderate pace; however, the available indica-
tors of high-tech manufacturing activity pointed to 
slower production in the current quarter.  The output 
of other manufacturing industries contracted, on bal-
ance, in the second quarter, and indicators of near-term 
production generally pointed to further declines, in-
cluding a sizable retrenchment in the scheduled pro-

duction of motor vehicles.  The factory utilization rate 
held steady in June at a rate below its long-run average 
but was still well above its low rate from 2001 through 
2002. 

Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 
modestly in the second quarter after posting weak gains 
in the previous two quarters.  However, real outlays for 
goods other than motor vehicles dropped noticeably in 
June after three months of robust gains. Sales of motor 
vehicles, which had begun to weaken earlier in the year, 
fell sharply in June and again in July.  Tax rebates pro-
vided a notable, albeit temporary boost to income since 
the end of April, but real disposable income excluding 
rebates was essentially flat in the second quarter.  The 
ratio of wealth to income likely declined again in the 
second quarter, as equity prices declined, on balance, 
and house prices continued to fall.  Consumer senti-
ment rose a bit in July but remained at a depressed 
level. 

Residential construction activity continued to descend 
rapidly but at a somewhat slower pace than during the 
second half of last year.  Single-family housing starts 
fell further in June, leaving the pace of construction in 
this sector well below its December reading.  Starts of 
multifamily homes jumped in June to a level well above 
the range of readings seen over the past two years.  
However, available information suggested that this in-
crease could be traced to more-stringent building codes 
that took effect in New York City on July 1, which ap-
parently led developers to move up some planned 
apartment projects.  Even though cuts in new construc-
tion continued to trim the level of new home invento-
ries, the months’ supply of new homes remained quite 
high because of the ongoing reductions in the demand 
for new houses.  Sales of existing single-family homes 
fell in June.  Tight conditions in the mortgage credit 
markets continued to restrain housing demand, particu-
larly for borrowers seeking nonconforming mortgages.  
House prices remained on a downward trajectory. 

In the business sector, real spending on equipment and 
software declined in the second quarter as outlays on 
transportation equipment dropped sharply.  Spending 
on computers and software rose at a moderate rate in 
the second quarter, while outlays on other equipment 
improved a bit last quarter after having declined in the 
preceding two quarters.  Data through June continued 
to show a robust increase in nonresidential construc-
tion activity.  However, vacancy rates for commercial 
properties ticked up in the first quarter, and the archi-
tectural billings index registered a string of weak read-
ings from February to June. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Real nonfarm inventories excluding motor vehicles fell 
sharply in the second quarter.  The ratio of book-value 
inventories to sales (excluding motor vehicles) ticked 
down again in May.  

The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May, as 
a large increase in exports of goods and services more 
than offset a moderate increase in imports.  Most major 
categories of non-oil imports rose in May; imports of 
consumer goods increased rapidly.  In contrast, the 
value of petroleum imports fell back despite higher 
prices, and imports of automotive products also fell.  
The increase in exports was supported by strong ex-
ports of industrial supplies, particularly petroleum 
products, and services. 

Across the advanced foreign economies, information 
received since the last meeting pointed to subdued 
growth in the second quarter and increasing inflation 
pressures.  Weak second-quarter data on industrial pro-
duction and sentiment in the euro area as well as on 
consumer expenditures and exports in Japan suggested 
that the first-quarter strength in output growth was not 
sustained.  Conditions worsened considerably in the 
United Kingdom, with a deepening slump in the hous-
ing sector.  In all the major advanced foreign econo-
mies, rising food and fuel prices continued to drive 
overall inflation to recent highs, but core measures of 
inflation generally rose only modestly.  Recent indica-
tors for emerging market economies pointed to some 
slowing of growth in the second quarter.  Real GDP 
growth in China moderated but remained strong.  In-
coming data suggested further slowing elsewhere in 
emerging Asia, and second-quarter activity appeared to 
have remained sluggish in Mexico.  Headline inflation 
rose further in much of the developing world, largely 
owing to higher food and energy prices, and several 
countries continued to face upward pressure on core 
inflation as well. 

Headline consumer price inflation in the United States 
stepped up in recent months, largely as a result of siz-
able increases in food and energy prices.  Excluding 
these categories, core consumer price inflation was ele-
vated in June but, on balance, was running this year at 
about the same rate as last year.  Some survey-based 
measures of year-ahead inflation expectations moved 
up sharply in recent months; longer-term inflation ex-
pectations were little changed recently but remained 
above their levels at the end of 2007.  Excluding food 
and energy, sharp increases in the prices of products 
and services at earlier stages of processing continued to 
put upward pressures on business costs and consumer 
prices.  Unit labor costs apparently continued to in-
crease at a restrained pace during the second quarter, 

reflecting only moderate gains in worker compensation 
and relatively strong productivity performance, with 
little sign of higher overall inflation passing through to 
higher worker compensation. 

At its June 24-25 meeting, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) kept its target for the federal 
funds rate at 2 percent.  The Committee’s statement 
noted that recent information indicated that overall 
economic activity continued to expand, partly because 
of some firming in household spending.  However, 
labor markets softened further and financial markets 
remained under considerable stress.  Tight credit condi-
tions, the ongoing housing contraction, and the rise in 
energy prices were likely to weigh on economic growth 
over the next few quarters.  The Committee expected 
inflation to moderate later this year and next.  How-
ever, in light of the continued increases in the prices of 
energy and some other commodities and the elevated 
state of some indicators of inflation expectations, un-
certainty about the inflation outlook remained high.  
The Committee stated that the substantial easing of 
monetary policy to date, combined with ongoing meas-
ures to foster market liquidity, should help promote 
moderate growth over time.  Although downside risks 
to growth remained, they appeared to have diminished 
somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation and infla-
tion expectations increased.  The Committee indicated 
that it would continue to monitor economic and finan-
cial developments and would act as needed to promote 
sustainable economic growth and price stability. 

The market’s expected path of monetary policy moved 
down following the announcement of the Committee’s 
decision at its June meeting to leave the target federal 
funds rate unchanged.  Although the decision was 
largely anticipated, the policy statement was reportedly 
viewed by investors as placing more emphasis on the 
downside risks to growth than they had anticipated.  
Subsequently, the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the 
Congress and the accompanying testimony also led in-
vestors to mark down the expected path for the federal 
funds rate, as did intensifying concerns about the 
health of financial institutions and the outlook for the 
housing-related government-sponsored enterprises 
(GSEs).  Consistent with the revision in policy expecta-
tions, yields on short- and medium-term nominal 
Treasury coupon securities fell over the intermeeting 
period.  Yields on long-term Treasury securities de-
clined less than those on shorter-term instruments, and 
the yield curve steepened.  Measures of shorter-horizon 
inflation compensation derived from yields on infla-
tion-indexed Treasury securities dropped over the in-
termeeting period as energy prices reversed some of 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 5, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



their earlier rise, while measures of longer-term infla-
tion compensation rose slightly. 

Functioning in the interbank funding markets remained 
strained over the intermeeting period.  Spreads of the 
London interbank offered rate, or Libor, over compa-
rable-maturity overnight index swap rates were un-
changed to slightly higher, and spreads on lower-rated 
nonfinancial and asset-backed commercial paper re-
mained well above historical norms.  Depository insti-
tutions’ use of both overnight and term primary credit 
borrowing continued to be strong during the intermeet-
ing period, peaking in late June amid quarter-end pres-
sures.  However, new extensions of credit through the 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) were negligible 
during July.  On July 30, the Board of Governors and 
the FOMC announced enhancements to existing liquid-
ity facilities, including extension of the PDCF and the 
Term Securities Lending Facility through January 30, 
2009.  Conditions in the market for Treasury repur-
chase agreements were fairly stable, although there was 
some deterioration of conditions in the market for 
agency collateral. 

In longer-term credit markets, yields on both invest-
ment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds rose over 
the intermeeting period even though comparable-
maturity Treasury yields declined slightly, which re-
sulted in a widening of already elevated spreads.  Cor-
porate bond issuance slowed further, as did lending by 
banks to businesses and households, and issuance of 
leveraged loans remained very weak.  Broad equity 
price indexes were volatile and declined modestly, on 
net, between the June and August FOMC meetings.  
Stock prices of financial firms fell sharply in mid-July 
but subsequently recouped most of those losses.  En-
ergy sector stocks significantly underperformed the 
broad indexes owing to recent declines in oil prices. 

Uncertainties about the financial condition of Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac added to market worries about 
the potential consequences of financial strains for the 
broader economy over the intermeeting period.  On 
July 13, the Treasury Department proposed a plan to 
support the liquidity and solvency of the two GSEs, 
and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System announced that the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York was authorized to lend to the two institu-
tions if necessary, reducing somewhat market concerns 
about the GSEs.  Concerns eased further as Congress 
passed legislation, which was subsequently signed by 
the President, authorizing the Treasury to provide li-
quidity and capital to the GSEs.  Over the intermeeting 
period, spreads of rates on conforming residential 
mortgages over those on comparable-maturity Treasury 

securities moved higher.  Offer rates on 30-year jumbo 
mortgages also rose, and credit for nonconforming 
mortgages remained difficult to obtain.  In the secon-
dary market, issuance of mortgage-backed securities by 
GSEs appeared to have slowed in July from its strong 
second-quarter pace, while issuance of securities 
backed by nonconforming loans and of commercial 
mortgage-backed securities remained nil. 

Pressures in the money markets of many major foreign 
economies eased slightly over the intermeeting period.  
Yields on sovereign debt in the advanced foreign 
economies fell, mainly because of declines in inflation 
compensation.  The trade-weighted index of the dollar 
against the currencies of major trading partners rose a 
bit on net. 

M2 expanded at a moderate pace in July, reversing the 
deceleration in May and June.  The expansion was 
broad based, reflecting an acceleration in liquid depos-
its as well as renewed inflows to retail money market 
mutual funds and small time deposits. 

In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff 
marked down its forecast of real GDP growth in the 
second half of 2008 and in 2009.  Although the in-
crease in real GDP in the second quarter was a bit 
faster than anticipated at the time of the June meeting, 
the labor market continued to weaken significantly, 
financial conditions remained unfavorable, consumer 
and business confidence was downbeat, and manufac-
turing activity was contracting.  All told, the staff con-
tinued to expect that real GDP would rise at less than 
its potential rate through the first half of next year.  
Nonetheless, real GDP growth was anticipated to re-
turn to its potential rate in the second half of 2009 as 
housing activity leveled out and financial conditions 
became less restrictive.  Core PCE price inflation was 
expected to pick up somewhat in the second half of 
this year, mostly as a result of the upward pressures 
from this year’s run-ups in prices of energy and im-
ports.  Core inflation was then expected to edge down 
in 2009 as the impetus from prior increases in the 
prices of imports, energy, and other commodities 
abated and the margin of slack in resource use widened. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, many FOMC participants noted that recent de-
velopments suggested that economic activity was likely 
to remain damped for several quarters.  Although eco-
nomic growth in the second quarter had apparently 
been boosted by fiscal stimulus, resilience in consump-
tion spending even before tax rebates were distributed, 
and  robust gains in exports, recent indicators pointed 
to a near-term deceleration in household spending and 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



to softer export demand.  Moreover, increasing con-
cerns about financial institutions had contributed to a 
widening of some risk spreads and a further tightening 
of credit to households and businesses.  Growth in 
overall economic activity was generally expected to be 
weak during the remainder of 2008 before recovering 
modestly next year, and nearly all meeting participants 
saw continuing downside risks to growth.  Recent read-
ings on inflation had been high, but growth in unit la-
bor costs had remained subdued and commodity prices 
had declined of late.  Accordingly, most participants 
anticipated that inflation would moderate in coming 
quarters.  However, participants also expressed signifi-
cant concerns about the upside risks to inflation, par-
ticularly the risk that longer-term inflation expectations 
could become unmoored.  

Many participants referred to the adverse financial sec-
tor developments that had occurred over the intermeet-
ing period.  Heightened investor apprehension about 
the viability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had eased 
following legislative action, but pressures on these 
firms continued.  Reflecting these strains, interest rates 
on residential mortgages had moved upward, a devel-
opment that was seen as potentially exacerbating the 
contraction in the housing sector.  Commercial banks 
had reported that terms and standards had been tight-
ened on nearly all categories of loans.  Declining mort-
gage asset values increased capital pressures on lenders 
exposed to real estate markets.  While some financial 
institutions had strengthened their balance sheets with 
new capital issues, raising new capital had become in-
creasingly difficult.  Moreover, broad equity price in-
dexes had declined and borrowing costs for nonfinan-
cial firms had increased, including a recent rise in cor-
porate bond yields across most risk categories.  Many 
participants believed that these developments were 
likely to restrain aggregate demand and economic 
growth.  Others, however, thought that the extent of 
such adverse effects was likely to be limited, noting that 
bank lending had continued to grow at a moderate pace 
and that consumption and business capital spending 
had increased in the second quarter despite the tighten-
ing of credit terms. 

While consumer spending had been bolstered tempo-
rarily by the effects of the tax rebates, retail sales had 
weakened during late spring and auto sales had 
dropped sharply in both June and July.  The unem-
ployment rate jumped during the intermeeting period, 
and participants generally anticipated that payroll em-
ployment would decline further in coming months.  
For example, automotive parts suppliers in one District 
had reported plans for laying off workers, idling pro-

duction, and closing several plants.  Lower equity prices 
and the ongoing deterioration in house prices had re-
duced household wealth significantly, while real in-
comes had been diminished by earlier increases in the 
prices of food and energy.  All of these factors—in 
conjunction with tightened access to auto loans, home 
equity lines of credit, and other consumer loans—were 
viewed as pointing towards weak growth in personal 
consumption expenditures during the second half of 
2008. 

The weaker outlook for consumer demand, along with 
tighter credit conditions for businesses, was expected 
to weigh on business spending going forward.  More-
over, some signs of weakness in the commercial real 
estate sector were seen as suggesting a slower pace of 
investment in nonresidential structures over coming 
quarters, although that deceleration might be gradual 
due to the lags in the planning and execution of such 
projects.  However, the elevated level of energy prices 
was boosting investment in the oil-producing industry. 

Growth in exports had provided substantial impetus to 
overall demand in the second quarter.  However, many 
participants observed that decelerating activity in some 
foreign economies would tend to dampen export gains 
going forward.  Indeed, recent indications of a slowing 
global economy may have contributed to the marked 
declines in the prices of oil and some other commodi-
ties over the intermeeting period. 

Participants pointed to potential interactions between 
financial stresses and the housing market contraction as 
the primary source of continuing downside risks to 
growth.  Many participants noted that the financial sys-
tem remained fragile, with some expressing continued 
concern about the possibility of an adverse feedback 
loop in which tighter conditions in the mortgage mar-
ket would contribute to further declines in the housing 
sector and additional losses for lenders, leading to fur-
ther tightening of lending terms and standards.  In con-
trast, several other participants suggested that risks to 
the financial system had receded, partly as a result of 
the implementation by the Federal Reserve of special 
liquidity facilities, and that prevailing credit conditions 
were broadly consistent with the typical patterns ob-
served during periods of weak growth or recession. 

Headline inflation was generally expected to moderate 
in coming quarters, reflecting importantly an antici-
pated leveling-out of prices for energy and other com-
modities.  Although measures of core inflation might 
well edge up later this year, given the pass-through to 
final goods prices of earlier increases in the prices of 
energy and other inputs, most participants anticipated 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 5, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



that core inflation would edge back down during 2009.  
Some participants reported that firms were increasingly 
using various pricing strategies—such as escalation 
clauses or the imposition of fuel surcharges—to pass 
higher costs on to their customers, who were appar-
ently becoming less resistant to such price adjustments.  
However, one participant mentioned the difficult pric-
ing decisions of manufacturers who face a combination 
of elevated input costs along with weakening demand 
for their products.  And a number of participants noted 
that the outlook for slack in resource utilization should 
tend to limit the extent of pass-through, contain the 
degree of inflation spillover to goods and services 
without high commodity content, and reinforce the 
anticipated moderation in inflation. 

Participants expressed significant concerns about the 
upside risks to inflation, especially the risk that persis-
tently high headline inflation could result in an un-
mooring of long-run inflation expectations.  Some 
viewed the upside risks to inflation as having dimin-
ished modestly over the intermeeting period, mainly as 
a result of the drop in the prices of oil and some other 
commodities as well as the greater likelihood of persis-
tent economic slack.  However, others viewed these 
risks as having increased, particularly in light of contin-
ued elevated readings on headline inflation, the low 
level of the real federal funds rate, anecdotal informa-
tion suggesting that firms were having more success in 
passing higher costs on to their customers, and some 
signs of an upward drift over recent months in inves-
tors’ expectations and uncertainty regarding inflation 
over the longer run; moreover, the recent decline in 
energy prices might well be reversed in coming months.  
A number of participants worried about the possibility 
that core inflation might fail to moderate next year 
unless the stance of monetary policy was tightened 
sooner than currently anticipated by financial markets. 

In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for 
the intermeeting period, members agreed that labor 
markets had softened further, that financial markets 
remained under considerable stress, and that these fac-
tors—in conjunction with still-elevated energy prices 
and the ongoing housing contraction—would likely 
weigh on economic growth in coming quarters.  In ad-
dition, members saw continuing downside risks to this 
outlook, particularly reflecting possible further deterio-
ration in financial conditions.  Members generally an-
ticipated that inflation would moderate; however, they 
emphasized the risks to the inflation outlook posed by 
persistent high readings on headline inflation and a 
possible unmooring of inflation expectations.  Against 
this backdrop, nearly all members judged that leaving 

the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting was 
appropriate and would most effectively promote pro-
gress toward the Committee’s dual objectives of maxi-
mum employment and price stability.  Most members 
did not see the current stance of policy as particularly 
accommodative, given that many households and busi-
nesses were facing elevated borrowing costs and re-
duced credit availability due to the effects of financial 
market strains as well as macroeconomic risks.  Al-
though members generally anticipated that the next 
policy move would likely be a tightening, the timing 
and extent of any change in policy stance would de-
pend on evolving economic and financial developments 
and the implications for the outlook for economic 
growth and inflation. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 
 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run objec-
tives, the Committee in the immediate future 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with maintaining the federal funds rate at an av-
erage of around 2 percent.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to keep its target for the federal funds rate 
at 2 percent.  

Economic activity expanded in the second quar-
ter, partly reflecting growth in consumer spend-
ing and exports.  However, labor markets have 
softened further and financial markets remain 
under considerable stress.  Tight credit condi-
tions, the ongoing housing contraction, and ele-
vated energy prices are likely to weigh on eco-
nomic growth over the next few quarters.  Over 
time, the substantial easing of monetary policy, 
combined with ongoing measures to foster mar-
ket liquidity, should help to promote moderate 
economic growth. 

Inflation has been high, spurred by the earlier 
increases in the prices of energy and some other 
commodities, and some indicators of inflation 
expectations have been elevated.  The Commit-

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



tee expects inflation to moderate later this year 
and next year, but the inflation outlook remains 
highly uncertain. 

Although downside risks to growth remain, the 
upside risks to inflation are also of significant 
concern to the Committee.  The Committee will 
continue to monitor economic and financial de-
velopments and will act as needed to promote 
sustainable economic growth and price stability.” 

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Geith-
ner, Ms. Duke, Messrs. Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, 
Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. 

Votes against this action:  Mr. Fisher. 

Mr. Fisher dissented because he favored an increase in 
the target federal funds rate to help restrain inflation 
and inflation expectations, which were at risk of drift-
ing higher.  While the financial system remained fragile 
and economic growth was sluggish and could weaken 
further, he saw a greater risk to the economy from up-
ward pressures on inflation.  In his view, businesses 
had become more inclined to raise prices to pass on the 
higher costs of imported goods and higher energy 
costs, the latter of which were well above their levels of 
late 2007.  Accordingly, he supported a policy tighten-
ing at this meeting. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, September 16, 2008. 

The meeting adjourned at 1:50 p.m. 

Conference Call 
On July 24, 2008, the Federal Open Market Committee 
met in a joint session with the Board of Governors to 
consider several proposals to extend or enhance Fed-
eral Reserve System liquidity facilities.  In light of con-
tinued significant stresses in financial markets and the 
experience to date with the Term Auction Facility 
(TAF), the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), 
and the Primary Dealer Lending Facility (PDCF), the 
staff proposed modifications to these programs.  The 
modifications included auctioning options on up to an 
additional $50 billion of TSLF loans and lengthening 
the term to maturity of all loans made under the TAF 
to 84 days.  Contingent upon Board approval of the 
change to TAF loans, the Committee was asked to 
consider an expansion of the existing currency swap 
arrangement with the European Central Bank to facili-
tate a similar change in the term of dollar credits auc-
tioned by the ECB.  Finally, policymakers were asked 
to vote on extending the availability of the TSLF and 

PDCF past the year-end, a topic that had been dis-
cussed on a preliminary basis at the joint 
Board/FOMC meeting on June 25, 2008. 

In the discussion, meeting participants exchanged views 
on issues entailed in administering the TAF and term 
primary discount window credit.  Issues regarding 
credit risk and collateral requirements received particu-
lar attention. 

Some participants raised questions about the net bene-
fit of approving and announcing the proposed changes 
at this time, asking, for example, whether such an an-
nouncement could suggest that the Federal Reserve 
saw financial markets as more fragile than expected or 
whether adjustments to the liquidity facilities could 
cause market analysts to infer that the System intended 
to keep the facilities in place permanently.  Most par-
ticipants expressed general support for the proposals as 
improving the System’s tools for supporting market 
liquidity.  However, there was considerable sentiment 
for altering the TAF proposal to allow for both 28- and 
84-day credits, and the Chairman directed the staff to 
confer, to consult further with policymakers, and to 
revise the proposal accordingly for notation votes in 
the near future by the Board and the FOMC. 

At this meeting, the Committee unanimously approved 
the following resolution: 

TSLF Extension Authorization  
The FOMC extends until January 30, 2009, its 
authorizations for the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to engage in transactions with pri-
mary dealers through the Term Securities Lend-
ing Facility, subject to the same collateral, inter-
est rate and other conditions previously estab-
lished by the Committee. 

With Mr. Plosser dissenting, the Committee voted to 
approve the resolution below.  Mr. Plosser dissented 
because he viewed the net benefit of the TSLF options 
as being insufficient to justify adding them to the sup-
port already being provided to market liquidity. 

TSLF Options Authorization 
In addition to the current authorizations granted 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to 
engage in term securities lending transactions, 
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to offer 
options on up to $50 billion in additional draws 
on the Facility, subject to the other terms and 
conditions previously established for the Facility. 

Mr. Lockhart voted as alternate member at this meet-
ing. 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 5, 2008                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



Notation Votes 
By notation vote completed on July 14, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on June 24-25, 2008. 

By notation vote completed on July 29, 2008, the 
Committee unanimously approved the following reso-
lution:   

Swap Authorization 
The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to increase 
the amount available from the System Open 
Market Account under the existing reciprocal 
currency arrangement ("swap" arrangement) 
with  the European Central Bank  to  an  amount  

not to exceed $55 billion. Within that aggregate 
limit, draws of up to $25 billion are hereby au-
thorized. The swap arrangement continues to be 
authorized through January 30, 2009, unless ex-
tended by the Federal Open Market Committee. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




