









































FOMC Minutes, August 11-12, 2009


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
August 11-12, 2009 

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 11, 
2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, Au-
gust 12, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.   
 
PRESENT: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia-

nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter,¹ Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Slifman, Sullivan, 

and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
 
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. George, Acting Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

Mr. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-
retary, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 

the Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Liang, Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Sen-

ior Associate Directors, Division of Research 
and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Messrs. Leahy and Nelson,¹ Associate Directors, 

Divisions of International Finance and Mone-
tary Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Carpenter, Deputy Associate Director, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Wei, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Beattie,¹ Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Sniderman, Executive Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
 
 
 

¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Mr. McAndrews,¹ Ms. McLaughlin, Messrs. Rude-
busch, Sellon, Tootell, and Waller, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New 
York, New York, San Francisco, Kansas City, 
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 

 
Messrs. Burke, Dotsey, Koenig, and Pesenti, Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New 
York, Philadelphia, Dallas, and New York, re-
spectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 
 
¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 
 
 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets.  The Manager also reported on 
System open market operations in Treasury securities, 
agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) since the Committee’s June 23-24 meeting.  By 
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified those transac-
tions.  There were no open market operations in for-
eign currencies for the System’s account during the 
intermeeting period.  The Federal Reserve’s total assets 
were about unchanged, on balance, since the Commit-
tee met in June, remaining at approximately $2 trillion 
as the System’s purchases of securities were essentially 
matched by a further decline in usage of the System’s 
credit and liquidity facilities.   

Meeting participants again discussed the merits of in-
cluding agency MBS backed by adjustable-rate mort-
gages (ARMs) in the Committee’s MBS purchase pro-
gram:  Some thought it would be useful to include 
agency ARM MBS, noting that doing so could reduce 
the unusually large spreads between ARM rates and 
yields on similar-duration Treasury securities—spreads 
that were far larger than the comparable spreads on 
fixed-rate mortgages; others saw little potential benefit, 
given the small stock and limited issuance of ARM 
MBS, and were hesitant to involve the Federal Reserve 
in another market segment.  The Committee made no 
decision on purchasing ARM MBS at this meeting.  
Participants also discussed the merits of progressively 
reducing the pace at which the Federal Reserve buys 

Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS prior 
to the end of the asset purchase programs.  They gen-
erally were of the view that gradually slowing the pace 
of the Committee’s purchases of $300 billion of Treas-
ury securities and extending their completion to the 
end of October could help promote a smooth transi-
tion in markets.  A number of participants noted that a 
similar tapering of agency debt and MBS purchases 
could be helpful in the future as those programs ap-
proach completion.  The Committee made no decisions 
on tapering those purchases at this meeting. 

The staff presented an update on the continuing devel-
opment of several tools that could help support a 
smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation at the 
appropriate time.  These measures include executing 
reverse repurchase agreements on a large scale, poten-
tially with counterparties other than the primary deal-
ers; implementing a term deposit facility that would be 
available to depository institutions in order to reduce 
the supply of excess reserves; and taking steps to tight-
en the link between the interest rate paid on reserve 
balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks and the 
federal funds rate.  Several participants noted the need 
to continue refining the Committee’s strategy for an 
eventual withdrawal of policy accommodation. The 
staff also updated the Committee on developments in 
the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
(TALF), summarized the pros and cons of expanding 
the range of collateral eligible for TALF loans, and rec-
ommended extending the final date for making new 
TALF loans into 2010.  Participants generally sup-
ported the extension of TALF into 2010 but were 
skeptical about expanding the range of assets at this 
time. 

Secretary’s note:  As announced on August 
17, 2009, the Board of Governors subse-
quently approved an extension of the TALF 
while holding in abeyance any further expan-
sion in the types of collateral eligible for the 
TALF. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the August 11-12 meeting 
suggested that overall economic activity was stabilizing 
after a contraction in real gross domestic product 
(GDP) during 2008 and early 2009 that the Bureau of 
Economic Analysis recently reported to have been 
greater than it had previously estimated.  Employment 
continued to move lower through July, but the pace of 
job losses had slowed noticeably in recent months.  A 
sizable pickup in motor vehicle production appeared to 
be under way.  Housing activity apparently was begin-

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ning to turn up.  Consumer spending dropped only a 
little further in the first half of this year, on balance, 
after falling sharply in the second half of last year.  The 
decline in equipment and software (E&S) investment 
seemed to be moderating, although the incoming data 
did not point to an imminent recovery.  The sharp cuts 
in production this year reduced inventory stocks signif-
icantly, though they remained high relative to the level 
of sales.  A jump in gasoline prices pushed up overall 
consumer price inflation in June, but core consumer 
price inflation remained relatively stable in recent 
months.  

Job losses continued to abate in July, and aggregate 
hours of production and nonsupervisory workers were 
unchanged.  The step-up in motor vehicle assemblies 
boosted employment in that industry; job losses de-
creased in a number of other manufacturing industries, 
and factory workweeks generally rose.  Employment 
declines in business and financial services in July were 
also smaller than those in recent months.  Payrolls in 
nonbusiness services posted their third monthly gain, 
supported by the continued uptrend in health and edu-
cation and a small gain in the leisure and hospitality 
industry.  However, job losses in the construction in-
dustry continued at about the recent rate.  In the 
household survey, the unemployment rate edged down 
in July to 9.4 percent, while the labor force participa-
tion rate fell back to its March level.  Other indicators 
also suggested a reduced pace of deterioration in labor 
demand.  Both initial claims for unemployment insur-
ance and insured unemployment moved down since 
June.  However, with labor markets still quite slack, 
year-over-year growth in average hourly earnings of 
production and nonsupervisory workers slowed further 
in July.   

The contraction in industrial production slowed mark-
edly in the second quarter, although the rate of decline 
remained rapid and the factory utilization rate recorded 
a new low in June.  The moderation in the pace of de-
cline in industrial production in the second quarter was 
widespread across industries and major market groups.  
Available indicators suggested that industrial produc-
tion increased noticeably in July, led by motor vehicle 
assemblies; manufacturing output excluding motor ve-
hicles likely also rose in July.   

Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) edged 
down in June after holding steady in May and declining 
in April.  Apart from a jump in motor vehicle purchas-
es, which were boosted appreciably by the govern-
ment’s “cash-for-clunkers” program, indicators of con-
sumer spending in July were mixed.  Most determinants 

of spending remained weak on balance.  In particular, 
the weak labor market continued to place significant 
strains on household income, and earlier declines in net 
worth were still holding back spending.  However, 
household net worth received a boost from the rise in 
equity prices since their low in March.  In addition, the 
July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank 
Lending Practices indicated that the fraction of banks 
tightening standards and terms for consumer credit had 
diminished further.  Moreover, measures of consumer 
sentiment, though they recently retraced a portion of 
their earlier gains, remained well above levels seen at 
the turn of the year. 

Data from the housing sector indicated that construc-
tion activity appeared to be emerging from its extended 
decline.  Single-family housing starts registered a sizable 
increase in June, and the number of starts stood well 
above the record low recorded in the first quarter of 
this year.  However, in the much smaller multifamily 
sector, starts continued to decline, on net, in 2009 after 
falling significantly in the second half of 2008 amid 
tight credit conditions and rapidly deteriorating demand 
fundamentals for apartment buildings.  The latest sales 
data suggested that demand for new houses may be 
strengthening after stabilizing in the early portion of 
this year.  Although sales remained quite modest, they 
were enough, given the very slow pace of production, 
to pare the overhang of unsold new single-family hous-
es:  In June, these inventories stood at about one-half 
of their peak in the summer of 2006, and the months’ 
supply of new homes was down considerably from its 
record high in January.  Sales of existing single-family 
houses, which were fairly flat early in the year, posted 
their third consecutive monthly increase in June, and 
pending home sales agreements through June suggested 
that resale activity would rise further in the months 
ahead.  Sales of existing homes had been supported for 
much of the year by heightened volumes of transac-
tions involving bank-owned and other distressed prop-
erties; the uptick in May and June, however, appeared 
to have been driven by an increase in transactions of 
non-distressed properties.  The apparent stabilization in 
housing demand seen in recent months was likely due, 
in part, to improvements in housing affordability 
stemming from low interest rates for conforming 
mortgages and lower house prices.  

Real investment in E&S continued to contract in the 
second quarter; however, the estimated rate of decline 
was substantially smaller than in the previous two quar-
ters.  Business outlays on motor vehicles leveled off in 
the second quarter after an extended period of steep 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 11-12, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



declines.  Real spending in the high-tech sector de-
clined, although real outlays for computing equipment 
posted their first gain in a year.  Outside of high-tech 
and transportation, real spending on equipment 
dropped again in the second quarter but at a slower 
pace than in the previous quarter.  Although the fun-
damental determinants of investment in E&S remained 
weak, conditions appeared less unfavorable, on balance, 
than earlier in the year.  In particular, the decline in 
business output was less pronounced in the second 
quarter than in prior quarters, and estimates of the user 
cost of capital fell back somewhat in the second quarter 
after spiking last year.  Other forward-looking indica-
tors generally improved, but they remained at levels 
consistent with a weak outlook for E&S investment.  
Corporate bond spreads over Treasury securities con-
tinued to ease, and monthly surveys of business condi-
tions and sentiment generally were less downbeat than 
earlier in the year.  In addition, the July Senior Loan 
Officer Opinion Survey reported that the net per-
centage of banks that had tightened standards and 
terms on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans re-
ceded somewhat, although the July National Federation 
of Independent Business survey showed that the share 
of small businesses reporting increased difficulty in 
obtaining credit remained high.  Conditions in the non-
residential construction sector generally remained quite 
poor, with spending in most major categories staying 
on a downward trajectory through June.  Vacancy rates 
continued to rise, property prices fell further, and, as 
indicated by the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur-
vey, financing for nonresidential construction projects 
became even tighter.   

In May, the U.S. international trade deficit narrowed to 
its lowest level since 1999, as exports increased mod-
erately and imports declined.  The increase in exports 
of goods and services was led by a climb in exports of 
industrial supplies, particularly of petroleum products, 
and reflected both higher prices and greater volumes.  
The value of imports of goods and services fell at a 
slower pace than in April.  Imports of petroleum prod-
ucts exhibited the largest decline, with the fall wholly 
reflecting lower volumes, as petroleum prices rose.  
Imports of services and automotive products moved 
down somewhat, while non-oil industrial supplies were 
largely unchanged.  Overall imports of consumer goods 
were also about unchanged, as a large decline in phar-
maceuticals offset increases in a number of other 
goods.  In contrast, imports of computers moved up 
strongly in May. 

Recent indicators of economic activity in the advanced 
foreign economies suggested that the pace of contrac-
tion in those countries moderated further.  Purchasing 
managers indexes continued to rebound but did not yet 
point to expansion for all countries.  Industrial produc-
tion, while remaining well below pre-crisis levels, 
moved up strongly in Japan and edged up in the euro 
area and in the United Kingdom.  Indicators of eco-
nomic sentiment also improved.  However, labor mar-
ket conditions continued to deteriorate, and credit 
standards remained generally tight.  In emerging market 
economies, recent data showed that economic activity 
surged across emerging Asia in the second quarter.  
Real GDP rebounded sharply in China and South Ko-
rea, and the preliminary estimate in Singapore indicated 
a substantial increase.  In China, policy stimulus lifted 
activity and thus helped boost China’s imports, primari-
ly from other countries in Asia.  Indicators for these 
other countries also pointed to a strong rebound in the 
second quarter.  Activity remained depressed in Mex-
ico, partly reflecting the adverse effect of a swine flu 
outbreak.  In contrast, activity in Brazil appeared to 
have begun to recover.   

In the United States, overall PCE prices rose in June 
following little change in each of the previous three 
months.  The increase largely reflected a sizable in-
crease in gasoline prices, which appeared to have 
caught up with earlier increases in crude oil prices.  The 
latest available survey data showed that gasoline prices 
flattened out, on net, in July.  Excluding food and 
energy, PCE prices moved up moderately in June.  For 
the second quarter as a whole, core inflation picked up 
from the pace in the first quarter, which had been re-
vised down because of smaller increases in the imputed 
prices of nonmarket services.  Median year-ahead infla-
tion expectations in the Reuters/University of Michi-
gan Survey of Consumers held relatively steady in July, 
as in recent months.  Longer-term inflation expecta-
tions were about the same as the average over 2008.  
The producer price index for core intermediate mate-
rials turned up in June following a string of monthly 
declines that likely reflected the pass-through of the 
large declines in spot prices of commodities in the 
second half of last year.  All measures of hourly com-
pensation and wages suggested that labor costs decel-
erated markedly this year in response to the considera-
ble deterioration in labor market conditions.   

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The decisions by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) at the June meeting to leave the target range 
for the federal funds rate unchanged and to maintain 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



the sizes of its large-scale asset purchase programs, 
along with the accompanying statement, were broadly 
in line with market expectations.  However, investors 
initially marked up their expected path for the federal 
funds rate following the release of the statement, as 
they apparently interpreted it as suggesting a more fa-
vorable assessment of prospects for economic growth 
than had been anticipated.  Subsequently, investors 
revised down the expected policy path after the June 
employment report and the Chairman’s semiannual 
monetary policy testimony.  These declines were more 
than offset by the favorable economic information re-
ceived toward the end of the intermeeting period, in-
cluding the stronger-than-expected July employment 
report.  On net, the market-implied path of the federal 
funds rate ended the period about the same as at the 
time of the June FOMC meeting.  Yields on nominal 
Treasury securities were also little changed, on balance, 
over the intermeeting period, though there were sizable 
intraday movements in response to macroeconomic 
data releases and Federal Reserve communications.  
Inflation compensation based on five-year Treasury 
inflation-protected securities (TIPS) declined, on net, 
over the intermeeting period, while five-year inflation 
compensation five years ahead rose somewhat.  Liquid-
ity in the TIPS market reportedly continued to be poor, 
making unclear the extent to which movements in 
TIPS inflation compensation reflected changes in in-
vestors’ expectations of future inflation.   

Functioning in short-term funding markets generally 
showed further improvement over the intermeeting 
period.  Consistent with reduced concerns about the 
financial condition of large banking institutions, Lon-
don interbank offered rates (Libor) continued to edge 
down.  Three- and six-month Libor-OIS (overnight 
index swap) spreads—while still somewhat elevated by 
historical standards—declined a bit further and stood at 
levels last recorded in early 2008.  Bid-asked spreads 
for most types of repurchase agreements edged down.  
Since June, spreads on A2/P2-rated commercial paper 
and AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper were lit-
tle changed, on net, remaining at the low ends of their 
ranges over the past two years.  Indicators of Treasury 
market functioning were little changed over the inter-
meeting period, and functioning continued to be 
somewhat impaired.  Bid-asked spreads held roughly 
steady, and trading volumes remained low.  The on-
the-run liquidity premium for the 10-year Treasury note 
was little changed at elevated levels, although it was 
well below its peak last fall.  

Broad stock price indexes rose, on net, over the inter-
meeting period, as investors responded to strong 
second-quarter earnings reports and indications that 
the economy may be stabilizing.  The spread between 
an estimate of the expected real equity return over the 
next 10 years for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the 
real 10-year Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equi-
ty risk premium—narrowed a bit more but remained 
high by recent historical standards.  Option-implied 
volatility on the S&P 500 index also dropped a bit fur-
ther.  Yields on BBB-rated and speculative-grade cor-
porate bonds declined over the intermeeting period.  
As a result, corporate bond spreads narrowed further 
and dropped below the previous peak levels reached in 
2002 following the 2001 recession.  Conditions in the 
leveraged loan market continued to improve as second-
ary-market prices rose further and bid-asked spreads 
narrowed.  

Investor sentiment toward the financial sector im-
proved further over the intermeeting period, boosted, 
in part, by better-than-expected second-quarter earn-
ings results at larger banking institutions.  Over the 
period, bank equity prices rose, and credit default swap 
spreads on financial firms declined.  Nonetheless, some 
investors commented that the positive upside surprises 
at large financial institutions were mostly related to in-
vestment banking and trading activities, which may not 
provide a stable source of earnings, and to mortgage 
refinancing activity, which may recede if longer-term 
rates rise.  Market participants also focused on the large 
consumer loan losses reported by many banks.  The 
financial condition of CIT Group, Inc., one of the larg-
est lenders to middle-market firms, worsened sharply 
over the period, but broader financial market condi-
tions appeared to be largely unaffected by this devel-
opment.  

The level of private domestic nonfinancial sector debt 
apparently declined again in the second quarter, as 
household debt was estimated to have dropped and 
nonfinancial business debt appeared to have been es-
sentially unchanged.  Gross issuance of speculative- 
and investment-grade bonds by nonfinancial corpora-
tions slowed in July from its outsized second-quarter 
pace. Issuance of institutional loans in the syndicated 
leveraged loan market reportedly remained extremely 
weak in July, while bank loans and commercial paper 
continued to run off, leaving net debt financing by 
nonfinancial corporations at around zero.  In contrast, 
the federal government issued debt at a rapid clip, and 
state and local government debt was estimated to have 
expanded moderately.  

Minutes of the Meeting of August 11-12, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



Commercial bank credit contracted further in June and 
July.  All major loan categories declined, apparently 
reflecting the combined effects of weaker demand for 
most types of loans, some substitution from bank loans 
to other funding sources, and an ongoing tightening of 
lending standards and terms.  Commercial and industri-
al lending dropped steeply amid subdued origination 
activity and broad-based paydowns of outstanding 
loans.  In the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, 
respondents indicated that the most important reasons 
for the decline in C&I loans in 2009 were weaker de-
mand from creditworthy borrowers and the deteriora-
tion in credit quality that had reduced the number of 
firms that respondents viewed as creditworthy.  The 
contraction in commercial real estate (CRE) lending 
accelerated.  Large fractions of respondents to the July 
survey again noted that they had tightened standards 
and that the demand for CRE loans had weakened fur-
ther.  

M2 was little changed, on net, in June and July.  Retail 
money market mutual funds and small time deposits 
dropped significantly in June and were estimated to 
have contracted again in July, likely reflecting the very 
low rates of interest on these assets and a continued 
reallocation of wealth toward riskier assets.  These de-
clines were partly offset by a net increase in liquid de-
posits, also suggesting some portfolio reallocation with-
in M2 assets.  Currency expanded weakly, apparently 
because of soft foreign demand.  

The tone of financial markets abroad improved further 
during the intermeeting period.  Stock markets rose 
globally, as positive U.S. earnings reports and news of 
strong economic rebounds in emerging Asian econo-
mies reportedly lifted investor sentiment.  European 
bank stocks rose especially rapidly, spurred by reports 
of better-than-expected earnings among some Euro-
pean banks as well as some U.S. financial institutions.  
The dollar depreciated mildly on a trade-weighted basis 
since late June. 

The European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of Eng-
land, the Bank of Canada, and the Bank of Japan kept 
their respective policy rates constant over the inter-
meeting period.  However, overnight interest rates in 
the euro area declined in the wake of the June 24 injec-
tion by the ECB of one-year funds at a fixed rate of     
1 percent.  The ECB also began its purchases of cov-
ered bonds, and yields on intermediate-term European 
covered bonds declined since the purchases began in 
early July.  After leaving the size of its Asset Purchase 
Facility (APF) unchanged at its July meeting, the Bank 
of England, at its August meeting, raised the size of the 

APF to £175 billion and widened the set of gilts it 
would purchase.  Benchmark gilt yields fell noticeably 
on the announcement after moving higher in July. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast prepared for the August FOMC meet-
ing, the staff’s outlook for the change in real activity 
over the next year and a half was essentially the same as 
at the time of the June meeting.  Consumer spending 
had been on the soft side lately.  The new estimates of 
real disposable income that were reported in the com-
prehensive revision to the national income and product 
accounts showed a noticeably slower increase in 2008 
and the first half of 2009 than previously thought.  By 
themselves, the revised income estimates would imply a 
lower forecast of consumer spending in coming quar-
ters.  But this negative influence on aggregate demand 
was roughly offset by other factors, including higher 
household net worth as a result of the rise in equity 
prices since March, lower corporate bond rates and 
spreads, a lower dollar, and a stronger forecast for for-
eign economic activity.  All told, the staff continued to 
project that real GDP would start to increase in the 
second half of 2009 and that output growth would pick 
up to a pace somewhat above its potential rate in 2010.  
The projected increase in production in the second half 
of 2009 was expected to be the result of a slowing in 
the pace of inventory liquidation; final sales were not 
projected to increase until 2010.  The step-up in eco-
nomic activity in 2010 was expected to be supported by 
an ongoing improvement in financial conditions, 
which, along with accommodative monetary policy, was 
projected to set the stage for further improvements in 
household and business sentiment and an acceleration 
in aggregate demand. 

The staff forecast for inflation was also about un-
changed from that at the June meeting.  Interpretation 
of the incoming data on core PCE inflation was com-
plicated by changes in the definition of the core meas-
ure recently implemented by the Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, as well as by unusually low readings for some 
nonmarket components of the price index.2  After ac-
counting for these factors, the underlying pace of core 
inflation seemed to be running a little higher than the 
staff had anticipated.  Survey measures of inflation ex-
pectations showed no significant change.  Nonetheless, 
                                                 
2 As part of the July 2009 comprehensive revision of the 
national income and product accounts, the Bureau of Eco-
nomic Analysis reclassified restaurant meals from the food 
category to the services category.  As a result, the price index 
for PCE excluding food and energy (the core PCE price 
index) now includes prices of restaurant meals. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



with the unemployment rate anticipated to increase 
somewhat during the remainder of 2009 and to decline 
only gradually in 2010, the staff still expected core PCE 
inflation to slow substantially over the forecast period; 
the very low readings on hourly compensation lately 
suggested that such a process might already be in train.   

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, meeting participants agreed that the incoming 
data and anecdotal evidence had strengthened their 
confidence that the downturn in economic activity was 
ending and that growth was likely to resume in the 
second half of the year.  Many noted that their baseline 
projections for the second half of 2009 and for subse-
quent years had not changed appreciably since the 
Committee met in June but that they now saw smaller 
downside risks.  Consumer spending appeared to be in 
the process of leveling out, and activity in a number of 
local housing markets had stabilized or even increased 
somewhat.  Reports from business contacts supported 
the view that firms were making progress in bringing 
inventories into better alignment with their reduced 
sales and that production was stabilizing in many sec-
tors—albeit at low levels—and beginning to rise in 
some.  Nonetheless, most participants saw the econo-
my as likely to recover only slowly during the second 
half of this year, and all saw it as still vulnerable to ad-
verse shocks.  Conditions in the labor market remained 
poor, and business contacts generally indicated that 
firms would be quite cautious in hiring when demand 
for their products picks up.  Moreover, declines in em-
ployment and weakness in growth of labor compensa-
tion meant that income growth was sluggish.  Also, 
households likely would continue to face unusually 
tight credit conditions.  These factors, along with past 
declines in wealth that had been only partly offset by 
recent increases in equity prices, would weigh on con-
sumer spending.  The data and business contacts indi-
cated very substantial excess capacity in many sectors; 
this excess capacity, along with the tight credit condi-
tions facing many firms, likely would mean further 
weakness in business fixed investment for a time.  
Even so, less-aggressive inventory cutting and continu-
ing monetary and fiscal policy stimulus could be ex-
pected to support growth in production during the 
second half of 2009 and into 2010.  In addition, the 
outlook for foreign economies had improved some-
what, auguring well for U.S. exports.  Participants ex-
pected the pace of  recovery to pick up in 2010, but 
they expressed a range of views, and considerable un-
certainty, about the likely strength of the upturn—

particularly about the pace of projected gains in con-
sumer spending and the extent to which credit condi-
tions would normalize.   

Most participants anticipated that substantial slack in 
resource utilization would lead to subdued and poten-
tially declining wage and price inflation over the next 
few years; a few saw a risk of substantial disinflation.  
However, some pointed to the problems in measuring 
economic slack in real time, and several were skeptical 
that temporarily low levels of resource utilization would 
reduce inflation appreciably, given the loose empirical 
relationship of economic slack to inflation and the fact 
that the public did not appear to have reduced its ex-
pectations of inflation.  Participants noted concerns 
among some analysts and business contacts that the 
sizable expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance 
sheet and large continuing federal budget deficits ulti-
mately could lead to higher inflation if policies were not 
adjusted in a timely manner.  To address these con-
cerns, it would be important to continue communicat-
ing that the Federal Reserve has the tools and willing-
ness to begin withdrawing monetary policy accommo-
dation at the appropriate time to prevent any persistent 
increase in inflation.   

Developments in financial markets during the inter-
meeting period were again seen as broadly positive; the 
cumulative improvement in market functioning since 
the spring was viewed as quite significant.  Markets for 
corporate debt continued to improve, and private credit 
spreads narrowed further.  With the TALF continuing 
to provide important support, markets for asset-backed 
securities also showed improvement, and recent issu-
ance had neared levels observed prior to the second 
half of 2008.  Higher equity prices appeared to result 
not only from generally better-than-expected corporate 
earnings, which seemed largely to reflect aggressive cost 
cutting, but also from a reduction in the perceived risk 
of extremely adverse outcomes and a consequent in-
crease in investors’ appetite for riskier assets.  Howev-
er, participants noted that many markets were still 
strained and that financial risks remain.  The improve-
ment in financial markets was due, in part, to support 
from various government programs, and market func-
tioning might deteriorate as those programs wind 
down.  While financial markets had improved, credit 
remained tight, with many banks—though fewer than 
in recent quarters—having reported that they again 
tightened loan standards and terms.  Increases in inter-
est rates and reductions in lines on credit cards were 
affecting small businesses as well as consumers.  All 
categories of bank lending had continued to decline.  

Minutes of the Meeting of August 11-12, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



Worsening credit quality was still cited by banks as an 
important reason for the tightening of credit condi-
tions, though anecdotal evidence suggested that the 
deterioration in the credit quality of consumer loans 
might be slowing.  Nonetheless, several participants 
noted that banks still faced a sizable risk of additional 
credit losses and that many small and medium-sized 
banks were vulnerable to deteriorating performance of 
commercial real estate loans.  Participants again ob-
served that obtaining or renewing financing for com-
mercial real estate properties and projects was extreme-
ly difficult amid worsening fundamentals in that sector, 
though some noted anecdotal evidence that the addi-
tion of highly rated commercial MBS to the list of se-
curities that can be pledged as collateral for TALF 
loans had contributed to an improvement in liquidity in 
that market. 

Labor market conditions remained of particular con-
cern to meeting participants.  Though recent data indi-
cated that the pace at which employment was declining 
had slowed appreciably, job losses remained sizable.  
Moreover, long-term unemployment and permanent 
separations continued to rise, suggesting possible prob-
lems of skill loss and a need for labor reallocation that 
could slow recovery in employment as the economy 
begins to expand.  The unusually large fraction of those 
who were working part time for economic reasons and 
the unusually low level of the average workweek, com-
bined with indications from business contacts that 
firms would resist hiring as sales and production turn 
up, also pointed to a period of modest job gains and 
thus a slow decline in the unemployment rate.  Wages 
and benefits continued to decelerate, reflecting—in the 
judgment of many participants—substantial slack in 
labor markets.  Several participants noted that the de-
celeration in labor costs should eventually support a 
pickup in hiring.  Recently, however, it contributed to 
weakness in household incomes.  

Consumer spending remained weak, but participants 
saw evidence that it was stabilizing, even before the 
boost to auto purchases provided by the cash-for-
clunkers program.  Real PCE declined little, on balance, 
during the first half of 2009 after dropping sharply dur-
ing the second half of 2008 and was essentially constant 
during May and June.  Several participants noted the 
recent rebound in equity prices and thus household 
wealth as a factor that was likely to support consumer 
spending.  Many noted, however, that households still 
faced considerable headwinds, including reduced 
wealth, tight credit, high levels of debt, and uncertain 
job prospects.  With these forces restraining spending, 

and with labor income likely to remain soft, partici-
pants generally expected no more than moderate 
growth in consumer spending going forward.  An im-
portant source of uncertainty in the outlook for con-
sumer spending was whether households’ propensity to 
save, which had risen in recent quarters, would increase 
further:  Analysis based on responses to past changes in 
wealth relative to income suggested that the personal 
saving rate could level out near its current value; how-
ever, there was some chance that the increased income 
volatility and reduced access to credit that had charac-
terized recent experience could lead households to save 
a still-larger fraction of their incomes.    

Regional surveys and anecdotal reports continued to 
indicate low levels of activity across many goods-
producing industries and in the service sector, but they 
also pointed to some optimism about the outlook.  
Firms appeared to be making substantial progress in 
reducing inventories toward desired levels; indeed, in-
ventories of motor vehicles appeared quite lean follow-
ing earlier production shutdowns and the recent boost 
to sales from the cash-for-clunkers program.  Accord-
ingly, participants expected firms to slow the pace of 
inventory reduction by raising production; this adjust-
ment was likely to make an important contribution to 
economic recovery in the second half of this year.  In 
contrast, business contacts generally reported setting a 
high bar for increasing capital investment once sales 
pick up, because their firms now have unusually high 
levels of excess capacity.   

In the residential real estate sector, home sales, prices, 
and construction had shown signs of stabilization in 
many areas and were increasing modestly in others, but 
a still-sizable inventory of unsold existing homes con-
tinued to restrain homebuilding.  Commercial real es-
tate activity, in contrast, was being weighed down by 
deteriorating fundamentals, including declining occu-
pancy and rental rates; by falling prices; and by difficul-
ty in refinancing loans on existing properties.   

Manufacturing firms appeared to have benefitted re-
cently from an earlier- and stronger-than-expected 
pickup in foreign economic activity, especially in Asia, 
and the resulting increase in demand for U.S. exports.  
Several participants noted that improving growth 
abroad would likely contribute to greater growth in 
U.S. exports going forward. 

A number of participants noted that fiscal policy 
helped support the stabilization in economic activity, in 
part by buoying household incomes and by preventing 
even larger cuts in state and local government spend-

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ing.  Participants generally anticipated that fiscal stimu-
lus already in train would contribute to growth in eco-
nomic activity during the second half of 2009 and into 
2010, but the stimulative effects of policy would fade as 
2010 went on and would need to be replaced by private 
demand and income growth.   

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, Committee members agreed that the stance of 
monetary policy should not be changed at this meeting.  
Given the prospects for an initially modest economic 
recovery, substantial resource slack, and subdued infla-
tion, the Committee agreed that it should maintain its 
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent.  
The future path of the federal funds rate would contin-
ue to depend on the Committee’s evolving outlook, 
but, for now, given their forecasts for only a gradual 
upturn in economic activity and subdued inflation, 
members thought it most likely that the federal funds 
rate would need to be maintained at an exceptionally 
low level for an extended period.  With the downside 
risks to the economic outlook now considerably re-
duced but the economic recovery likely to be damped, 
the Committee also agreed that neither expansion nor 
contraction of its program of asset purchases was war-
ranted at this time.  The Committee did, however, de-
cide to gradually slow the pace of the remainder of its 
purchases of $300 billion of Treasury securities and 
extend their completion to the end of October to help 
promote a smooth transition in markets.  Members 
noted that, with the programs for purchases of agency 
debt and MBS not due to expire until the end of the 
year, it was not necessary to make decisions at this 
meeting about any potential modifications to those 
programs.  The Committee agreed that it would con-
tinue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its 
purchases of securities in light of the evolving econom-
ic outlook and conditions in financial markets. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run 
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions 
in reserve markets consistent with federal 
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  
The Committee directs the Desk to purchase 

agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term 
Treasury securities during the intermeeting 
period with the aim of providing support to 
private credit markets and economic activity.  
The timing and pace of these purchases 
should depend on conditions in the markets 
for such securities and on a broader assess-
ment of private credit market conditions.  
The Desk is expected to purchase up to $200 
billion in housing-related agency debt and up 
to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of 
the year.  The Desk is expected to purchase 
about $300 billion of longer-term Treasury 
securities by the end of October, gradually 
slowing the pace of these purchases until 
they are completed.  The Committee antic-
ipates that outright purchases of securities 
will cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s 
balance sheet to expand significantly in com-
ing months.  The System Open Market Ac-
count Manager and the Secretary will keep 
the Committee informed of ongoing devel-
opments regarding the System’s balance 
sheet that could affect the attainment over 
time of the Committee’s objectives of maxi-
mum employment and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in June sug-
gests that economic activity is leveling out.  
Conditions in financial markets have im-
proved further in recent weeks.  Household 
spending has continued to show signs of sta-
bilizing but remains constrained by ongoing 
job losses, sluggish income growth, lower 
housing wealth, and tight credit.  Businesses 
are still cutting back on fixed investment and 
staffing but are making progress in bringing 
inventory stocks into better alignment with 
sales.  Although economic activity is likely to 
remain weak for a time, the Committee con-
tinues to anticipate that policy actions to sta-
bilize financial markets and institutions, fiscal 
and monetary stimulus, and market forces 
will contribute to a gradual resumption of 
sustainable economic growth in a context of 
price stability.  

The prices of energy and other commodities 
have risen of late.  However, substantial re-
source slack is likely to dampen cost pres-

Minutes of the Meeting of August 11-12, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



sures, and the Committee expects that infla-
tion will remain subdued for some time. 

In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve 
will employ all available tools to promote 
economic recovery and to preserve price sta-
bility.  The Committee will maintain the tar-
get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to   
¼ percent and continues to anticipate that 
economic conditions are likely to warrant ex-
ceptionally low levels of the federal funds 
rate for an extended period.  As previously 
announced, to provide support to mortgage 
lending and housing markets and to improve 
overall conditions in private credit markets, 
the Federal Reserve will purchase a total of 
up to $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-
backed securities and up to $200 billion of 
agency debt by the end of the year.  In addi-
tion, the Federal Reserve is in the process of 
buying $300 billion of Treasury securities.  
To promote a smooth transition in markets 
as these purchases of Treasury securities are 
completed, the Committee has decided to 
gradually slow the pace of these transactions 
and anticipates that the full amount will be 
purchased by the end of October.  The 
Committee will continue to evaluate the tim- 

ing and overall amounts of its purchases of 
securities in light of the evolving economic 
outlook and conditions in financial markets.  
The Federal Reserve is monitoring the size 
and composition of its balance sheet and will 
make adjustments to its credit and liquidity 
programs as warranted.” 

Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart, 
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action: None. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, September 22-
23, 2009.  The meeting adjourned at 11:40 a.m. on Au-
gust 12, 2009. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on July 14, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on June 23-24, 2009. 

 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




