









































Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, November 3-4, 2009


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
November 3-4, 2009

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 3, 
2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, No-
vember 4, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.   
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Mr. Bullard, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. 

Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser, Presi-

dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, 
Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, 

Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate 
Economists 

 
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
the Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Senior 

Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Af-
fairs, Board of Governors; Messrs. Reif-
schneider, and Wascher, Senior Associate Di-
rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Leahy,¹ Associate Director, Division of Inter-

national Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Palumbo, Deputy Associate Director, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Ihrig, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Af-

fairs, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Dallas 
 

Messrs. Fuhrer and Sniderman, Executive Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston 
and Cleveland, respectively 

 
 

 
¹ Attended the portion of the meeting relating to financial 

developments, open market operations, and System facili-
ties. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Mr. Barkema, Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Mr. 
Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York, 
and St. Louis, respectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Mr. Burke and Ms. Yucel, Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, re-
spectively 

 
Ms. Sbordone and Mr. Sill, Assistant Vice Presi-

dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York 
and Philadelphia, respectively 

 
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 
 

 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets.  The Manager also reported on 
System open market operations in Treasury securities, 
agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) since the Committee’s September 22-23 meet-
ing.  By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified those 
transactions.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the 
intermeeting period.  Since the Committee met in Sep-
tember, the Federal Reserve’s total assets were about 
unchanged, on balance, at approximately $2.2 trillion, 
as the increase in the System’s holdings of securities 
roughly matched a further decline in usage of the Sys-
tem’s credit and liquidity facilities.  The Manager noted 
that, as of October 30, $300 billion in Treasury securi-
ties had been purchased, as directed by the Committee.  
Overall, the Treasury market had recovered substantial-
ly from the strains during the financial crisis, and the 
Manager reported that the completion of the Federal 
Reserve’s purchase program did not appear to have led 
to any significant upward pressure on Treasury yields 
or to any notable deterioration in Treasury market 
functioning.  There was little evidence, to date, of a 
buildup in year-end funding pressures, although de-
mand for Treasury bills with maturities extending just 
beyond the year-end seemed to be elevated.  The Man-
ager noted that the recent path of purchases of agency 
debt was consistent with buying a cumulative amount 
of $175 billion by the end of the first quarter of 2010. 

The staff briefed the Committee on recent develop-
ments regarding various Federal Reserve liquidity and 
credit facilities, including the Term Auction Facility 
(TAF), the primary credit program, the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), and the swap 
lines with foreign central banks.  Usage of these facili-
ties had been declining in recent months as financial 
market conditions continued to improve.  On Septem-
ber 24, the Board of Governors announced a gradual 
reduction in amounts to be auctioned under the TAF 
through January and indicated that auctions of credit 
with maturities longer than 28 days would be phased 
out.  The staff reviewed the changes that had been 
made since the onset of the crisis to the terms of the 
primary credit program, including loan maturities and 
interest rates.  The staff noted that reducing the maxi-
mum maturity of loans available under the primary 
credit program from 90 days to 28 days would 
represent another step toward normalization of the 
Federal Reserve’s policy-implementation framework 
and would align the maximum maturities of the prima-
ry credit program with those under the TAF, but no 
action on this matter was taken by the Board at this 
meeting.  Regarding the TALF, the staff indicated that 
auto and credit card asset-backed security issuance was 
increasingly being funded by non-TALF sources; how-
ever, commercial MBS remained more dependent on 
TALF financing. 

The staff presented another update on the continuing 
development of several tools that could help support a 
smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation at the 
appropriate time.  These measures include executing 
reverse repurchase agreements (RPs) on a large scale, 
potentially with counterparties other than the primary 
dealers; implementing a term deposit facility, available 
to depository institutions, to reduce the supply of re-
serve balances; and taking steps to tighten the link be-
tween the interest rate paid on reserve balances held at 
the Federal Reserve Banks and the federal funds rate.  
The staff had made considerable further progress on 
these tools.  Participants expressed confidence that the 
Committee would be in a position to remove policy 
accommodation when appropriate by raising the rate of 
interest paid on excess reserves and by employing re-
serve-management tools such as reverse RPs, term de-
posits, and, if desirable, asset sales.  Completing the 
operational work necessary to establish reverse RPs and 
term deposits as tools that can drain large volumes of 
reserves was viewed as an important near-term objec-
tive.  Participants anticipated that the Federal Reserve 
would conduct tests of these tools, but they stressed 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



that such testing would not imply that these tools 
would be employed for policy purposes any time soon. 

Participants expressed a range of views about how the 
Committee might use its various tools in combination 
to foster most effectively its dual objectives of maxi-
mum employment and price stability.  As part of the 
Committee’s strategy for eventual exit from the period 
of extraordinary policy accommodation, several partici-
pants thought that asset sales could be a useful tool to 
reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
and lower the level of reserve balances, either prior to 
or concurrently with increasing the policy rate.  In their 
view, such sales would help reinforce the effectiveness 
of paying interest on excess reserves as an instrument 
for firming policy at the appropriate time and would 
help quicken the restoration of a balance sheet compo-
sition in which Treasury securities were the predomi-
nant asset.  Other participants had reservations about 
asset sales—especially in advance of a decision to raise 
policy interest rates—and noted that such sales might 
elicit sharp increases in longer-term interest rates that 
could undermine attainment of the Committee’s goals.  
Furthermore, they believed that other reserve manage-
ment tools such as reverse RPs and term deposits 
would likely be sufficient to implement an appropriate 
exit strategy and that assets could be allowed to run off 
over time, reflecting prepayments and the maturation 
of issues.  Participants agreed to continue to evaluate 
various potential policy-implementation tools and the 
possible combinations and sequences in which they 
might be used.  They also agreed that it would be im-
portant to develop communication approaches for 
clearly explaining to the public the use of these tools 
and the Committee’s exit strategy more broadly. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the November 3-4 meet-
ing suggested that overall economic activity continued 
to rise in recent months.  Manufacturers increased pro-
duction in September for the third consecutive month.  
The gradual recovery in construction of single-family 
homes from its extremely low level earlier in the year 
continued, and home sales increased in the third quar-
ter.  Although consumer spending on motor vehicles 
declined in September after the expiration of govern-
ment rebates, other household spending rose.  Outlays 
for equipment and software (E&S) appeared to be sta-
bilizing.  However, the labor market weakened further, 
and business spending on nonresidential structures 
continued to decline.  Meanwhile, consumer price infla-
tion remained subdued in recent months. 

The labor market continued to weaken in September, 
but the pace of deterioration lessened from that seen 
earlier in the year.  Job losses remained widespread 
across industries.  The length of the average workweek 
for production and nonsupervisory workers decreased, 
and the index of aggregate hours worked for this group 
fell, albeit more slowly than earlier in the year.  In the 
household survey, the unemployment rate rose in Sep-
tember to 9.8 percent, and the labor force participation 
rate fell to its lowest level of the year.  Continuing 
claims for unemployment insurance through regular 
state programs declined through early October, but 
total claims, including those for extended and emergen-
cy benefits, remained high. 

Industrial production rose in September for the third 
consecutive month.  A substantial portion of the third-
quarter gain was directly attributable to a rebound in 
motor vehicle assemblies and related parts production, 
but increases in production were widespread across the 
industrial sector.  Indicators from business surveys sug-
gested that there would be further gains in factory out-
put over the near term.  Nevertheless, considerable 
slack remained in the manufacturing sector, as the fac-
tory utilization rate for September was up only a bit 
from its historical low earlier this year. 

For the third quarter as a whole, real personal con-
sumption expenditures (PCE) rose at a solid rate, with 
noticeable increases in motor vehicles, furniture, elec-
tronics, and other durable goods.  However, real out-
lays declined in September after a sharp increase in Au-
gust.  The monthly pattern in expenditures was signifi-
cantly affected by swings in motor vehicle sales during 
and after the government’s “cash-for-clunkers” pro-
gram.  Real disposable personal income fell for the 
fourth consecutive month in September, reflecting the 
weakness in the labor market.  Poor labor market con-
ditions and prior declines in household net worth ap-
peared to have weighed on consumer sentiment, and 
the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on 
Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) suggested that many 
banking institutions continued to tighten standards for 
consumer lending in the third quarter. 

The housing sector continued to recover, on balance.  
Although single-family starts were about flat in Sep-
tember, the number of starts was well above the record 
low reached in the first quarter of the year.  In the 
much smaller multifamily sector, where tight credit 
conditions persisted and vacancies remained elevated, 
starts were about unchanged.  Sales of new homes, al-
though down a bit in September, rose over the third 

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



quarter as a whole.  The inventory of unsold new 
homes declined further, as sales outpaced construction.  
Sales of existing single-family homes increased in Sep-
tember and for the quarter as a whole, and recent resale 
activity appeared to be driven primarily by transactions 
of nondistressed properties.  The average interest rate 
on 30-year conforming fixed-rate mortgages remained 
very low over the intermeeting period.  Although some 
house price indexes had risen in recent months, such 
indexes remained below year-earlier levels. 

Real spending on E&S appeared to have stabilized in 
the third quarter.  Real business outlays on high-tech 
E&S increased modestly further, outlays for aircraft 
posted another gain, and business investment in motor 
vehicles and other areas was down only slightly.  The 
improvements in a number of the fundamental deter-
minants of investment in E&S, including a decline in 
the cost of capital and a rise in business output, sug-
gested further, albeit sluggish, gains in spending over 
the next few quarters.  The responses to the October 
SLOOS indicated that banks continued to tighten stan-
dards on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to 
firms.  Meanwhile, conditions in the nonresidential 
construction sector generally remained quite poor.  The 
recent trend in architectural billings was consistent with 
further declines in nonresidential construction, and 
employment in the sector continued to decline.  The 
October SLOOS suggested that financing for new con-
struction projects was very difficult for businesses to 
obtain.  The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated 
that businesses continued to liquidate inventories in the 
third quarter, but at a slower rate than in the preceding 
quarter. 

In August, the U.S. international trade deficit narrowed, 
as exports edged up and imports declined, but it re-
mained wider than it had been at its recent low point in 
May.  The increase in exports of goods and services 
was held down by a sharp drop in the volatile aircraft 
category.  The decline in imports of goods and services 
was led by a lower volume of imported oil.  In contrast, 
imports of machinery, automotive products, and indus-
trial supplies increased. 

Indicators of economic activity in the advanced foreign 
economies during the third quarter were mixed, but 
consistent with economic recovery in the aggregate.  In 
most countries, purchasing managers surveys were at 
levels consistent with expansion, and many indicators 
of consumer and business confidence continued to 
show improvement.  Economic indicators were strong-
est in Japan and the euro area, where industrial produc-

tion rebounded sharply.  In contrast, real gross domes-
tic product (GDP) contracted in the United Kingdom 
in the third quarter, and real GDP in Canada edged 
down in July and August.  In most emerging market 
economies, recent data showed that economic recovery 
continued in the third quarter.  Real GDP increased 
strongly in China, Korea, and Singapore, and the re-
covery in Brazil continued.  In Mexico, available data 
suggested that activity had begun to expand after sever-
al quarters of contraction.  Across most of the major 
foreign economies, price pressures remained subdued.  
Twelve-month inflation remained elevated but declined 
further in Mexico and Brazil. 

In the United States, recent monthly data indicated that 
consumer price inflation remained subdued.  The PCE 
price index moved up only a bit in September as in-
creases in energy prices were largely offset by declines 
in food prices.  Core PCE prices also edged up during 
the month.  Gasoline prices rose again in October.  
Median year-ahead inflation expectations in the final 
October Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of 
Consumers increased, remaining higher than at the turn 
of the year, but longer-term inflation expectations from 
this survey were about unchanged.  Measures of labor 
compensation rose moderately in the third quarter after 
decelerating significantly in the first half of the year.  
The employment cost index for wages and salaries was 
boosted by increases in several industry categories that 
might have been affected by the rise in the minimum 
wage in July.  Output per hour rose sharply in the 
second and third quarters, contributing to a sizable de-
cline in unit labor costs so far this year. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
Market participants largely anticipated the decisions by 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the 
September meeting to leave the target range for the 
federal funds rate unchanged and to extend the Federal 
Reserve’s purchases of agency MBS and agency debt 
through the end of the first quarter of 2010 to allow for 
a gradual reduction in the pace of these purchases.  The 
announcement of the Committee’s intent to purchase 
the full $1.25 trillion of agency MBS securities reduced 
some uncertainty about the cumulative amount of these 
purchases.  After the release of the statement, investors 
marked down their expected path for the federal funds 
rate slightly; over subsequent weeks, that initial reaction 
was largely reversed so that, on balance, the expected 
path appeared to change little over the intermeeting 
period.  Yields on nominal Treasury securities were 
about unchanged on net.  Inflation compensation 
based on five-year Treasury inflation-protected securi-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ties (TIPS) rose over the intermeeting period, apparent-
ly owing in part to an increase in oil and other com-
modity prices, while five-year inflation compensation 
five years ahead was little changed. 

Overall conditions in short-term funding markets eased 
a bit further during the intermeeting period.  Spreads 
between London interbank offered rates (Libor) and 
overnight index swap (OIS) rates at the one- and three-
month maturities were about unchanged and were near 
their pre-crisis levels.  Spreads at the six-month maturi-
ty narrowed but remained elevated.  Spreads on 
A2/P2-rated commercial paper (CP) and AA-rated as-
set-backed CP remained at the lower ends of their re-
spective ranges over the past two years.  Indicators of 
Treasury market functioning, including on-the-run li-
quidity premiums for the 10-year Treasury note and 
trading volumes in both the nominal and TIPS mar-
kets, showed some signs of improvement over the in-
termeeting period, but trading conditions remained 
somewhat impaired.  Year-end pressures in funding 
markets generally appeared modest.  However, some 
evidence pointed to increased demand for Treasury 
securities that mature soon after the turn of the year. 

Broad stock price indexes were about unchanged, on 
net, over the intermeeting period despite initial third-
quarter earnings reports that mostly beat analysts’ fore-
casts.  Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index 
moved up slightly.  The spread between an estimate of 
the expected real return on equity over the next 10 
years for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the real 10-
year Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk 
premium—remained elevated.  Corporate bond spreads 
narrowed further as yields on investment- and specula-
tive-grade corporate bonds decreased more than those 
on comparable-maturity Treasury securities.  Bid-asked 
spreads for corporate bonds—a measure of liquidity in 
this market—remained at moderate levels.  Conditions 
in the secondary market for leveraged syndicated loans 
continued to improve, as secondary-market prices rose 
and bid-asked spreads narrowed. 

Investor sentiment toward the banking sector appeared 
to deteriorate over the intermeeting period.  Bank share 
prices fell, with equity prices for large banks declining 
more than those for regional and smaller banks.  Credit 
default swap spreads for large bank holding companies 
were about flat, but they widened for regional and 
smaller banking organizations.  Market participants 
reportedly remained concerned about the earnings 
prospects for banks in an environment of weak eco-
nomic activity and rising loan losses. 

Debt of the private domestic nonfinancial sector ap-
peared to have declined again in the third quarter, as 
estimates suggested that household debt edged down 
and nonfinancial business debt decreased.  Consumer 
credit contracted for the seventh consecutive month in 
August, reflecting declines in both revolving and non-
revolving credit; issuance of consumer credit asset-
backed securities also fell.  Gross issuance of bonds by 
investment-grade nonfinancial corporations slowed 
somewhat in October, even as speculative-grade firms 
continued to issue bonds at a robust pace.  CP out-
standing increased, though gains were concentrated at a 
few large issuers.  Bank loans continued to contract 
rapidly.  In contrast, the federal government continued 
to issue debt at a brisk pace, and gross issuance of state 
and local government debt remained strong in Octo-
ber. 

Bank credit declined in September and in the first half 
of October, as the contraction in C&I loans contri-
buted importantly to a further decline in total loans 
over the period.  According to the SLOOS, bank lend-
ing standards and terms tightened further and demand 
continued to decline, on net, for most types of loans in 
the third quarter.  Commercial real estate (CRE) loans 
also continued to decrease, reportedly because of wide-
spread paydowns and charge-offs.  In addition, residen-
tial mortgage loans on banks’ books fell, and revolving 
home equity loans and consumer loans also contracted.  
The pace of decline in total loans at large banks contin-
ued to exceed that at smaller banks.  The allowance for 
loan and lease losses rose further at large banks in Sep-
tember, but it was about unchanged at small banks. 

M2 appeared to have expanded at a moderate rate in 
September and October.  While liquid deposits rose 
rapidly, small time deposits and retail money market 
mutual funds continued to contract.  Meanwhile, cur-
rency increased amid moderate demand for U.S. cur-
rency from abroad. 

Stock indexes fell over the intermeeting period in most 
major industrial economies, while 10-year sovereign 
yields declined in Europe and were little changed in 
Japan and Canada.  Equity prices were mixed in emerg-
ing markets, and credit spreads on emerging market 
sovereign debt edged up.  The trade-weighted index of 
the foreign exchange value of the dollar was little 
changed over the intermeeting period.  The Reserve 
Bank of Australia and Norges Bank raised their policy 
rates, while most other central banks left their respec-
tive policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting pe-
riod.  The European Central Bank, the Bank of Eng-

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



land, and the Bank of Japan continued implementing 
their special liquidity and asset purchase programs, al-
though Bank of Japan officials indicated they would let 
some credit-easing programs expire at the end of the 
year. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast prepared for the November FOMC 
meeting, the staff raised its projection for real GDP 
growth over the second half of 2009 but left the fore-
cast for output growth in 2010 and 2011 roughly un-
changed.  The spending and production data received 
during the intermeeting period suggested that econom-
ic activity, especially household spending, was a little 
stronger in the summer than previously estimated.  Al-
so, industrial production increased more than had been 
anticipated at the September meeting.  But with labor 
market conditions somewhat weaker than anticipated, 
earlier declines in wealth still weighing on household 
balance sheets, and measures of consumer sentiment 
relatively low, the staff did not take much signal from 
the recent unexpected strength in spending and output.  
Indeed, the staff boosted its projection for the unem-
ployment rate over the next several years.  Still, the 
staff continued to believe that several factors that were 
restraining spending would gradually fade.  The staff 
anticipated that the strengthening of the recovery in 
real output during 2010 and 2011 would be supported 
by an ongoing improvement in financial conditions and 
household balance sheets, continued recovery in the 
housing sector, improved household and business con-
fidence, and accommodative monetary policy even as 
the impetus to real activity from fiscal policy dimi-
nished. 

The staff forecast for inflation was little changed from 
the September meeting.  Although oil prices moved 
higher, likely boosting near-term inflation, the staff also 
revised up its estimate of the degree of slack in the 
economy, leaving the forecast for total and core PCE 
inflation over the next two years little changed.  With 
significant underutilization of resources expected to 
persist for several years, the staff continued to project 
that core inflation would slow somewhat further over 
the next two years. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting 
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve 
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the 
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for 

each year from 2009 through 2012 and over a longer 
horizon.  Longer-run projections represent each partic-
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable 
would be expected to converge over time under appro-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further 
shocks.  Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over 
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum 
to these minutes. 

In the meeting participants’ discussion of the economic 
situation and outlook, they agreed that the incoming 
data and information received from business contacts 
suggested that economic activity was picking up as an-
ticipated, with output continuing to expand in the 
fourth quarter.  A number of factors were expected to 
support near-term growth:  Business inventories were 
being brought into better alignment with sales, and the 
pace of inventory runoff was slowing; activity in the 
housing sector appeared to be turning up, and house 
prices seemed to be leveling out or beginning to rise by 
some measures; consumer spending appeared to be 
rising even apart from the effects of fiscal incentives to 
purchase autos; the outlook for growth abroad had 
improved since earlier in the year, auguring well for 
U.S. exports; and U.S. and global financial market con-
ditions, while roughly unchanged over the intermeeting 
period, were substantially better than earlier in the year.  
Above-trend output growth in the third quarter was a 
welcome development.  Moreover, the upturn in real 
GDP appeared to reflect stronger final demand and not 
just a slower pace of inventory decumulation.  While 
these developments were positive, participants noted 
that it was not clear how much of the recent firming in 
final demand reflected the effects of temporary fiscal 
programs to support the auto and housing sectors, and 
some participants expressed concerns about the ability 
of the economy to generate a self-sustaining recovery 
without government support.  Nonetheless, partici-
pants expected the recovery to continue in subsequent 
quarters, although at a pace that would be rather slow 
relative to historical experience, particularly the robust 
recoveries that followed previous steep downturns.  
Such a modest pace of expansion would imply only 
slow improvement in the labor market next year, with 
unemployment remaining high.  Indeed, participants 
noted that business contacts continued to report plans 
to be cautious in hiring and capital spending even as 
demand for their products increased.  Nonetheless, 
economic growth was expected to strengthen during 
the next two years as housing construction continued 
to rise and financial conditions improved further, lead-

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ing to more-substantial increases in resource utilization 
in product and labor markets. 

Most participants now viewed the risks to their growth 
forecasts as being roughly balanced rather than tilted to 
the downside, but uncertainty surrounding these fore-
casts was still viewed as quite elevated.  Downside risks 
to growth included the continued weakness in the labor 
market and its implications for income growth and 
consumer confidence, as well as the potential for credit 
availability to remain relatively tight for consumers and 
some businesses.  In this regard, some participants 
noted the difficulty that smaller, bank-dependent firms 
were having in securing financing.  The CRE sector 
was also considered a downside risk to the forecast and 
a possible source of increased pressure on banks.  On 
the other hand, consumer spending on items other 
than autos had been stronger than expected, which 
might be signaling more underlying momentum in the 
recovery and some chance that the step-up in spending 
would be sustained going forward.  In addition, growth 
abroad had exceeded expectations for some time, po-
tentially providing more support to U.S. exports and 
domestic growth than anticipated. 

Financial market developments over recent months 
were generally regarded as supportive of continued 
economic recovery, with equity prices considerably 
higher, private credit spreads substantially lower, and 
financial markets generally performing significantly bet-
ter than earlier in the year.  Participants noted, howev-
er, that bank credit remained tight.  With rising levels 
of nonperforming loans expected to continue to be a 
source of stress, and with many regional and small 
banks vulnerable to the deteriorating performance of 
CRE loans, banks continued to tighten lending stan-
dards for C&I loans and consumer loans, although the 
net percentage of banks reporting further tightening in 
each category had fallen in recent surveys.  Bank loans 
continued to contract sharply in all categories.  Partici-
pants noted that the dichotomy between significant 
easing of conditions in capital markets and continuing 
tight conditions in the banking sector implied that fi-
nancing conditions differed for large and small firms.  
Large firms with access to debt and equity markets for 
financing had relatively little difficulty in obtaining 
credit and in many cases also had high levels of re-
tained earnings with which to fund their operations and 
investment.  In contrast, smaller firms, which tend to 
be more dependent on commercial banks for financing, 
reportedly faced substantial constraints in their access 
to credit.  Limited credit availability, along with weak 
aggregate demand, was viewed as likely to restrain hir-

ing at small businesses, which are normally a source of 
employment growth in recoveries. 

The weakness in labor market conditions remained an 
important concern to meeting participants, with unem-
ployment expected to remain elevated for some time.  
Although the pace of job losses was moderating, the 
unusually large fraction of those who were working 
part time for economic reasons and the unusually low 
level of the average workweek pointed to only a gradual 
decline in the unemployment rate as the economic re-
covery proceeded.  In addition, business contacts re-
ported that they would be cautious in their hiring and 
would continue to aggressively seek cost savings in the 
absence of revenue growth.  Indeed, participants ex-
pected that businesses would be able to meet any in-
creases in demand in the near term by raising their em-
ployees’ hours and boosting productivity, thus delaying 
the need to add to their payrolls; this view was sup-
ported by aggregate data indicating rapid productivity 
growth in recent quarters.  Moreover, the need to real-
locate labor across sectors as the recovery proceeds, as 
well as losses of skills caused by high levels of long-
term unemployment and permanent separations, could 
limit the pace of gains in employment.  Participants 
discussed the possibility that this recovery could re-
semble the past two, which were characterized by a 
slow pace of hiring for a time even after aggregate de-
mand picked up. 

The prospect for continued weakness in labor markets 
remained an important factor in the outlook for con-
sumer spending.  Although consumer spending had 
picked up more than expected in recent months, partic-
ipants saw that increase as partly reflecting special fac-
tors such as the cash-for-clunkers program.  Uncertain 
job prospects, slow income growth, and tight credit, as 
well as wealth levels that remained relatively low de-
spite the recent rise in equity prices and stabilization in 
house prices, were seen as weighing on consumer con-
fidence and the growth of consumer spending for some 
time to come.  In such an environment, households’ 
saving behavior was an important source of uncertainty 
in the outlook.  Participants continued to believe that 
the most likely outcome was for the saving rate to re-
main near its average level over the past few quarters or 
to edge up gradually.  However, they could not com-
pletely discount the possibility of a further substantial 
rise in the saving rate as households took further steps 
to repair their balance sheets. 

Participants noted that firms seemed to be reducing 
inventories at a slower pace than earlier in the year and 

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



apparently had made substantial progress in reducing 
stocks toward desired levels.  With inventories lower, 
firms were beginning to raise production to meet at 
least a portion of increased demand, and this adjust-
ment was expected to make an important contribution 
to economic recovery in the fourth quarter of the year 
and, to a lesser extent, in 2010 as well.  Investment in 
E&S appeared to have stabilized in the third quarter, 
and recent data on new orders continued to point to a 
pickup next year.  However, many participants ex-
pressed the view that cautious business sentiment, to-
gether with low industrial utilization rates, was likely to 
keep new capital spending subdued until firms became 
more confident about the durability of increases in de-
mand. 

In the residential real estate sector, home sales and con-
struction increased over recent months from very low 
levels; moreover, house prices appeared to be stabiliz-
ing and in some areas had reportedly moved higher.  
Generally, the outlook was for these trends to continue.  
However, some participants still viewed the improve-
ments as quite tentative, pointing to potential sources 
of softness from the pending termination of the tem-
porary tax credit for first-time homebuyers, the 
winding down of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS 
purchase program, and the downward pressure that 
anticipated further increases in foreclosures would put 
on house prices.  In contrast to developments in the 
residential sector, CRE activity continued to fall mar-
kedly in most Districts as a result of deteriorating fun-
damentals, including declining occupancy and rental 
rates and very tight credit conditions. 

Stronger foreign economic activity, especially in Asia, 
as well as the partial reversal this year of the dollar’s 
appreciation during the latter part of 2008, was provid-
ing support to U.S. exports.  Participants noted that the 
recent fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar 
had been orderly and appeared to reflect an unwinding 
of safe-haven demand in light of the recovery in finan-
cial market conditions this year, but that any tendency 
for dollar depreciation to intensify or to put significant 
upward pressure on inflation would bear close watch-
ing.  Further improvements in foreign economies 
would likely buoy U.S. exports going forward, but as 
the recovery took hold in the United States, import 
growth would also strengthen. 

Participants continued to discuss the appropriate 
weights to place on resource slack, inflation expecta-
tions, and other factors in assessing the inflation out-
look.  In the near term, most participants anticipated 

that substantial slack in both labor and product markets 
would likely keep inflation subdued.  Indeed, the consi-
derable decelerations in wages and unit labor costs this 
year were cited as factors putting downward pressure 
on inflation.  However, some participants noted that 
the recent rise in the prices of oil and other commodi-
ties, as well as increases in import prices stemming 
from the decline in the foreign exchange value of the 
dollar, could boost inflation pressures.  Overall, many 
participants viewed the risks to their inflation outlooks 
over the next few quarters as being roughly balanced.  
Some saw the risks as tilted to the downside in the near 
term, reflecting the quite elevated level of economic 
slack and the possibility that inflation expectations 
could begin to decline in response to the low level of 
actual inflation.  But others felt that risks were tilted to 
the upside over a longer horizon, because of the possi-
bility that inflation expectations could rise as a result of 
the public’s concerns about extraordinary monetary 
policy stimulus and large federal budget deficits.  
Moreover, these participants noted that banks might 
seek to reduce appreciably their excess reserves as the 
economy improves by purchasing securities or by eas-
ing credit standards and expanding their lending sub-
stantially.  Such a development, if not offset by Federal 
Reserve actions, could give additional impetus to 
spending and, potentially, to actual and expected infla-
tion.  To keep inflation expectations anchored, all par-
ticipants agreed that it was important for policy to be 
responsive to changes in the economic outlook and for 
the Federal Reserve to continue to clearly communicate 
its ability and intent to begin withdrawing monetary 
policy accommodation at the appropriate time and 
pace. 

Committee Policy Action 
In the members’ discussion of monetary policy for the 
period ahead, they agreed that no substantive changes 
to the Committee’s federal funds target range or large-
scale asset purchase programs were warranted at this 
meeting.  On balance, the economic outlook had 
changed little since the September meeting.  The recov-
ery appeared to be continuing and was expected to 
gradually strengthen over time.  Still, most members 
projected that over the next couple of years, the unem-
ployment rate would remain quite elevated and the lev-
el of inflation would remain below rates consistent over 
the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s objectives.  
Based on this outlook, members decided to maintain 
the federal funds target range at 0 to ¼ percent and to 
continue to state their expectation that economic con-
ditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



for an extended period.  Low levels of resource utiliza-
tion, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation ex-
pectations were among the important factors underly-
ing their expectation for monetary policy, and members 
agreed that policy communications would be enhanced 
by citing these conditions in the policy statement.  
Members noted the possibility that some negative side 
effects might result from the maintenance of very low 
short-term interest rates for an extended period, includ-
ing the possibility that such a policy stance could lead 
to excessive risk-taking in financial markets or an un-
anchoring of inflation expectations.  While members 
currently saw the likelihood of such effects as relatively 
low, they would remain alert to these risks.  All agreed 
that the path of short-term rates going forward would 
be dependent on the evolution of the economic out-
look. 

With respect to the large-scale asset purchase pro-
grams, all members supported reiterating the Commit-
tee’s intention to purchase $1.25 trillion of agency MBS 
by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  The Committee 
also agreed to specify that its agency debt purchases 
would cumulate to about $175 billion by the end of the 
first quarter, $25 billion less than the previously an-
nounced maximum for these purchases.  Owing to the 
limited availability of agency debt and concerns that 
larger purchases could impair market functioning, the 
Committee’s transactions in these instruments for some 
time had been on a trajectory that would leave total 
purchases somewhat below the previously established 
maximum.  Announcing that purchases would total 
about $175 billion was viewed as providing greater clar-
ity to the public regarding the expected amount of pur-
chases and would not reflect a decision to scale back 
the degree of policy accommodation.  Members also 
decided to reiterate their intention to gradually slow the 
pace of the Committee’s agency MBS and agency debt 
purchases to promote a smooth transition in markets as 
the announced purchases are completed.  The Commit-
tee agreed that it would continue to evaluate the timing 
and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in 
light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions 
in financial markets. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 

foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run 
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions 
in reserve markets consistent with federal 
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  
The Committee directs the Desk to purchase 
agency debt and agency MBS during the in-
termeeting period with the aim of providing 
support to private credit markets and eco-
nomic activity.  The timing and pace of these 
purchases should depend on conditions in 
the markets for such securities and on a 
broader assessment of private credit market 
conditions.  The Desk is expected to execute 
purchases of about $175 billion in housing-
related agency debt and about $1.25 trillion 
of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter 
of 2010.  The Desk is expected to gradually 
slow the pace of these purchases as they near 
completion.  The Committee anticipates that 
outright purchases of securities will cause the 
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to 
expand significantly in coming months.  The 
System Open Market Account Manager and 
the Secretary will keep the Committee in-
formed of ongoing developments regarding 
the System’s balance sheet that could affect 
the attainment over time of the Committee’s 
objectives of maximum employment and 
price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in September 
suggests that economic activity has contin-
ued to pick up.  Conditions in financial mar-
kets were roughly unchanged, on balance, 
over the intermeeting period.  Activity in the 
housing sector has increased over recent 
months.  Household spending appears to be 
expanding but remains constrained by ongo-
ing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower 
housing wealth, and tight credit.  Businesses 
are still cutting back on fixed investment and 
staffing, though at a slower pace; they con-
tinue to make progress in bringing inventory 
stocks into better alignment with sales.  Al-
though economic activity is likely to remain 
weak for a time, the Committee anticipates 
that policy actions to stabilize financial mar-
kets and institutions, fiscal and monetary 

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



stimulus, and market forces will support a 
strengthening of economic growth and a 
gradual return to higher levels of resource 
utilization in a context of price stability. 

With substantial resource slack likely to con-
tinue to dampen cost pressures and with 
longer-term inflation expectations stable, the 
Committee expects that inflation will remain 
subdued for some time. 

In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve 
will continue to employ a wide range of tools 
to promote economic recovery and to pre-
serve price stability.  The Committee will 
maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to 
anticipate that economic conditions, includ-
ing low rates of resource utilization, subdued 
inflation trends, and stable inflation expecta-
tions, are likely to warrant exceptionally low 
levels of the federal funds rate for an ex-
tended period.  To provide support to mort-
gage lending and housing markets and to im-
prove overall conditions in private credit 
markets, the Federal Reserve will purchase a 
total of $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-
backed securities and about $175 billion of 
agency debt.  The amount of agency debt 
purchases, while somewhat less than the pre-
viously announced maximum of $200 billion, 
is consistent with the recent path of purchas-
es and reflects the limited availability of 
agency debt.  In order to promote a smooth 
transition in markets, the Committee will 
gradually slow the pace of its purchases of 

both agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities and anticipates that these 
transactions will be executed by the end of 
the first quarter of 2010.  The Committee 
will continue to evaluate the timing and 
overall amounts of its purchases of securities 
in light of the evolving economic outlook 
and conditions in financial markets.  The 
Federal Reserve is monitoring the size and 
composition of its balance sheet and will 
make adjustments to its credit and liquidity 
programs as warranted.” 

Voting for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart, 
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, December 15-
16, 2009.  The meeting adjourned at 12:40 p.m. on No-
vember 4, 2009. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on October 13, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on September 22-23, 2009. 

 

 

 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Summary of Economic Projections
 

In conjunction with the November 3-4, 2009, FOMC 
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of 
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub-
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, 
and inflation for the years 2009 to 2012 and over the 
longer run.  The projections were based on information 
available through the end of the meeting and on each 
participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect 
economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary 
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the 
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for 
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or 
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.  
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s 
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be 
expected to converge over time under appropriate 
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. 

As depicted in Figure 1, FOMC participants anticipated 
that economic recovery would be gradual, with real 
gross domestic product (GDP) growing at a moderate 
pace and the unemployment rate declining slowly over 
the next few years.  Most participants also expected 
that inflation would remain subdued over this period. 
As indicated in Table 1, participants marked up their 
projections for real GDP growth in 2009, reflecting a 
faster pickup in output during the second half of the 
year than they had anticipated at the time of their pre-
vious forecasts, which were made in conjunction with 

the June FOMC meeting.  Looking beyond 2009, the 
contours of the participants’ outlook for economic ac-
tivity and inflation were broadly similar to those in their 
June projections, with the pace of the economic recov-
ery expected to be restrained by household and busi-
ness uncertainty, weak labor market conditions, and 
slow waning of tight credit conditions in the banking 
system.  Most participants anticipated that about five or 
six years would be needed for the economy to converge 
fully to a longer-run path characterized by a sustainable 
rate of output growth and by rates of unemployment 
and inflation consistent with their interpretation of the 
Federal Reserve’s objectives.  However, some partici-
pants indicated that the convergence process might 
well require even longer, while a few expected that al-
though inflation would settle at its longer-run rate in 
the next several years, the convergence process for the 
real economy was likely to occur over a somewhat 
longer period.  With a further waning of downside risks 
to growth since June, nearly all participants now judged 
the risks to their growth outlook as roughly balanced, 
and most also saw roughly balanced risks surrounding 
their inflation projections.  As in June, however, partic-
ipants generally judged that their projections for eco-
nomic activity and inflation were subject to an unusual-
ly high degree of uncertainty relative to historical 
norms. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2009 
had a central tendency of negative 0.4 percent to nega-
tive 0.1 percent, around a percentage point above the 

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, November 2009 
Percent    

Variable 
Central tendency1 Range2 

2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer run 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer run 
Change in real GDP . . -0.4 to -0.1 2.5 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.8 -0.5 to 0.0 2.0 to 4.0 2.5 to 4.6 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

June projection. . . -1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6 n.a. 2.5 to 2.7 -1.6 to -0.6 0.8 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 n.a. 2.4 to 2.8 

Unemployment rate. . . 9.9 to 10.1 9.3 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.6 6.8 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.2 9.8 to 10.3 8.6 to 10.2 7.2 to 8.7 6.1 to 7.6 4.8 to 6.3 
June projection. . . 9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8 n.a. 4.8 to 5.0 9.7 to 10.5 8.5 to 10.6 6.8 to 9.2 n.a. 4.5 to 6.0 

PCE inflation. . . . . . . . 1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.0 to 1.7 1.1 to 2.0 0.6 to 2.4 0.2 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 
June projection. . .  1.0 to 1.4 1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0 1.0 to 1.8 0.9 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 n.a. 1.5 to 2.1 

Core PCE inflation3. . 1.4 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 1.3 to 1.6 0.9 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.4 0.2 to 2.3
June projection. . .  1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 n.a. 1.2 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5 n.a. 

   NOTE:  Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the 
fourth quarter of the year indicated.  Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  Longer-run projections 
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of
further shocks to the economy.  The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 23-24, 2009.
   1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
   2.  The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
   3.  Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



2

1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–12 and over the longer run  

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

9

10

Percent

Unemployment rate

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

1

2

3

Percent

PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

1

2

3

Percent

Core PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



central tendency of their June projections.  The projec-
tions for the year as a whole were broadly consistent 
with participants’ previous expectations that economic 
activity would bottom out around midyear.  However, 
the contraction over the first half was a bit sharper than 
many participants had anticipated at the time of the 
June FOMC meeting, which took place about a month 
before the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) pub-
lished its advance estimate of second-quarter GDP and 
its comprehensive revision of previous estimates, in-
cluding a substantial downward revision to the estimate 
of first-quarter GDP growth.  Subsequent data on con-
sumer spending, housing starts, and industrial produc-
tion, as well as the advance estimate of third-quarter 
GDP, suggested that the economy was growing at a 
moderate pace over the second half of the year.  Parti-
cipants took note of the continuing improvement in 
financial market conditions, the progress that business-
es appeared to be making in bringing inventories into 
line with sales, and the signs of stronger growth abroad, 
especially in Asia.  Participants also indicated that GDP 
growth in the second half of 2009 had likely been 
boosted by transitory factors such as the “cash-for-
clunkers” program and the first-time homebuyers’  
credit, which had brought forward spending that would 
have otherwise occurred in subsequent quarters. 

Looking beyond this year, participants’ outlook for real 
GDP growth was generally similar to that reflected in 
their June forecasts.  The central tendency of their out-
put growth projections was 2.5 to 3.5 percent for 2010, 
3.4 to 4.5 percent for 2011, and 3.5 to 4.8 percent for 
2012.  Participants indicated that consumer spending 
would likely be bolstered by the turnaround in housing 
prices, further increases in equity values, and gradual 
improvements in credit availability.  With an improved 
sales outlook, businesses would rebuild their inventory 
stocks and spending on equipment and software would 
pick up; in addition, exports would likely receive a sig-
nificant boost from stronger global growth.  Monetary 
and fiscal stimulus would provide further support to 
aggregate demand next year.  Nevertheless, the pace of 
expansion would probably be damped for some time 
by elevated uncertainty on the part of households and 
businesses and by the slow and lagging recovery of la-
bor markets, which would hold down income growth 
and limit any rebound in household confidence.  In 
addition, distress in commercial real estate markets 
would likely weigh further on the balance sheets of 
banking institutions, thereby contributing to continued 
tight credit conditions for many households and small-
er firms.  However, participants anticipated that the 

recovery would gather steam in 2011 and 2012 as a 
consequence of further improvements in consumer and 
business confidence and in the condition of financial 
markets and institutions.  In the absence of any further 
shocks, participants generally expected that the econo-
my would converge over time to a sustainable path 
with real GDP growing at a rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, 
reflecting longer-term demographic trends and im-
provements in labor productivity. 

Participants generally anticipated that the unemploy-
ment rate would rise somewhat further during the final 
months of 2009 and then decline steadily over the next 
few years.  Their projections for the average unem-
ployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2009 had a cen-
tral tendency of 9.9 to 10.1 percent, somewhat higher 
than the actual unemployment rate of 9.8 percent in 
September—the latest reading available at the time of 
the November FOMC meeting.  Participants noted 
that, as in the early stages of previous recoveries the 
unemployment rate was continuing to rise after output 
turned up, reflecting firms’ uncertainty about the pace 
of recovery and their efforts to raise productivity and 
hold down costs.  Looking further ahead, participants’ 
unemployment rate projections had a central tendency 
of 9.3 to 9.7 percent for the fourth quarter of 2010, 8.2 
to 8.6 percent for the end of 2011, and 6.8 to 7.5 per-
cent for the final quarter of 2012.  A number of partic-
ipants made modest upward revisions to their estimates 
of the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment in 
light of their assessments of the extent to which ongo-
ing structural adjustments would be associated with 
somewhat higher labor market frictions.  Thus, partici-
pants’ longer-run unemployment rate projections had a 
central tendency of 5.0 to 5.2 percent, about a quarter 
percentage point higher than in June. 

The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in 
2009 was 1.1 to 1.2 percent, and the central tendency of 
their projections for core PCE inflation was 1.4 to 1.5 
percent.1  While actual PCE inflation over the first half 
of the year turned out to be somewhat lower than par-
ticipants had anticipated at the time of the June FOMC 
meeting, recent increases in energy prices led most of 
them to make upward revisions to their second-half 

                                                 
1 In July 2009, the BEA adjusted the definition of core PCE 
inflation to include prices for food consumed at restaurants 
and other establishments away from home.  FOMC partici-
pants indicated that this definitional adjustment did not 
cause any material changes in their core inflation projections 
for 2009 or beyond. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



inflation forecasts; thus, participants’ PCE inflation 
projections for the year as a whole were broadly similar 
to their previous forecasts.  Core PCE inflation was 1.6 
percent at an annual rate over the first half of 2009, 
about a quarter point lower than most participants had 
anticipated last June, and nearly all participants pro-
jected that core PCE inflation would decline further to 
an annual rate of about 1¼ percent in the second half. 

Looking beyond this year, participants generally anti-
cipated that inflation would remain subdued.  The cen-
tral tendency of their projections for PCE inflation was 
1.3 to 1.6 percent for 2010, 1.0 to 1.9 percent for 2011, 
and 1.2 to 1.9 percent for 2012, and the central tenden-
cy of their projections for core PCE inflation was 1.0 to 
1.5 percent for 2010, 1.0 to 1.6 percent for 2011, and 
1.0 to 1.7 percent for 2012.  Many participants stated 
that well-anchored inflation expectations would play an 
important role in avoiding further declines in inflation 
over the next few years despite the persistence of siza-
ble resource slack.  Participants also pointed out that 
strong global growth was likely to place significant up-
ward pressure on the prices of energy and other com-
modities; as a consequence, their projections for overall 
inflation over the next several years were generally a 
notch higher than their projections for core inflation.  
As in June, the central tendency of projections for PCE 
inflation over the longer run was 1.7 to 2.0 percent, 
reflecting participants’ assessments of the measured 
rate of inflation that would best satisfy the Federal Re-
serve’s dual mandate of maximum employment and 
stable prices.  Most participants expected that inflation 
in 2012 would remain below its longer-run value, but a 
few expected inflation to have converged to its longer-
run value by that time. 

Uncertainty and Risks 
As in June, nearly all participants judged the degree of 
uncertainty surrounding their projections of output 
growth and unemployment as higher than historical 
norms.2  Participants generally saw the risks to these 
projections as roughly balanced, although a few indi-
cated that the risks to the unemployment outlook re-
mained weighted to the upside.  In explaining these 
judgments, participants highlighted the intrinsic diffi-

                                                 
2 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the 
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008.  At 
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” 
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in 
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess 
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 

culties in predicting the dynamics of the economy fol-
lowing a financial crisis and a severe recession.  Partici-
pants noted that the recent pickup in economic growth 
might reflect stronger underlying momentum in eco-
nomic activity than anticipated and hence point to a 
faster pace of recovery going forward.  On the other 
hand, participants referred to the possibility that deteri-
orating performance of commercial real estate and con-
sumer loans could have adverse effects on the financial 
system that would damp the growth of output and em-
ployment over coming quarters. 

Most participants continued to see the uncertainty sur-
rounding their inflation projections as unusually high, 
although a few viewed the extent of such uncertainty as 
roughly in line with historical norms.  Participants gen-
erally judged the risks to the inflation outlook to be 
roughly balanced, and many of them indicated that 
these risks were linked, at least in part, to the risks as-
sociated with the economic outlook.  Participants cited 
the risk that longer-term inflation expectations might 
start drifting downward in response to persistent eco-
nomic slack and low inflation outcomes; alternatively, 
those expectations could shift upwards in response to a 
sharper recovery, especially if extraordinary monetary 
policy stimulus were not unwound in a timely fashion.  
Participants also noted the possibility that an accelera-
tion in global economic activity could induce a surge in 
the prices of energy and other commodities that would 
place upward pressure on headline inflation. 

Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2009 2010 2011 2012 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . .   ±0.6 ±1.4 ±1.6 ±1.5 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . .  ±0.2 ±0.7 ±0.9 ±1.1 

Total consumer prices2 . . . .  ±0.5 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were re-
leased in the fall by various private and government forecasters.  As de-
scribed in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, 
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, 
unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the aver-
age size of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in 
David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of 
the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and 
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, November).  

1.  For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that 

has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.  
Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the 
fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in 
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and over the longer run.  The 
dispersion in these projections reflects, among other 
factors, differences in the participants’ assessments re-
garding the current degree of underlying momentum in 
economic activity, the evolution of consumer and busi-
ness sentiment, and the trajectory for private saving, 
and in their interpretations of the continued weakness 
in bank credit. The distribution of participants’ GDP 
growth projections for 2009 shifted upward about a 
percentage point and became narrower in response to 
the economic and financial information received since 
the June FOMC meeting.  Most participants only 
shaded up their growth projections for 2010, but a few 
participants made more substantial upward revisions; 
hence the lowest points in the distribution increased 
markedly while the median was just a notch higher than 
in June. The distribution of growth projections for 
2011 was little changed from June, while the distribu-
tion for 2012 was centered at a slightly higher rate than 
for 2011 with about the same degree of dispersion.  A 
few participants made modest upward revisions to their 
estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of output 
growth, producing a slight widening of the range for 
these longer-run projections.  Regarding participants’ 
unemployment rate projections, the distribution for 
2009 narrowed but with roughly the same mode as in 
June, while the distributions for 2010 and 2011 shifted 
down a bit and narrowed somewhat.  The distribution 
of unemployment rate projections for 2012 exhibited 
noticeably greater dispersion than for 2011.  The distri-
bution of longer-run unemployment rate projections 

was generally more tightly concentrated than in June, 
reflecting modest upward revisions to some partici-
pants’ estimates of the sustainable rate of unemploy-
ment to which the economy would converge under 
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
ther shocks. 

Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
tion about the diversity of participants’ views regarding 
the inflation outlook.  For total PCE inflation, the dis-
tribution of participants’ projections for 2009 was nar-
rower than in June, whereas the distributions of their 
projections for 2010 and 2011 did not change signifi-
cantly, and there was virtually no change in the distri-
bution of longer-run projections.  For core PCE infla-
tion, participants’ projections for 2009 became more 
tightly concentrated, while their projections for 2010 
and 2011 were only slightly less dispersed than in June.  
The distributions of total and core PCE inflation pro-
jections for 2012 exhibited somewhat greater disper-
sion than those for 2011.  The dispersion in partici-
pants’ projections for 2010, 2011, and 2012 mainly re-
flected differences in their judgments regarding the 
determinants of inflation, including their estimates of 
prevailing resource slack and their assessments of the 
extent to which that slack affects inflation outcomes 
and expectations.  In contrast, the relatively concen-
trated distribution of longer-run inflation projections 
indicates substantial agreement among participants re-
garding the measured rate of inflation that best satisfies 
the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
ployment and stable prices.  

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2
4
6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–12 and over the longer run  

2009

June projections

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

Percent range

November projections

2
4

6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

2010

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10

12
14

Number of participants

2011

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

Percent range

2
4
6

8
10
12
14

Number of participants

2012

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10
12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2
4
6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–12 and over the longer run  

2009

June projections

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

November projections

2
4

6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

2010

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10

12
14

Number of participants

2011

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

2
4
6

8
10
12
14

Number of participants

2012

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10
12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2
4
6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–12 and over the longer run  

2009

June projections

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

November projections

2
4

6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

2010

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10

12
14

Number of participants

2011

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2
4
6

8
10
12
14

Number of participants

2012

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10
12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2
4
6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–12  

2009

June projections

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

November projections

2
4

6
8

10
12
14

Number of participants

2010

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2
4
6
8

10

12
14

Number of participants

2011

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2
4
6

8
10
12
14

Number of participants

2012

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by 
the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understand-
ing of the basis for policy actions.  Considera-
ble uncertainty attends these projections, 
however.  The economic and statistical models 
and relationships used to help produce eco-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de-
scriptions of the real world.  And the future 
path of the economy can be affected by my-
riad unforeseen developments and events.  
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, 
participants consider not only what appears to 
be the most likely economic outcome as em-
bodied in their projections, but also the range 
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of 
their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports 
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board 
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  The projection 
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the 
considerable uncertainty associated with eco-
nomic forecasts.  For example, suppose a par-
ticipant projects that real gross domestic 
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will 
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 
percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty   
attending those  projections  is  similar to  that 
 

experienced in the past and the risks around 
the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP 
would expand within a range of 2.4 to 3.6 per-
cent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 percent in 
the second year, 1.4 to 4.6 in the third year and 
1.5 to 4.5 percent in the fourth year.  The cor-
responding 70 percent confidence intervals for 
overall inflation would be 1.5 to 2.5 percent in 
the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the 
second, third and fourth years. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
tory, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
jections of each variable is greater than, smaller 
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, are weighted to the 
downside, or are broadly balanced.  That is, 
participants judge whether each variable is 
more likely to be above or below their projec-
tions of the most likely outcome.  These judg-
ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
tending each participant’s projections are dis-
tinct from the diversity of participants’ views 
about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast un-
certainty is concerned with the risks associated 
with a particular projection rather than with 
divergences across a number of different pro-
jections. 

 
    

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




