









































Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, January 16 and January 27-28, 2009


 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
January 27-28, 2009

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, January 27, 2009, at 1:30 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, January 28, 2009, at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pi-

analto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Ashton,1 Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, 

Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
 
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open 

Market Account 
 
Ms. Johnson,2 Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson,2 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-

rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Levin, Associate Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Shanks,3 Associate Secretary, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Reeve, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors  
 
Mr. Sichel, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Dynan, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
 

1 Attended Wednesday’s session only. 
2 Attended portion of the meeting that was a joint 

session of the Board and the FOMC. 
3 Attended portion of the meeting on Tuesday that 

was a joint session of the Board and the FOMC. 
 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



 

Ms. Kusko, Senior Economist, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Gust, Senior Economist, Division of Interna-

tional Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Driscoll and King, Economists, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Richmond 
 
Messrs. Fuhrer, Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Ex-

ecutive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, Dallas, and Cleveland, respectively 

 
Messrs. Hilton and Krane, Mses. Mester and 

Perelmuter, Messrs. Rasche, Rudebusch, and 
Sellon, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, 
New York, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Kan-
sas City, respectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 

Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond  

 
2 Attended portion of the meeting that was a joint 

session of the Board and the FOMC. 
 

 
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad-
vices of the election of the following members and al-
ternate members of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee for a term beginning January 27, 2009, had been 
received and that these individuals had executed their 
oaths of office. 
 
The elected members and alternate members were as 
follows: 
 
William C. Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First 

Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, as alternate. 
 
Jeffrey M. Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond, with Eric C. Rosengren, President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate. 
 
Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago, with Sandra Pianalto, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate. 
 
Dennis P. Lockhart, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta, with James B. Bullard, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate. 
 
Janet L. Yellen, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco, with Thomas M. Hoenig, President 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alter-
nate. 
 
Annual Organizational Matters 
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee were selected to serve 
until the selection of their successors at the first regu-
larly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2010: 
 
Ben S. Bernanke Chairman 
William C. Dudley Vice Chairman  
Brian F. Madigan Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker Deputy Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez General Counsel 
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr. Deputy General Counsel 
Richard M. Ashton Assistant General  
 Counsel 
D. Nathan Sheets Economist  
David J. Stockton Economist  
  
David E. Altig 
James A. Clouse 
Thomas A. Connors  
Steven B. Kamin    
Lawrence Slifman   
Daniel G. Sullivan 
Joseph S. Tracy 
John A. Weinberg 
David W. Wilcox 
John C. Williams Associate Economists 
 
 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted several 
minor amendments to its Program for Security of 
FOMC Information. 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York was selected to execute transactions for the Sys-
tem Open Market Account. 

Secretary’s note:  The Chairman reported that 
prior to the meeting he had used his authority 
under the Committee’s Rules of Organization 
to appoint Ms. Mosser as Manager of the Sys-
tem Open Market Account until the Commit-
tee selects a replacement manager. 

 

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Au-
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations (shown 
below) with a clerical amendment that combined the 
list of currencies in 1.A approved at the January 2008 
meeting with the five additional currencies that were 
approved by the Committee in September and October 
2008 in connection with temporary reciprocal currency 
arrangements: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY 
OPERATIONS 
(Amended January 27, 2009) 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for 
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary 
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive 
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant 
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural in-
structions as the Committee may issue from time to 
time: 

A. To purchase and sell the following foreign cur-
rencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or 
forward transactions on the open market at home 
and abroad, including transactions with the U.S. 
Treasury, with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund 
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 
1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the 
Bank for International Settlements, and with other 
international financial institutions: 

 
Australian dollars 
Brazilian reais 
Canadian dollars 
Danish kroner 
euro 
Japanese yen 
Korean won 

Mexican pesos 
New Zealand dollars 
Norwegian kroner 
Pounds sterling 
Singapore dollars 
Swedish kronor 
Swiss francs 

 
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding 
forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the foreign 
currencies listed in paragraph A above. 
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit for-
eign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal cur-
rency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, pro-
vided that drawings by either party to any such ar-
rangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 
after any amount outstanding at that time was first 
drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional 
circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay. 
D. To maintain an overall open position in all for-
eign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this 
purpose, the overall open position in all foreign cur-
rencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of 
net positions in individual currencies, excluding 
changes in dollar value due to foreign exchange rate 
movements and interest accruals. The net position in 
a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of 
balances in that currency, plus outstanding contracts 
for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for 
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of 
these elements with due regard to sign. 

2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain recip-
rocal currency arrangements (“swap” arrangements) for 
the System Open Market Account for periods up to a 
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign 
banks, which are among those designated by the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign 
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the 
Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity: 
 
Foreign bank  Amount of arrangement 

    (millions of dollars equivalent) 
 
Bank of Canada   2,000 
Bank of Mexico   3,000 
 

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrange-
ments, and the proposed terms of any new arrange-
ments that may be authorized, shall be referred for re-
view and approval to the Committee. 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 

3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken 
under paragraph 1.A. above shall, unless otherwise ex-
pressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing 
market rates. For the purpose of providing an invest-
ment return on System holdings of foreign currencies 
or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or 
received in connection with swap drawings, transac-
tions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at 
non-market exchange rates. 
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with for-
eign central banks for the coordination of foreign cur-
rency transactions. In making operating arrangements 
with foreign central banks on System holdings of for-
eign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, 
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee. Any agreements or understandings concerning 
the administration of the accounts maintained by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign 
banks designated by the Board of Governors under 
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for re-
view and approval to the Committee. 
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to 
ensure that adequate liquidity is maintained to meet 
anticipated needs and so that each currency portfolio 
shall generally have an average duration of no more 
than 18 months (calculated as Macaulay duration). Such 
investments may include buying or selling outright ob-
ligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and in-
terest by, a foreign government or agency thereof; buy-
ing such securities under agreements for repurchase of 
such securities; selling such securities under agreements 
for the resale of such securities; and holding various 
time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions. 
In addition, when appropriate in connection with ar-
rangements to provide investment facilities for foreign 
currency holdings, U.S. Government securities may be 
purchased from foreign central banks under agree-
ments for repurchase of such securities within 30 cal-
endar days. 
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preced-
ing paragraphs shall be reported promptly to the For-
eign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee. The 
Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the 
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such 
other member of the Board as the Chairman may des-
ignate (or in the absence of members of the Board 
serving on the Subcommittee, other Board members 
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the 
absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, the 
Vice Chairman’s alternate). Meetings of the Subcom-

mittee shall be called at the request of any member, or 
at the request of the Manager, System Open Market 
Account (“Manager”), for the purposes of reviewing 
recent or contemplated operations and of consulting 
with the Manager on other matters relating to the Man-
ager’s responsibilities. At the request of any member of 
the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews 
and consultations shall be referred for determination to 
the Federal Open Market Committee. 
7. The Chairman is authorized: 

A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter 
into any needed agreement or understanding with the 
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of re-
sponsibility for foreign currency operations between 
the System and the Treasury; 
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully ad-
vised concerning System foreign currency operations, 
and to consult with the Secretary on policy matters 
relating to foreign currency operations; 
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re-
ports and information to the National Advisory 
Council on International Monetary and Financial 
Policies. 

8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to 
transmit pertinent information on System foreign cur-
rency operations to appropriate officials of the Treas-
ury Department. 
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Account in ac-
cordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Gov-
ernors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to For-
eign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated 
January 1, 1944. 

 

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive 
was reaffirmed in the form shown below: 

FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
(Reaffirmed January 27, 2009) 

1. System operations in foreign currencies shall gen-
erally be directed at countering disorderly market con-
ditions, provided that market exchange rates for the 
U.S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with 
IMF Article IV, Section 1. 
2. To achieve this end the System shall: 

A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales 
of foreign exchange. 
B. Maintain reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrange-
ments with selected foreign central banks. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks 
of other countries and with international monetary 
institutions. 

3. Transactions may also be undertaken: 
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable 
future needs for currencies. 
B. To provide means for meeting System and 
Treasury commitments in particular currencies, and 
to facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization 
Fund. 
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly 
authorized by the Committee. 

4. System foreign currency operations shall be con-
ducted: 

A. In close and continuous consultation and coop-
eration with the United States Treasury; 
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign 
monetary authorities; and 
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of 
the United States in the International Monetary Fund 
regarding exchange arrangements under IMF Article 
IV. 

 

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Pro-
cedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency 
Operations, with the addition of the clarifying phrase 
“unless otherwise directed by the Committee” in the 
first sentence: 

PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT 
TO FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS 
(Amended January 27, 2009) 

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization 
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee 
as set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency 
Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Man-
ager, System Open Market Account (“Manager”), shall 
be guided by the following procedural understandings 
with respect to consultations and clearances with the 
Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and 
the Chairman of the Committee, unless otherwise di-
rected by the Committee. All operations undertaken 
pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly 
to the Committee. 
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee 
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that 
consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in 
the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in 
the System's overall open position in foreign curren-

cies exceeding $300 million on any day or $600 mil-
lion since the most recent regular meeting of the 
Committee. 
B. Any operation that would result in a change on 
any day in the System's net position in a single for-
eign currency exceeding $150 million, or $300 million 
when the operation is associated with repayment of 
swap drawings. 
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial 
volume of trading in a particular currency by the Sys-
tem, even though the change in the System's net po-
sition in that currency might be less than the limits 
specified in 1.B. 
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 
percent of the size of the swap arrangement. 

2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or 
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes 
that consultation with the full Committee is not feasible 
in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the 
Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcom-
mittee is not feasible in the time available): 

A. Any operation that would result in a change in 
the System's overall open position in foreign curren-
cies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most recent regu-
lar meeting of the Committee. 
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank 
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 per-
cent of the size of the swap arrangement. 

3. The Manager shall also consult with the Sub-
committee or the Chairman about proposed swap 
drawings by the System and about any operations that 
are not of a routine character. 
 

By unanimous vote, the Committee approved several 
amendments to the Authorization for Domestic Open 
Market Operations (shown below).  The amendments 
consolidate language authorizing repurchase agree-
ments and reverse repurchase agreements into one pa-
ragraph, add a paragraph authorizing the use of agents 
to execute transactions in certain mortgage-backed se-
curities (MBS), and add language to the final paragraph 
that reflects the Committee’s current focus on using 
the composition and size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet as instruments of monetary policy.  The fi-
nal paragraph now specifies that decisions to make ma-
terial changes in the composition and size of the port-
folio of assets held in the System Open Market Ac-
count during the period between meetings of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee will be made in the same 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



 

manner as decisions to change the intended level of the 
federal funds rate during the intermeeting period: 

AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN 
MARKET OPERATIONS 
(Amended January 27, 2009) 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent do-
mestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the 
Committee: 

A. To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, in-
cluding securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and 
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guar-
anteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of 
the United States in the open market, from or to se-
curities dealers and foreign and international ac-
counts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery 
basis, for the System Open Market Account at mar-
ket prices, and, for such Account, to exchange matur-
ing U.S. Government and Federal agency securities 
with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to al-
low them to mature without replacement; 
B. To buy or sell in the open market U.S. Gov-
ernment securities, and securities that are direct obli-
gations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and in-
terest by, any agency of the United States, for the 
System Open Market Account under agreements to 
resell or repurchase such securities or obligations (in-
cluding such transactions as are commonly referred 
to as repo and reverse repo transactions) in 65 busi-
ness days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise ex-
pressly authorized by the Committee, shall be deter-
mined by competitive bidding, after applying reason-
able limitations on the volume of agreements with 
individual counterparties. 

2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
to use agents in agency MBS-related transactions. 
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
to lend on an overnight basis U.S. Government securi-
ties held in the System Open Market Account to deal-
ers at rates that shall be determined by competitive bid-
ding. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall set 
a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives 
of the program and apply reasonable limitations on the 
total amount of a specific issue that may be auctioned 
and on the amount of securities that each dealer may 

borrow. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York may 
reject bids which could facilitate a dealer's ability to 
control a single issue as determined solely by the Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of New York. 
4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, while assisting in the provision of 
short-term investments for foreign and international 
accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York and accounts maintained at the Federal Re-
serve Bank of New York as fiscal agent of the United 
States pursuant to Section 15 of the Federal Reserve 
Act, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes 
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) 
for System Open Market Account, to sell U.S. Gov-
ernment securities to such accounts on the bases set 
forth in paragraph 1.A under agreements providing for 
the resale by such accounts of those securities in 65 
business days or less on terms comparable to those 
available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for 
New York Bank account, when appropriate, to under-
take with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed on 
purchases and sales of securities in paragraph l.B, re-
purchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency 
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repur-
chase agreements between its own account and such 
foreign, international, and fiscal agency accounts main-
tained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such 
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may 
provide for a service fee when appropriate. 
5. In the execution of the Committee’s decision re-
garding policy during any intermeeting period, the 
Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, upon the instruction of the Chair-
man of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in excep-
tional circumstances the degree of pressure on reserve 
positions and hence the intended federal funds rate and 
to take actions that result in material changes in the 
composition and size of the assets in the System Open 
Market Account other than those anticipated by the 
Committee at its most recent meeting. Any such ad-
justment shall be made in the context of the Commit-
tee’s discussion and decision at its most recent meeting 
and the Committee’s long-run objectives for price sta-
bility and sustainable economic growth, and shall be 
based on economic, financial, and monetary develop-
ments during the intermeeting period. Consistent with 
Committee practice, the Chairman, if feasible, will con-
sult with the Committee before making any adjustment. 
 

In light of its program to purchase large quantities of 
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, the Com-

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

mittee voted to suspend temporarily the Guidelines for 
the Conduct of System Operations in Federal Agency 
Issues (last amended January 28, 2003).  Mr. Lacker 
dissented, stating that he views targeted purchases of 
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities as distort-
ing credit markets and would prefer that the Desk in-
stead purchase Treasury securities. 

The remainder of the Committee’s meeting was con-
ducted as a joint meeting with the Board of Governors 
in order to facilitate policy discussion of developments 
with regard to the System’s liquidity facilities and bal-
ance sheet during the intermeeting period and to con-
sider the need for changes in the System’s approach to 
using those tools. 

Market Developments and Open Market Opera-
tions 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets.  The Manager also reported on 
System open market operations in Treasury securities 
and in agency debt and mortgage-backed securities dur-
ing the period since the Committee’s December 15-16 
meeting.  By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified 
these transactions.  There were no open market opera-
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account 
during the period since the Committee’s December 15-
16 meeting. 

Meeting participants discussed the potential benefits of 
conducting open market purchases of a substantial 
quantity of longer-term Treasury securities for the Sys-
tem Open Market Account.  Participants generally 
agreed that purchasing such securities could be a useful 
adjunct to other monetary policy tools in some circum-
stances.  One participant preferred to begin purchasing 
Treasury securities immediately, as a way to increase 
the monetary base, in lieu of expanding programs that 
aim to support particular segments of the credit mar-
kets.  Other participants were prepared to purchase 
longer-term Treasury securities if evolving circum-
stances were to indicate that such transactions would 
be particularly effective in improving conditions in pri-
vate credit markets.  However, they judged that pur-
chases of longer-term Treasury securities would only 
modestly improve conditions in private credit markets 
at present, and that completing already-announced 
plans to purchase large quantities of agency debt and 
mortgage-backed securities and to support certain as-
set-backed securities markets was, in current circum-
stances, likely to be a more effective way to employ the 

Federal Reserve balance sheet to support credit flows 
to, and spending by, households and businesses. 

System Liquidity Programs and Balance Sheet 
Staff reported on developments in System liquidity 
programs and on changes in the System’s balance sheet 
since the Committee’s December 15-16 meeting.  As of 
January 26, the System’s total assets and liabilities stood 
at just under $2 trillion, about $300 billion less than on 
December 17, 2008.  The drop, which resulted primar-
ily from a decline in foreign central bank drawings on 
reciprocal currency arrangements and a reduction in 
issuers’ sales of commercial paper to the Commercial 
Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), seemed to reflect some 
improvement in the functioning of global interbank 
markets and the commercial paper market after the 
year-end. 

Most participants interpreted the evidence as indicating 
that credit markets still were not working well, and that 
the Federal Reserve’s lending programs, asset pur-
chases, and currency swaps were providing much-
needed support to economic activity by reducing dislo-
cations in financial markets, lowering the cost of credit, 
and facilitating the flow of credit to businesses and 
households.  Several indicated that they expected the 
soon-to-be-implemented Term Asset-Backed Securities 
Loan Facility (TALF) to improve liquidity and reduce 
disruptions in the markets for securities backed by stu-
dent loans, credit card receivables, auto loans, and small 
business loans guaranteed by the Small Business Ad-
ministration; they also noted that it might become nec-
essary to enhance or expand the TALF or other pro-
grams.  However, in the view of one participant, finan-
cial markets—including those for asset-backed securi-
ties—were working reasonably well, given the current 
high level of pessimism and uncertainty about eco-
nomic prospects and asset values, and the System’s 
lending and asset-purchase programs were resulting in 
undesirable distortions in the allocation of credit.  Oth-
ers noted that such programs could have undesirable 
consequences if expanded too far or continued too 
long.  Many participants agreed that it would be desir-
able for the System to develop additional measures of 
the effects of its programs, and they encouraged addi-
tional research on analytical frameworks that could in-
form Federal Reserve policy actions with respect to the 
size and composition of its balance sheet. 

Several meeting participants noted that the expansion 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet along with con-
tinued growth of the money supply could help stabilize 
longer-run inflation expectations in the face of increas-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



 

ing economic slack and very low inflation in coming 
quarters.  Over a longer horizon, however, the Federal 
Reserve will need to scale back its liquidity programs 
and the size of its balance sheet as the economy recov-
ers, to avoid the risk of an unwanted increase in ex-
pected inflation and a buildup of inflation pressures.  
Participants observed that many of the Federal Re-
serve’s liquidity programs are priced so that they will 
become unattractive to borrowers as conditions in fi-
nancial markets improve; these programs will shrink 
automatically.  In other cases, the Federal Reserve 
eventually may have to take a more active role in scal-
ing back programs by adjusting their terms and condi-
tions.  More generally, the Federal Reserve may need to 
develop additional tools to manage the size of its bal-
ance sheet and the level of the federal funds rate as the 
economy recovers.  As of late January, however, with 
financial conditions strained and the economic outlook 
weak, most participants agreed that the Committee 
should continue to focus on supporting the functioning 
of financial markets and stimulating the economy 
through purchases of agency debt and mortgage-
backed securities and other measures—including the 
implementation of the TALF—that will keep the size 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet at a high level 
for some time. 

Participants also discussed the advisability of extending 
the termination dates of a number of temporary liquid-
ity facilities and reciprocal currency arrangements from 
April 30 to October 30, 2009.  Participants generally 
were of the view that, despite modest improvements in 
some sectors, conditions in credit markets overall re-
mained severely disrupted.  Most expressed support for 
extending the termination dates in order to reassure 
market participants that the facilities would remain in 
place as a backstop to private-sector credit arrange-
ments while financial conditions remained strained; 
they were prepared to extend the facilities beyond year-
end if conditions warrant.  Participants also noted that 
extending the termination date of these liquidity facili-
ties to October 30 would not rule out the possibility of 
closing particular facilities sooner if improvements in 
financial conditions were to indicate they were no 
longer needed to support credit markets and economic 
activity and to help preserve price stability. 

Following the discussion, the Committee voted unani-
mously to extend the termination dates of existing re-
ciprocal currency arrangements and the Term Securities 
Lending Facility (TSLF) to October 30, 2009.  The 
Board of Governors then voted unanimously to extend 
the termination dates of the TSLF, the Primary Dealer 

Credit Facility (PDCF), the Asset-Backed Commercial 
Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility 
(AMLF), the CPFF, and the Money Market Investor 
Funding Facility (MMIFF) to October 30, 2009. 

Staff Review of the Economic and Financial Situa-
tion 
The information reviewed at the meeting indicated a 
continued sharp contraction in real economic activity.  
Sales and starts of new homes remained on a steep 
downward trend, consumer spending continued its sig-
nificant decline, the deterioration in business equip-
ment investment intensified, and foreign demand 
weakened.  Conditions in the labor market continued 
to deteriorate rapidly in December:  Private payroll 
employment fell sharply, and the unemployment rate 
rose.  Industrial production dropped more severely 
than in earlier months.  Headline consumer prices fell 
in November and December, reflecting declines in 
consumer energy prices; core consumer prices were 
about flat in those months.  While conditions in some 
financial markets showed limited improvement, ex-
traordinary financial stresses remained apparent and 
credit conditions became still tighter for households 
and businesses. 

Employment continued to contract.  Private nonfarm 
payrolls fell sharply in December, with substantial 
losses over a wide range of industries.  Indicators of job 
vacancies and hiring declined further, and layoffs con-
tinued to mount.  The unemployment rate increased to 
7.2 percent in December, the share of individuals work-
ing part time for economic reasons surged, and the la-
bor force participation rate edged down for a second 
consecutive month. 

In December, industrial production posted a sharp de-
cline after falling substantially in November; the con-
traction was broad-based.  The decrease in production 
of consumer goods reflected cutbacks in motor vehicle 
assemblies as well as in the output of consumer durable 
goods such as appliances, furniture, and carpeting.  
Output in high-tech sectors contracted in the fourth 
quarter, reflecting reduced production of semiconduc-
tors, communications equipment, and computers.  The 
production of aircraft and parts recorded an increase in 
December after being held down in the autumn by a 
strike and by problems with some outsourced compo-
nents.  Available forward-looking indicators pointed to 
a further contraction in manufacturing output in com-
ing months. 

Real consumer spending appeared to decline sharply 
again in the fourth quarter, likely reflecting the com-

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

bined effects of decreases in house and equity prices, a 
weakening labor market, and tight credit conditions.  
Real spending on goods excluding motor vehicles was 
estimated to have fallen noticeably in December, more 
than reversing an increase in November.  Outlays on 
motor vehicles edged down in November and Decem-
ber following a sharper decline in October.  Early indi-
cators of spending in January pointed to continued soft 
demand.  Readings on consumer sentiment remained at 
very low levels by historical standards through the end 
of 2008 and showed little improvement in early Janu-
ary. 

Real residential construction contracted in November 
and December.  Single-family housing starts dropped at 
a much faster rate in those months than they had in the 
first 10 months of the year.  Multifamily starts also fell 
in those months, as did permit issuance for both cate-
gories.  Housing demand remained very weak and, al-
though the stock of unsold new single-family homes 
continued to move down in November, inventories of 
unsold homes remained elevated relative to the pace of 
sales.  Sales of existing single-family homes dropped 
less than sales of new homes in November and turned 
up in December, but the relative strength in sales of 
existing homes appeared to be at least partly attribut-
able to increases in foreclosure-related and other dis-
tressed sales.  Although the interest rate on conforming 
30-year fixed-rate mortgages declined markedly over 
the intermeeting period, the Senior Loan Officer Opin-
ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices that was con-
ducted in January indicated that banks had tightened 
lending standards on prime mortgage loans over the 
preceding three months.  The market for nonconform-
ing loans remained severely impaired.  Several indexes 
indicated that house prices continued to decline rapidly. 

In the business sector, investment in equipment and 
software appeared to contract noticeably in the fourth 
quarter, with decreases registered in all major spending 
categories.  In December, business purchases of autos 
and trucks moved down.  Spending on high-tech capi-
tal goods appeared to decline in the fourth quarter.  
Orders and shipments for many types of equipment 
declined in October and November, and imports of 
capital goods dropped back in those months.  Forward-
looking indicators of investment in equipment and 
software pointed to likely further declines.  Construc-
tion spending related to petroleum refining and power 
generation and distribution continued to increase 
briskly in the second half of 2008, responding to the 
surge in energy prices in the first half of that year, but 
real investment for many types of buildings stagnated 

or declined.  Vacancy rates for office, retail, and indus-
trial properties continued to move up in the fourth 
quarter, and the results of the January Senior Loan Of-
ficer Opinion Survey indicated that financing for new 
projects had become even more difficult to acquire. 

Real nonfarm inventories (excluding motor vehicles) 
appeared to have fallen in the last few months of 2008.  
However, with sales declining even more sharply, the 
ratio of book-value inventories to sales increased in 
October and November. 

The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed sharply in 
November, as a steep decline in imports outweighed a 
sizable drop in exports.  Much of the fall in exports was 
attributable to a decline in exports of fuels, chemicals, 
and other industrial supplies, which in part reflected 
lower prices for these goods.  All other major catego-
ries of exports moved down as well.  More than half of 
the decline in imports was due to a decrease in imports 
of oil that mostly reflected a dramatic decrease in prices 
but also some reduction in volume.  All other major 
categories of imports also recorded sizable decreases. 

Economic activity in the advanced foreign economies 
appeared to contract sharply in the fourth quarter, as 
the pace of job losses rose and measures of consumer 
spending on durable goods and business spending on 
investment goods showed declines.  In Japan and 
Europe, trade and industrial production dropped 
steeply, and measures of consumer and business senti-
ment declined.  In Canada, employment fell markedly 
in November and December after edging up in Octo-
ber.  Incoming data suggested that economic activity in 
the emerging market economies slowed significantly in 
the fourth quarter, with real gross domestic product 
(GDP) plunging in several Asian economies and ap-
pearing little changed in China.  Industrial production, 
trade, and measures of consumer sentiment registered 
declines across many other countries in both emerging 
Asia and Latin America. 

In the United States, overall personal consumption ex-
penditure (PCE) prices were estimated to have fallen in 
December, largely reflecting significant reductions in 
energy prices.  Increases in consumer food prices began 
to moderate toward the end of 2008.  Excluding food 
and energy prices, PCE prices appeared to have decel-
erated over the final three months of the year.  The 
moderation in core PCE prices was widespread across 
categories of goods and services.  After rising rapidly 
during the first nine months of the year, producer pric-
es excluding food and energy fell sharply in the last 
three months of 2008.  Measures of longer-term infla-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 

tion expectations edged up in early January, but re-
mained lower than they had been in all but the last few 
weeks of 2008.  In December, average hourly earnings 
moved up moderately. 

The decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) at its December 15-16 meeting reportedly 
were more aggressive than investors had been expect-
ing.  Market participants reportedly were somewhat 
surprised both by the size of the reduction in the target 
federal funds rate, to a range of 0 to ¼ percent, and by 
the statements that policy rates would likely remain low 
for some time and that the FOMC might engage in 
additional nontraditional policy actions such as the pur-
chase of longer-term Treasury securities.  Over the in-
termeeting period, investors marked down their expec-
tations for the path of the federal funds rate, as meas-
ured by money market futures rates.  The path first 
moved down immediately after the December FOMC 
meeting.  Later in the period, the policy path tilted low-
er in response to weaker-than-expected economic data 
releases and increased concerns about the health of 
some financial institutions.  In contrast, yields on me-
dium- and longer-term nominal Treasury coupon secu-
rities increased, on net, over the period.  Yields 
dropped sharply following the release of the FOMC 
statement, reportedly in part because investors inter-
preted it as suggesting that the Federal Reserve might 
increase its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities.  
Those price movements were more than reversed after 
the turn of the year, despite the worsening economic 
outlook, apparently reflecting a waning of year-end 
safe-haven demands and an anticipation of substantially 
increased Treasury debt issuance to finance larger-than-
expected deficits associated with the new Administra-
tion’s economic stimulus plans.  Although implied in-
flation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities (TIPS) increased over the period, 
this increase reportedly was largely attributable to im-
proved trading conditions in the TIPS market rather 
than upward revisions to inflation expectations. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets showed 
some signs of easing, although significant stresses re-
mained.  The spreads of London interbank offered 
rates, or Libor, over comparable-maturity overnight 
index swap rates declined across most maturities over 
the period:  The one-month spread fell to its lowest 
level since August 2007; the three-month spread also 
declined but remained elevated.  Though depository 
institutions continued to make substantial use of the 
discount window, the amount of primary credit out-
standing declined.  Recent auctions of term funds un-

der the Federal Reserve’s Term Auction Facility were 
undersubscribed, although one auction following the 
year-end did see a relatively large number of bidders.  
The TSLF auctions were also undersubscribed.  Use of 
the PDCF continued to fall significantly over the pe-
riod. 

Conditions in markets for repurchase agreements, or 
repos, also showed some signs of improvement.  With 
the overnight Treasury general collateral repo rate near 
zero for much of the period, market participants re-
portedly were reluctant to lend Treasury collateral out 
of concern that counterparties might fail to return bor-
rowed securities.  However, the pace of delivery fails 
continued to run well below the high rates of Septem-
ber and October, reflecting in part reductions in trans-
action volumes as well as industry efforts to mitigate 
fails, including the January 5 recommendation of the 
Treasury Market Practices Group to implement a fi-
nancial charge on settlement fails.  Conditions in the 
market for repo transactions backed by agency debt 
and mortgage-backed securities also improved some-
what, with average bid-asked spreads declining from 
high levels. 

The market for Treasury coupon securities showed 
signs of increased impairment late in 2008, followed by 
some improvement early in 2009.  Trading volumes fell 
to very low levels at the end of 2008, although they 
recovered a bit after the end of the year.  Bid-asked 
spreads in the on-the-run market declined sharply at 
the beginning of 2009 after having increased at the end 
of 2008.  The on-the-run premium for the 10-year no-
minal Treasury note was little changed at very elevated 
levels over the intermeeting period.  On balance, the 
Treasury market remained much less liquid than nor-
mal. 

Treasury- and government-only money market mutual 
funds (MMMFs) faced pressures stemming from very 
low short-term interest rates, and many such funds re-
portedly had waived management fees in an effort to 
retain investors.  By contrast, prime MMMFs had net 
inflows over the intermeeting period.  The MMIFF 
continued to register no activity despite changes that 
eased some of the terms of the program.  Market par-
ticipants nonetheless pointed to the MMIFF as a po-
tentially important backup facility. 

Conditions in the commercial paper (CP) market im-
proved over the intermeeting period, likely reflecting 
recent measures taken in support of this market, greater 
demand from institutional investors, and the passing of 
year-end.  Yields and spreads on 30-day A1/P1 nonfi-

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

nancial and financial CP as well as on asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) declined modestly and re-
mained low.  Yields and spreads on 30-day A2/P2 CP, 
which is not eligible for purchase under the CPFF, 
dropped sharply after the beginning of the year as some 
institutional investors reportedly reentered the market.  
The dollar amounts of outstanding unsecured financial 
and nonfinancial CP and ABCP rose slightly, on net, 
over the intermeeting period.  This small change was 
more than accounted for by the increase in CP held by 
the CPFF.  In contrast, credit extended under the 
AMLF declined over the intermeeting period. 

Liquidity in the corporate bond market improved over 
the intermeeting period, with increases in trading vol-
ume for both investment- and speculative-grade bonds 
and declines in bid-asked spreads for speculative-grade 
bonds.  Yields and spreads on corporate bonds de-
creased noticeably, particularly for speculative-grade 
firms, but spreads remained high by historical stan-
dards.  Gross issuance of bonds by nonfinancial in-
vestment-grade companies remained solid, but issuance 
of speculative-grade bonds was limited.  Conditions in 
the leveraged loan market remained very poor and issu-
ance of leveraged syndicated loans was also very weak.  
Secondary market prices for leveraged loans stayed near 
record lows and the average bid-asked spread in that 
market continued to be very wide.  The market for 
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) con-
tinued to show signs of strain, with the CMBX index—
an index based on credit default swap  (CDS) spreads 
on AAA-rated CMBS—widening during the intermeet-
ing period from already very elevated levels. 

Broad equity market indexes fell over the intermeeting 
period.  After improving during the early part of the 
intermeeting period, market sentiment toward financial 
firms appeared to worsen later in the period.  Those 
firms substantially underperformed the broader market 
as a number of large and regional banks reported siz-
able losses stemming from weak trading results, asset 
write-downs, and additional increases in loan-loss pro-
visions in anticipation of a further deterioration in 
credit quality.  CDS spreads for U.S. bank holding 
companies rose sharply in mid-January to near their 
historical highs, and equity prices for such companies 
fell on net, ending the period below their November 
lows.  A number of banking organizations issued debt 
through the FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee 
Program; spreads on such debt declined to levels close 
to those on agency debt.  The Treasury’s Troubled As-
set Relief Program provided additional support to sev-
eral banking institutions.  In particular, to support fi-

nancial market stability, the Treasury, the FDIC, and 
the Federal Reserve announced on January 16 that they 
had entered into an agreement with Bank of America 
to provide a package of guarantees, liquidity access, and 
capital.  Developments at nonbank financial institutions 
were mixed.  Equity prices of insurance companies 
edged down over the period, while their CDS spreads 
declined from extremely high levels.  Hedge funds 
posted negative average returns in December. 

Debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors expanded at 
a somewhat faster pace in the fourth quarter of 2008 
than in the first three quarters of the year.  Borrowing 
by the federal government continued to surge, boosted 
by programs aimed at reducing financial market strains.  
Borrowing by state and local governments picked up as 
the conditions in municipal bond market improved 
somewhat.  Household debt appeared to have con-
tracted in the fourth quarter, with both mortgage and 
consumer credit sharply curtailed due to weak house-
hold spending and tight credit conditions.  Business 
debt expanded only modestly, given the high cost of 
borrowing, tighter lending terms, and the deterioration 
in the macroeconomic environment. 

Commercial bank credit fell for the second consecutive 
month in December.  Commercial and industrial loans 
declined in November and December, likely reflecting 
a combination of tighter credit supply and reduced loan 
demand as well as some unwinding of the surge during 
September and October.  The Senior Loan Officer 
Opinion Survey conducted in January indicated that 
banks had continued to tighten credit standards and 
terms on all major loan categories over the past three 
months.  Survey respondents also indicated that they 
had reduced the size of credit lines for a wide range of 
existing business and household customers. 

M2 expanded at a considerably more rapid pace in De-
cember than in previous months.  Flows into both de-
mand deposits and savings deposits surged, possibly 
reflecting a reallocation of wealth towards assets that 
had government insurance or guarantees.  Small time 
deposits also increased strongly, as banks continued to 
bid aggressively for these deposits.  Currency continued 
to grow briskly, apparently boosted by solid foreign 
demand for U.S. banknotes.  In December, retail 
MMMF balances increased modestly after a decline in 
November. 

Conditions in foreign financial markets were relatively 
calm over the intermeeting period, although concerns 
about bank earnings and the stability of the global 
banking system led to widespread declines in equity 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11



 

prices later in the period.  Governments in major for-
eign economies initiated several actions aimed at 
strengthening the banking sector and easing credit 
market strains.  Sovereign bond yields in the advanced 
foreign economies fell early in the period, likely reflect-
ing declining inflation and expectations of lower policy 
rates, but moved up subsequently, perhaps in response 
to concerns about fiscal deficits.  The dollar increased 
on balance against the currencies of major U.S. trading 
partners. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff re-
vised down its outlook for economic activity in the first 
half of 2009, as the implications of weaker-than-
anticipated economic data releases more than offset an 
upward revision to the staff’s assumption of the 
amount of forthcoming fiscal stimulus.  Conditions in 
the labor market deteriorated sharply over the inter-
meeting period.  Industrial production declined steeply, 
and household and business spending fell more than 
anticipated.  Sales and starts of new homes remained 
on a steep downtrend.  Foreign demand also was 
weaker than expected.  Financial markets continued to 
be strained overall, credit remained unusually tight for 
both households and businesses, and equity prices had 
fallen further.  The staff’s projections of real GDP 
growth in the second half of 2009 and in 2010 were 
revised upward slightly, reflecting greater monetary and 
fiscal stimulus as well as the effects of more moderate 
oil prices and long-term interest rates, but they contin-
ued to show no more than a gradual economic recov-
ery.  The staff again expected that unemployment 
would rise substantially through the beginning of 2010 
before edging down over the remainder of that year.  
Forecasts for core and overall PCE inflation in 2009 
and 2010 were little changed, with growth in both core 
and overall PCE prices expected to be unusually low 
over the next few years in response to slack in resource 
utilization and relatively flat prices anticipated for many 
commodities and for imports. 

Meeting Participants’ Views and Committee Pol-
icy Action 
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting 
participants—the four members of the Board of Gov-
ernors and the presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve 
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the 
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for 
each year from 2009 through 2011.  To provide the 
public with information about their views of likely 
longer-term economic trends, and as additional context 
for the Committee’s monetary policy discussions, par-

ticipants agreed to collect and publish, on a quarterly 
basis, projections of the longer-run values to which 
they expect these three variables to converge.  Partici-
pants’ projections through 2011, and for the longer-
run, are described in the Summary of Economic Pro-
jections that is attached as an addendum to these min-
utes. 

In their discussion of the economic and financial situa-
tion and the outlook for the economy, participants 
agreed that the economy had weakened further going 
into 2009.  The incoming data, as well as information 
received from contacts in the business and banking 
communities, indicated a sharp and widespread eco-
nomic contraction both domestically and abroad, re-
flecting in large part the adverse effects of the intensifi-
cation of the financial crisis and the interaction be-
tween deteriorating economic and financial conditions.  
Participants generally saw credit conditions as ex-
tremely tight, with financial markets fragile and some 
parts of the banking sector under substantial stress.  
However, modest signs of improvement were evident 
in some financial markets—particularly those that were 
receiving support from Federal Reserve liquidity facili-
ties and other government actions.  Participants antici-
pated that a gradual recovery in U.S. economic activity 
would begin during the third or fourth quarter of this 
year as the economy begins to respond to fiscal stimu-
lus, relatively low energy prices, and continuing efforts 
to stabilize the financial sector and increase the avail-
ability of credit.  Several participants noted that firms’ 
efforts to control inventories as sales declined had con-
tributed to the rapid downturn in production and em-
ployment in recent quarters, but expected that the re-
sulting absence of widespread inventory overhangs 
might spur a prompt pickup in production in many 
sectors later this year once sales begin to level out or 
turn up.  Headline inflation would pick up some as the 
effects of previous declines in oil and other commodity 
prices wore off.  But in an environment of considerable 
economic slack, little if any inflation pressure from en-
ergy or other import prices, and possible declines in 
inflation expectations, headline and core inflation were 
expected to be quite low for several years.  Participants 
were, however, quite uncertain about the outlook.  All 
but a few saw the risks to growth as tilted to the down-
side; in light of financial stresses and tight credit condi-
tions, they saw a significant risk that the economic re-
covery would be both delayed and initially quite weak.  
In particular, most participants saw the renewed dete-
rioration in the banking sector’s financial condition as 
posing a significant downside risk to the economic out-

Page 12                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

look absent additional initiatives to stabilize the bank-
ing system. 

Participants noted that consumers were continuing to 
cut back expenditures in response to sharply declining 
employment, further declines in wealth, and tighter 
credit conditions.  Some participants mentioned that 
business contacts had indicated that firms were reduc-
ing payrolls aggressively and also freezing wages and 
salaries, further restricting growth in personal income 
and thus probably damping consumer spending.  Look-
ing ahead, participants anticipated that tax cuts and 
some other elements of the proposed fiscal stimulus 
package would add to after-tax incomes and thus boost 
consumer spending, though the magnitude of the im-
petus was far from clear.  For example, unless the cuts 
were clearly perceived to be permanent, the boost to 
consumer spending might prove short-lived, as was the 
case with the tax rebates distributed in the spring of 
2008. 

Participants saw no indication that the housing sector 
was beginning to stabilize.  Though sales of existing 
homes appeared to have flattened out, a large fraction 
of those transactions seemed to have resulted from 
foreclosures or other forced sales; moreover, new 
home sales, housing starts, and permits all continued to 
decline steeply.  Lower house prices and mortgage rates 
had increased housing affordability, but concerns that 
house prices may fall further appeared to be holding 
back potential buyers. 

The pace of commercial construction also had slowed.  
A number of participants expressed concern that the 
commercial real estate sector could deteriorate sharply 
in the months ahead.  They noted that a large number 
of commercial real estate mortgages will come due at a 
time when banks likely will still be facing balance-sheet 
constraints, the ability to securitize commercial real 
estate mortgages may remain severely restricted, and 
vacancy rates in commercial properties could well be 
climbing.  Some participants worried that the outcome 
could be an increase in defaults on commercial real 
estate mortgages and forced sales of commercial prop-
erties, which could push prices down further and gen-
erate additional losses on banks’ commercial real estate 
loan portfolios.  However, the commercial real estate 
sector had expanded more moderately during the re-
cent expansion than during the expansion of the late 
1980s, suggesting that the downturn in the current cy-
cle could be milder than that seen in the early 1990s. 

Participants also noted that other categories of business 
investment were contracting; they expected the rapid 

contraction to continue in coming quarters.  Equip-
ment investment had declined particularly sharply, re-
flecting weak sales, tighter credit, and substantial uncer-
tainty about future economic conditions and govern-
ment policies.  Lower energy and commodity prices, 
while supporting consumer spending, had reduced in-
vestment in oil, gas, and mineral extraction.  Outside of 
the agricultural sector, business contacts had reported 
sizable cutbacks in their planned capital expenditures 
for 2009. 

State and local government budgets had come under 
significant pressure as the slowing economy led to de-
clining revenues.  Several participants noted that gov-
ernments in their regions were responding by cutting 
spending rather than supplementing revenues.  The 
fiscal stimulus bill, which was being considered by the 
Congress as the Committee met, would support state 
and local government spending as well as boost federal 
spending, helping to buoy demands for goods and ser-
vices.  Participants generally thought that fiscal stimulus 
was a necessary and important complement to the steps 
the Federal Reserve and other agencies were taking, 
and that it would help foster economic recovery, but 
had questions about the details of the proposed legisla-
tion and the extent to which it would boost demands 
for and production of goods and services. 

Participants indicated they had been surprised by the 
speed and magnitude of the slowdown in economic 
growth abroad and the resulting drop in demand for 
U.S. exports.  It was noted that the surprisingly sharp 
decline in both U.S. exports and imports might also 
reflect tight credit conditions, including the reduced 
availability of trade credit.  Moreover, participants did 
not expect foreign economies to rebound quickly, sug-
gesting that net exports would not provide much sup-
port for U.S. economic activity in coming quarters. 

Participants agreed that inflation pressures had dimin-
ished appreciably in recent quarters, and they expected 
significantly lower headline and core inflation during 
the next few years than during recent years.  Indeed, 
most anticipated that inflation will slow for a time to 
rates somewhat lower than those they judge consistent 
with the dual goals of price stability and maximum em-
ployment, initially reflecting the recent declines in the 
prices of energy and other commodities and later re-
sponding to several years of substantial economic slack.  
Many participants noted some risk of a protracted pe-
riod of excessively low inflation, especially if inflation 
expectations were to move down in response to lower 
actual inflation and increasing economic slack, and a 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 13



 

few even saw some risk of deflation.  Several others, 
however, anticipated that longer-run inflation expecta-
tions would remain well anchored, supported in part by 
the Federal Reserve’s aggressive expansion of its bal-
ance sheet and the resulting growth of the monetary 
base, and therefore thought it unlikely that inflation 
would decline below levels they saw as consistent with 
the dual goals of price stability and maximum employ-
ment.  Moreover, some noted a risk that expected infla-
tion might actually increase to an undesirably high level 
if the public does not understand that the Federal Re-
serve’s liquidity facilities will be wound down and its 
balance sheet will shrink as economic and financial 
conditions improve. 

Several participants indicated that they thought the 
FOMC should explore establishing quantitative guide-
lines or targets for a monetary aggregate, perhaps the 
growth rate of the monetary base or M2; in their view 
such guidelines would provide useful information to 
the public and help anchor inflation expectations.  Oth-
ers were skeptical that a single quantitative measure 
could adequately convey the Federal Reserve’s current 
approach to monetary policy because the stimulative 
effect of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity-providing and 
asset-purchase programs depends not only on the scale 
but also on the mix of lending programs and securities 
purchases.  In addition, a few participants noted that 
the sizes of some Federal Reserve liquidity programs 
are determined by banks’ and market participants’ need 
to use those programs and thus will tend to increase 
when financial conditions worsen and shrink when fi-
nancial conditions improve; the size and composition 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet needs to be able 
to adjust in response. 

In their discussion of monetary policy for the inter-
meeting period, Committee members agreed that keep-
ing the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ 
percent would be appropriate.  They also agreed to 
continue using liquidity and asset-purchase programs to 
support the functioning of financial markets and stimu-
late the economy.  Members further agreed that these 
programs were likely to maintain the size of the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet at a high level. Members noted 
that it may be necessary to expand these programs, but 
had somewhat different views about the best way of 
doing so.  One member expressed the view that it 
would be best to expand holdings of U.S. Treasury se-
curities rather than to expand targeted liquidity pro-
grams.  All other members indicated that they thought 
it appropriate to continue the program of purchasing 
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities.  Several 

expressed a willingness to expand the size and duration 
of those purchases in the near future; others stood 
ready to expand the program if conditions warrant but 
noted that the program had only recently been imple-
mented and preferred to wait for more information 
about economic and financial developments and the 
program’s effects before considering an expansion. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, with Mr. Lacker 
dissenting, the Committee voted to authorize and direct 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was 
instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the Sys-
tem Account in accordance with the following domes-
tic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
ter price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run ob-
jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in re-
serve markets consistent with federal funds 
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The 
Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE 
debt and agency-guaranteed MBS during the in-
termeeting period with the aim of providing 
support to the mortgage and housing markets.  
The timing and pace of these purchases should 
depend on conditions in the markets for such 
securities and on a broader assessment of con-
ditions in primary mortgage markets and the 
housing sector.  By the end of the second quar-
ter of this year, the Desk is expected to pur-
chase up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE 
debt and up to $500 billion in agency-
guaranteed MBS.  The System Open Market 
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep 
the Committee informed of ongoing develop-
ments regarding the System’s balance sheet that 
could affect the attainment over time of the 
Committee’s objectives of maximum employ-
ment and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the following 
statement to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to keep its target range for the federal 
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee 
continues to anticipate that economic condi-
tions are likely to warrant exceptionally low lev-
els of the federal funds rate for some time. 

Page 14                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

Information received since the Committee met 
in December suggests that the economy has 
weakened further.  Industrial production, hous-
ing starts, and employment have continued to 
decline steeply, as consumers and businesses 
have cut back spending.  Furthermore, global 
demand appears to be slowing significantly.  
Conditions in some financial markets have im-
proved, in part reflecting government efforts to 
provide liquidity and strengthen financial institu-
tions; nevertheless, credit conditions for house-
holds and firms remain extremely tight.  The 
Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in 
economic activity will begin later this year, but 
the downside risks to that outlook are signifi-
cant. 

In light of the declines in the prices of energy 
and other commodities in recent months and 
the prospects for considerable economic slack, 
the Committee expects that inflation pressures 
will remain subdued in coming quarters.  More-
over, the Committee sees some risk that infla-
tion could persist for a time below rates that 
best foster economic growth and price stability 
in the longer term. 

The Federal Reserve will employ all available 
tools to promote the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth and to preserve price stability.  
The focus of the Committee's policy is to sup-
port the functioning of financial markets and 
stimulate the economy through open market 
operations and other measures that are likely to 
keep the size of the Federal Reserve's balance 
sheet at a high level.  The Federal Reserve con-
tinues to purchase large quantities of agency 
debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide 
support to the mortgage and housing markets, 
and it stands ready to expand the quantity of 
such purchases and the duration of the purchase 
program as conditions warrant.  The Committee 
also is prepared to purchase longer-term Treas-
ury securities if evolving circumstances indicate 
that such transactions would be particularly ef-
fective in improving conditions in private credit 
markets.  The Federal Reserve will be imple-
menting the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan 
Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to 
households and small businesses.  The Commit-
tee will continue to monitor carefully the size 
and composition of the Federal Reserve's bal-

ance sheet in light of evolving financial market 
developments and to assess whether expansions 
of or modifications to lending facilities would 
serve to further support credit markets and eco-
nomic activity and help to preserve price stabil-
ity.” 

Voting for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lockhart, and Warsh, 
and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action:  Mr. Lacker. 
Mr. Lacker dissented because he preferred to expand 
the monetary base by purchasing U.S. Treasury securi-
ties rather than through targeted credit programs.  Mr. 
Lacker was fully supportive of the significant expansion 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the intention 
to maintain the size of the balance sheet at a high level.  
However, while he recognized that spreads were ele-
vated and volumes low in many credit markets, he saw 
no evidence of market failures that made targeted credit 
programs, including the forthcoming TALF, necessary.   
Moreover, he was concerned that such programs chan-
nel credit away from other worthy borrowers, amount 
to fiscal policy, would exacerbate moral hazard, and 
might be hard to unwind.  He supported, instead, main-
taining the size of the balance sheet at a high level 
through purchases of U.S. Treasury securities.  In his 
view, such purchases would limit distortions to private 
credit flows, minimize adverse incentive effects, and 
maintain a clear distinction between monetary and fis-
cal policies. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, March 17, 2009.  The meet-
ing adjourned at 1:05 p.m. on January 28, 2009. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on January 5, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on December 15-16, 2008. 

Conference Call 
On January 16, 2009, the Committee met by confer-
ence call to discuss issues associated with establishing 
an explicit numerical objective for inflation.  The 
Committee made no decisions on whether to establish 
such an objective.  Most meeting participants expressed 
the view that an explicit numerical objective for longer-
run inflation would be fully consistent with the Federal 
Reserve’s dual mandate of promoting maximum em-
ployment and price stability and would not impede fos-
tering the stability of the financial system.  A number 
of participants emphasized that additional clarity on the 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 15



 

longer-run inflation goal would further enhance Federal 
Reserve communications but would not involve any 
substantive change in monetary policy strategy.  Many 
participants agreed that establishing and maintaining a 
transparent numerical inflation objective would be 
helpful—at least to some degree—in anchoring infla-
tion expectations and thereby improve the overall ef-
fectiveness of monetary policy; others judged that the 
potential benefits of an explicit numerical inflation ob-
jective might be largely attained by extending the hori-
zon of their regular projections for economic activity 
and inflation.  Some indicated that the establishment of 
a numerical inflation objective could be particularly 
helpful under present circumstances in forestalling an 
unwelcome decline in longer-run inflation expecta-
tions—and hence in contributing to economic recov-
ery—while also assuring the public that actions taken 
to counter economic weakness will not lead to high 
inflation over the longer-run.  However, several par-
ticipants expressed concern that an initiative to clarify 
the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective could be 
confusing to the public in the current context of eco-
nomic weakness and financial market strains.  Partici-

pants also discussed several technical issues related to 
the implementation and communication of an explicit 
numerical inflation objective.  They expressed a range 
of views about whether such an objective should be 
expressed in terms of the consumer price index or the 
PCE price deflator, the merits of a point value versus a 
range, the length of time over which policy would aim 
to achieve any such objective, and the frequency with 
which the Committee would reevaluate this framework.  
At this meeting, the staff also briefed the Committee 
on the coordinated set of measures for supporting 
Bank of America that had been taken by the Treasury, 
the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve earlier that day. 

 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 
 

 

Page 16                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

 

Summary of Economic Projections
 

In conjunction with the January 27-28, 2009 FOMC 
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of 
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, pro-
vided projections for economic growth, unemploy-
ment, and inflation in 2009, 2010, 2011, and over the 
longer run.  Projections were based on information 
available through the conclusion of the meeting, on 
each participant’s assumptions regarding a range of 
factors likely to affect economic outcomes, and on his 
or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  
“Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future 
policy that, based on current information, is deemed 
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity 
and inflation that best satisfy the participant’s interpre-
tation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of 
maximum employment and price stability.  Longer-run 
projections represent each participant’s assessment of 
the rate to which each variable would be expected to 
converge over time under appropriate monetary policy 
and in the absence of further shocks. 

FOMC participants viewed the outlook for economic 
activity and inflation as having weakened significantly 
since last October, when their last projections were 
made.  As indicated in Table 1 and depicted in Figure 1, 
participants projected that real GDP would contract 
this year, that the unemployment rate would increase 
substantially, and that consumer price inflation would 
be significantly lower than in recent years.  Given the 
strength of the forces currently weighing on the econ-
omy, participants generally expected that the recovery 

would be unusually gradual and prolonged:  All partici-
pants anticipated that unemployment would remain 
substantially above its longer-run sustainable rate at the 
end of 2011, even absent further economic shocks; a 
few indicated that more than five to six years would be 
needed for the economy to converge to a longer-run 
path characterized by sustainable rates of output 
growth and unemployment and by an appropriate rate 
of inflation.  Participants generally judged that their 
projections for both economic activity and inflation 
were subject to a degree of uncertainty exceeding his-
torical norms.  Nearly all participants viewed the risks 
to the growth outlook as skewed to the downside, and 
all participants saw the risks to the inflation outlook as 
either balanced or tilted to the downside. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for the change in real GDP in 
2009 had a central tendency of -1.3 to -0.5 percent, 
compared with the central tendency of -0.2 to 1.1 per-
cent for their projections last October.  In explaining 
these downward revisions, participants referred to the 
further intensification of the financial crisis and its ef-
fect on credit and wealth, the waning of consumer and 
business confidence, the marked deceleration in global 
economic activity, and the weakness of incoming data 
on spending and employment.  Participants anticipated 
a broad-based decline in aggregate output during the 
first half of this year; they noted that consumer spend-
ing would likely be damped by the deterioration in la-
bor markets, the tightness of credit conditions, the con-
tinuing decline in house prices, and the recent sharp 

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, January 2009 
Percent    

Central tendency1 Range2 
Variable 

2009 2010 2011 Longer Run 2009 2010 2011 Longer Run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . -1.3 to -0.5 2.5 to 3.3 3.8 to 5.0 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to 0.2 1.5 to 4.5 2.3 to 5.5 2.4 to 3.0 

October projection. . . . -0.2 to 1.1 2.3 to 3.2 2.8 to 3.6 n.a. -1.0 to 1.8 1.5 to 4.5 2.0 to 5.0 n.a. 

Unemployment rate. . . . . . 8.5 to 8.8 8.0 to 8.3 6.7 to 7.5 4.8 to 5.0 8.0 to 9.2 7.0 to 9.2 5.5 to 8.0 4.5 to 5.5 
October projection. . . . 7.1 to 7.6 6.5 to 7.3 5.5 to 6.6 n.a. 6.6 to 8.0 5.5 to 8.0 4.9 to 7.3 n.a. 

PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . .  0.3 to 1.0 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.8 0.2 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.0 
October projection. . . . 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.8 1.4 to 1.7 n.a. 1.0 to 2.2 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8 n.a. 

Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 0.9 to 1.1 0.8 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 1.5 0.4 to 1.7 0.0 to 1.8 
October projection. . . . 1.5 to 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.3 to 1.7 1.3 to 2.1 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8 

   NOTE:  Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of 
the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in 
the fourth quarter of the year indicated.  Each participant's projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the 
absence of further shocks to the economy.  The October projections were made in conjunction with the FOMC meeting on October 28-29, 2008. 
   1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 
   2.  The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
   3.  Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



2

1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
Run

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

9

Percent

Unemployment rate

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
Run

+
_0

1

2

3

Percent

PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
Run

+
_0

1

2

3

Percent

Core PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

 

reduction in stock market wealth, and they saw reduc-
tions in consumer demand contributing to further 
weakness in business investment.  However, partici-
pants expected that the economy would begin to re-
cover—albeit gradually—during the second half of the 
year, mainly reflecting the effects of fiscal stimulus and 
of Federal Reserve measures providing support to 
credit markets. 

Looking further ahead, participants’ growth projections 
had a central tendency of 2.5 to 3.3 percent for 2010 
and 3.8 to 5.0 percent for 2011. Participants generally 
expected that strains in financial markets would ebb 
only slowly and hence that the pace of recovery in 2010 
would be damped.  Nonetheless, participants generally 
anticipated that real GDP growth would gain further 
momentum in 2011, reaching a pace that would tempo-
rarily exceed their estimates of the longer-run sustain-
able rate of economic growth and would thereby help 
reduce the slack in resource utilization.  Most partici-
pants expected that, absent further shocks, economic 
growth would eventually converge to a rate of 2.5 to 
2.7 percent, reflecting longer-term trends in the growth 
of productivity and the labor force. 

Participants anticipated that labor market conditions 
would deteriorate substantially further over the course 
of this year, and nearly all expected that unemployment 
would still be well above its longer-run sustainable rate 
at the end of 2011.  Participants’ projections for the 
average unemployment rate during the fourth quarter 
of 2009 had a central tendency of 8.5 to 8.8 percent, 
markedly higher than last December’s actual unem-
ployment rate of 7.2 percent—the latest available figure 
at the time of the January FOMC meeting.  Nearly all 
participants’ projections were more than a percentage 
point higher than their previous forecasts made last 
October, reflecting the sharp rise in actual unemploy-
ment that occurred during the final months of 2008 as 
well as participants’ weaker outlook for economic activ-
ity this year.  Most participants anticipated that output 
growth in 2010 would not be substantially above its 
longer-run trend rate and hence that unemployment 
would decline only modestly next year.  With economic 
activity and job creation generally projected to acceler-
ate in 2011, participants anticipated that joblessness 
would decline more appreciably that year, as is evident 
from the central tendency of 6.7 to 7.5 percent for their 
unemployment rate projections.  Participants expected 
that the unemployment rate would decline further after 
2011, and most saw it settling in at a rate of 4.8 to 5.0 
percent over time. 

The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
total PCE inflation this year was 0.3 to 1.0 percent, 
about a percentage point lower than the central ten-
dency of their projections last October.  Many partici-
pants noted that recent readings on inflation had been 
surprisingly low, and some anticipated that the unex-
pected declines in the prices of energy and other com-
modities that had occurred in the latter part of 2008 
would continue to hold down inflation at the consumer 
level in 2009.  Participants also marked down their pro-
jections for core PCE inflation this year in light of their 
views about the indirect effects of lower energy prices 
and the influence of increased resource slack. 

Looking beyond this year, participants’ projections for 
total PCE inflation had a central tendency of 1.0 to 1.5 
percent for 2010, 0.9 to 1.7 percent for 2011, and 1.7 to 
2.0 percent over the longer run.  Participants’ longer-
run projections for total PCE inflation reflected their 
individual assessments of the measured rates of infla-
tion consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate 
for promoting price stability and maximum employ-
ment.  Most participants judged that a longer-run PCE 
inflation rate of 2 percent would be consistent with the 
dual mandate; others indicated that 1½ or 1¾ percent 
inflation would be appropriate.  Modestly positive 
longer-run inflation would allow the Committee to 
stimulate economic activity and support employment 
by setting the federal funds rate temporarily below the 
inflation rate when the economy is buffeted by a large 
negative shock to demands for goods and services.  
Participants generally expected that core and overall 
inflation would converge over time, and that persistent 
economic slack would continue to weigh on inflation 
outcomes for the next few years and hence that total 
PCE inflation in 2011 would still be below their as-
sessments of the appropriate inflation rate for the 
longer run. 

Risks to the Outlook 
Participants continued to view uncertainty about the 
outlook for economic activity as higher than normal.1  
The risks to their projections for real GDP growth 
were judged as being skewed to the downside and the 
associated risks to their projections for the unemploy-
ment  rate  were tilted to  the upside.  Participants high- 

                                                 
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the 
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1987 to 2007.  At 
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” 
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in 
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess 
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 

 Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 
 

 

lighted the considerable degree of uncertainty about the 
future course of the financial crisis and its impact on 
the real economy; for example, rising unemployment 
and weaker growth could exacerbate delinquencies on 
household and business loans, leading to higher losses 
for financial firms and so to a further tightening of 
credit conditions that would in turn put further down-
ward pressure on spending to a greater degree than 
currently foreseen.  In addition, some participants 
noted that a substantial degree of uncertainty was asso-
ciated with gauging the stimulative effects of nontradi-
tional monetary policy tools that are now being em-
ployed given that conventional policy easing was lim-
ited by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.  
Others referred to uncertainties regarding the size, 
composition, and effectiveness of the fiscal stimulus 
package—which was still under consideration at the 
time of the FOMC meeting—and of further measures 
to stabilize the banking system. 

As in October, most participants continued to view the 
uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as 
higher than historical norms.  A slight majority of par-
ticipants judged the risks to the inflation outlook as 
roughly balanced, while the rest viewed these risks as 
skewed to the downside.  Participants indicated that 
elevated uncertainty about global growth was clouding 
the outlook for prices of energy and other commodities 
and hence contributing to greater uncertainty in their 
inflation projections.  Many participants stated that 
their assessments regarding the level of uncertainty and 
balance of risks to the inflation outlook were closely 

linked to their judgments about the uncertainty and 
risks to the outlook for economic activity.  Some par-
ticipants noted the risk that inflation expectations 
might become unanchored and drift downward in re-
sponse to persistently low inflation outcomes, while 
others pointed to the possibility of an upward shift if 
investors became concerned that stimulative policy 
measures might not be unwound in a timely fashion 
once the economy begins to recover. 

Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes 
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate, re-
spectively.  For 2009 to 2011, the dispersion in partici-
pants’ projections for each variable was roughly the 
same as for their projections last October.  This disper-
sion mainly indicated the diversity of participants’ as-
sessments regarding the stimulative effects of fiscal 
policy, the pace of recovery in financial markets, and 
the evolution of households’ desired saving rates.  The 
dispersion in participants’ longer-run projections re-
flected differences in their estimates regarding the sus-
tainable rates of output growth and unemployment to 
which the economy would converge under appropriate 
policy and in the absence of any further shocks. 

Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
tion regarding the diversity of participants’ views re-
garding the inflation outlook.  The dispersion in par-
ticipants’ projections for total PCE inflation in 2009 
was substantially greater than for their projections 
made last October, due to increased diversity of par-
ticipants’ views regarding the near-term evolution of 
prices of energy and raw materials and the extent to 
which changes in those prices would be likely to pass 
through into overall inflation.  The dispersion in par-
ticipants’ projections for core PCE inflation in 2009 
was noticeably lower than last October, but the disper-
sion in their projections for core inflation in 2010 and 
2011 was markedly wider, reflecting varying assess-
ments about the timing and pace of economic recovery, 
the sensitivity of inflation to slack in resource utiliza-
tion, the prevalence of downward nominal wage rigid-
ity, and the likelihood that inflation expectations will 
remain firmly anchored.  A few participants anticipated 
that inflation in 2011 would be close to their longer-run 
projections.  However, most participants’ projections 
for total PCE inflation in 2011 were below their longer-
run projections, primarily reflecting the anticipated ef-
fects of substantial slack over the next three years; this 
inflation gap was about ¼ to ½ percentage point for 
some participants but exceeded a full percentage point 
for others. 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2009 2010 2011 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . . ±1.2 ±1.4 ±1.4 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±0.8 ±1.0 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±0.9 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections that were released in the winter from 
1987 through 2007 for the current and following two years by various 
private and government forecasters.  As described in the box “Forecast 
Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent 
probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and con-
sumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection 
errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider 
and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Out-
look from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Dis-
cussion Series 2007-60 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem, November).  

1.  For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2.  Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure 

that has been most widely used in government and private economic 
forecasts.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous 
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.  The slightly narrower 
estimated width of the confidence interval for inflation in the third year 
compared with that for the second year is likely the result of using a lim-
ited sample period for computing these statistics. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

October projections

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

January projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2010

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2011

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Longer Run

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

 Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

October projections

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

Percent range

January projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2010

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2011

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Longer Run

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

October projections

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

January projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2010

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2011

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Longer Run

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

 Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–11  

2009

October projections

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

January projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2010

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of participants

2011

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

 

 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by 
the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understand-
ing of the basis for policy actions.  Consider-
able uncertainty attends these projections, 
however.  The economic and statistical models 
and relationships used to help produce eco-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de-
scriptions of the real world.  And the future 
path of the economy can be affected by myr-
iad unforeseen developments and events.  
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, 
participants consider not only what appears to 
be the most likely economic outcome as em-
bodied in their projections, but also the range 
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of 
their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Re-
ports and those prepared by Federal Reserve 
Board staff in advance of meetings of the 
Federal Open Market Committee.  The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illus-
trate the considerable uncertainty associated 
with economic forecasts.  For example, sup-
pose a participant projects that real GDP and 
total consumer prices will rise steadily at an-
nual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 
percent.  If the uncertainty attending those 
projections  is  similar  to that  experienced  in 
 

the past and the risks around the projections 
are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in 
table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 
percent that actual GDP would expand be-
tween 1.8 percent to 4.2 percent in the current 
year and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in the  sec-
ond and third years.  The corresponding 70 
percent confidence intervals for overall infla-
tion would be 1.1 percent to 2.9 percent in the 
current year, 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the 
second year, and 1.1 percent to 2.9 percent in 
the third year. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed on average over his-
tory, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
jections of each variable is greater than, smaller 
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge 
whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most 
likely outcome.  These judgments about the 
uncertainty and the risks attending each par-
ticipant’s projections are distinct from the di-
versity of participants’ views about the most 
likely outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty is con-
cerned with the risks associated with a particu-
lar projection, rather than with divergences 
across a number of different projections. 

 
    

 Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 27-28, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9




