















































Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, June 3 and June 23-24


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
June 23-24, 2009

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 23, 2009, 
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 24, 
2009, at 9:00 a.m.   
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Messrs. Bullard and Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. 

Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez,¹ General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, 

Weinberg, and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
 
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
the Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-

tary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Greenlee, Nelson, Reifschneider, and 

Wascher, Associate Directors, Divisions of 
Banking Supervision and Regulation, Monetary 
Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research 
and Statistics, respectively, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors  
 
Messrs. Carpenter and Perli, Deputy Associate Di-

rectors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Kiley, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Lindner, Group Manager, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Wood, Senior Economist, Division of Interna-

tional Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Driscoll, King,¹ and McCarthy, Econo-

mists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

 
Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 

¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 
 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston 
and Dallas, respectively 

 
Mr. Judd, Advisor to the President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of San Francisco 
 

Messrs. Feldman, Hilton, Krane, McAndrews, 
Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Messrs. 
Schweitzer, Sellon, and Waller, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Minne-
apolis, New York, Chicago, New York, Phila-
delphia, New York, Cleveland, Kansas City, 
and St. Louis, respectively 

 
Ms. Logan, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York 
 
 

Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) reported on recent developments in domestic 
and foreign financial markets.  The Manager also re-
ported on System open market operations in Treasury 
securities and in agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) during the period since the 
Committee’s April 28-29 meeting.  By unanimous vote, 
the Committee ratified those transactions.  There were 
no open market operations in foreign currencies for the 
System’s account over the intermeeting period. 

The Committee reviewed a staff proposal that would 
authorize the Desk to lend, as part of the Federal Re-
serve’s regular overnight securities lending operations, 
securities held in the SOMA portfolio that are direct 
obligations of federal agencies.  Lending agency securi-
ties was viewed as a technical modification to the exist-
ing overnight securities lending program that would 
support functioning of agency debt markets.  The 
Committee voted unanimously to amend paragraph 3 
of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Oper-
ations with the text underlined below. 

“3.  In order to ensure the effective con-
duct of open market operations, the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee authorizes 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to 
lend on an overnight basis U.S. Govern-
ment securities and securities that are di-

rect obligations of any agency of the Unit-
ed States, held in the System Open Market 
Account, to dealers at rates that shall be 
determined by competitive bidding.  The 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall 
set a minimum lending fee consistent with 
the objectives of the program and apply 
reasonable limitations on the total amount 
of a specific issue that may be auctioned 
and on the amount of securities that each 
dealer may borrow.  The Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York may reject bids which 
could facilitate a dealer’s ability to control 
a single issue as determined solely by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.” 

The staff reported on projections of the Federal Re-
serve’s balance sheet under various assumptions about 
economic and financial conditions and the associated 
path of monetary policy.  Staff projections suggested 
that the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
might peak late this year and decline gradually thereaf-
ter.  The staff also presented information on the possi-
ble implications of substantial changes in the size and 
composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet for 
the System’s net income.  The analysis indicated that 
the Federal Reserve was likely to earn substantial net 
interest income over the next few years under most 
interest rate scenarios.  The staff presented one scena-
rio, however, in which aggressive increases in short-
term interest rates significantly reduced System net in-
come relative to a baseline scenario. The analysis also 
suggested that the market value of the Federal Re-
serve’s securities holdings could decline appreciably 
under some scenarios.  However, while the Federal 
Reserve would retain the option of selling securities 
before they mature or are prepaid as a means of tight-
ening policy when appropriate, it was not expected to 
have to do so. Changes in market valuations were thus 
seen as unlikely to have significant implications for the 
System’s net income.   

In a related discussion, the staff briefed the Committee 
on a number of possible tools that the Federal Reserve 
might employ to foster effective control of the federal 
funds rate in the context of a much expanded balance 
sheet.  Some of those tools were focused primarily on 
shaping or strengthening the demand for reserves, 
while others were designed to provide greater control 
over the supply of reserves.  In discussing the staff 
presentation, meeting participants generally agreed that 
the Federal Reserve either already had or could develop 
tools to remove policy accommodation when appropri-

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ate. Ensuring that policy accommodation can ultimately 
be withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate time 
would remain a top priority of the Federal Reserve. 

The staff also provided the Committee with an analysis 
of the potential adverse effects of very high reserve 
balances on bank capital ratios.  An important issue 
was whether the further increase in reserve balances 
that is likely to result from the Federal Reserve’s al-
ready-announced program of asset purchases could 
lead banks to limit their lending and acquisition of se-
curities in order to prevent an excessive decline in their 
capital ratios.    The analysis concluded that, with few 
exceptions, banks’ regulatory leverage ratios (defined as 
tier 1 capital divided by total average assets) were likely 
to remain comfortably above regulatory minimums, 
even with the substantial growth in reserve balances 
projected to occur in coming months and even if there 
were some erosion in bank capital.  In part, that result 
reflected the fact that many institutions had raised capi-
tal lately; in addition, the leverage ratios for most insti-
tutions were well above the regulatory minimums at the 
end of the first quarter.   

The staff also reviewed the experience to date with the 
Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury securities, 
agency debt securities, and agency MBS.  A number of 
potential modifications to those programs were pre-
sented for the Committee’s consideration, including 
possible expansions in their size, extensions of the du-
ration of securities purchased, steps to increase the 
flexibility of those purchases both within each program 
and across programs in response to short-term market 
developments, and possible approaches to winding 
down purchases as the programs near completion.  The 
Federal Reserve was already purchasing a very large 
fraction of new current-coupon agency MBS and agen-
cy debt, and further increasing the scale of those pro-
grams could compromise market functioning.  Some 
participants thought that increases in purchases of 
Treasury securities might have little or no effect on 
long-term interest rates unless the increases were very 
sizable, given the large amount of current and projected 
supply of Treasury securities. Others were concerned 
that announcements of substantial additional purchases 
could add to perceptions that the federal debt was be-
ing monetized. While most members did not see large-
scale purchases of Treasury securities as likely to be a 
source of inflation pressures given the weak economic 
outlook, public concern about monetization could have 
adverse implications for inflation expectations.  The 
asset purchase programs were intended to support eco-
nomic activity by improving market functioning and 

reducing interest rates on mortgage loans and other 
long-term credit to households and businesses relative 
to what they otherwise would have been.  But the 
Committee had not set specific objectives for longer-
term interest rates, and participants did not consider it 
appropriate to allow the Desk discretion to adjust the 
size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s asset 
purchases in response to short-run fluctuations in mar-
ket interest rates.  Some participants noted that, in 
principle, the Committee could formulate a plan for 
asset purchases that would respond to economic and 
financial developments in a way that might better pro-
mote monetary policy objectives. Most, however, 
thought that formulating and communicating such a 
plan would be very difficult, potentially leading to an 
increase in market uncertainty regarding Federal Re-
serve actions and intentions.  Many participants agreed, 
however, that it was appropriate for the Desk to make 
small adjustments to the size and timing of purchases 
aimed at fostering market liquidity and improving mar-
ket functioning.  Participants discussed the merits of 
including securities backed by adjustable-rate mortgag-
es in MBS purchases and of tapering off purchases of 
securities as the asset purchase programs were being 
completed, but the Committee did not reach a decision 
on those issues at the meeting.   

The staff presented policymakers with proposals for 
extensions, modifications, and terminations of various 
liquidity programs.  A number of the credit and liquidi-
ty facilities that the Federal Reserve had established in 
the course of the financial crisis were scheduled to ex-
pire on October 30.  Use of most of the liquidity facili-
ties had declined in recent months as market conditions 
had improved.  Still, meeting participants judged that 
market conditions remained fragile, and that concerns 
about counterparty credit risk and access to liquidity, 
both of which had ebbed notably in recent months, 
could increase again.  Moreover, participants viewed 
the availability of the liquidity facilities as a factor that 
had contributed to the reduction in financial strains. If 
the Federal Reserve’s backup liquidity facilities were 
terminated prematurely, such developments might put 
renewed pressure on some financial institutions and 
markets and tighten credit conditions for businesses 
and households.  The period over year-end was seen as 
posing heightened risks given the usual pressures in 
financial markets at that time.  In these circumstances, 
participants agreed that most facilities should be ex-
tended into early next year.  However, participants also 
judged that improved market conditions and declining 
use of the facilities warranted scaling back, suspending, 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



or tightening access to several programs, including the 
Term Auction Facility (TAF), the Term Securities 
Lending Facility (TSLF), and the Asset-Backed Com-
mercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity 
Facility (AMLF). 

Following the presentation and discussion of the staff 
proposal, the Board voted unanimously to extend the 
AMLF, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
(CPFF), the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), 
and the TSLF through February 1, 2010.  The Board 
did not extend the Money Market Investor Funding 
Facility (MMIFF) beyond October 30.  The extension 
of the TSLF required the approval of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC), as that facility was estab-
lished under the joint authority of the Board and the 
FOMC.  The Board and the FOMC jointly decided to 
suspend some TSLF auctions and to reduce the size 
and frequency of others.  In addition, the FOMC ex-
tended the temporary reciprocal currency arrangements 
(swap lines) between the Federal Reserve and other 
central banks to February 1, 2010.  The FOMC unan-
imously passed the following resolution to extend the 
temporary swap arrangements and the TSLF: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee ex-
tends until February 1, 2010, its authoriza-
tions for the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York to engage in temporary reciprocal 
currency arrangements (“swap arrange-
ments”) with foreign central banks under 
the conditions previously established by 
the Committee. 

The Federal Open Market Committee ex-
tends until February 1, 2010, its authoriza-
tions for the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York to provide a Term Securities Lending 
Facility, subject to the same collateral, in-
terest rate, and other conditions previously 
established by the Committee.  However, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is 
directed to suspend Schedule 1 TSLF auc-
tions, effective immediately.  The Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York is directed to 
conduct Schedule  2 TSLF auctions  in-
itially on a monthly basis in amounts of 
$75 billion; the Reserve Bank is directed to 
reduce over time the amounts provided 
through the TSLF as market conditions 
warrant.  The Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York is directed to suspend opera-
tions of the Term Securities Lending Facil-

ity Options Program (TOP), effective im-
mediately.  Should market conditions ap-
pear to warrant the resumption of Sched-
ule 1 TSLF or TOP auctions, the Account 
Manager is to consult with the Chairman 
and, if possible, the Board and the Federal 
Open Market Committee.” 

Board members and FOMC participants noted their 
expectation that a number of these facilities may not 
need to be extended beyond February 1, 2010, if the 
recent improvements in market conditions continue.  
However, if financial stresses do not moderate as ex-
pected, the Board and the FOMC were prepared to 
extend the terms of some or all of the facilities as 
needed to promote financial stability and economic 
growth. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the June 23-24 meeting 
suggested that the economy remained very weak, 
though declines in activity seemed to be lessening.  
Employment was still falling, and manufacturers had 
cut production further in response to excess invento-
ries and soft demand.  But the reductions in employ-
ment and industrial production had slowed somewhat, 
consumer spending appeared to be holding reasonably 
steady after shrinking in the second half of 2008, and 
sales and construction of single-family homes had ap-
parently flattened out.  In addition, the recent declines 
in capital spending were smaller than those recorded 
earlier in the year.  Consumer price inflation was fairly 
quiescent in recent months, although the upturn in 
energy prices appeared likely to boost headline inflation 
in June.  

The demand for labor weakened further in May, albeit 
less rapidly than in earlier months.  Nonfarm payrolls 
continued to shrink, but the decline was the smallest 
since September.  In addition, average weekly hours of 
production and nonsupervisory workers on private 
payrolls, which had dropped substantially from Sep-
tember to March, were essentially unchanged in April 
and May.  Thus aggregate hours worked by this group 
fell at a slower pace in April and May than on average 
over the previous seven months.  The unemployment 
rate, however, rose further in May, to 9.4 percent.  De-
spite the high level of joblessness, the labor force par-
ticipation rate moved up for a second consecutive 
month to a level close to where it was at the beginning 
of the recession.  The four-week moving average of 
initial claims for unemployment insurance fell back a 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



little, but the number of individuals receiving unem-
ployment insurance benefits continued to increase. 

Industrial production decreased in April and May but at 
a slower pace than in the first quarter.  Manufacturing 
output also fell in those months, and the factory oper-
ating rate dipped further in May.  In the high-tech sec-
tor, computer output fell at a pace similar to that in the 
first quarter, but near-term indicators of production 
turned somewhat less negative and global semiconduc-
tor sales climbed in April for the second consecutive 
month.  The production of motor vehicles and parts 
dropped sharply in May, principally because of ex-
tended plant shutdowns at General Motors and Chrys-
ler.  The production of commercial aircraft moved up.  
Outside the transportation and high-tech sectors, most 
industries continued to cut production in both April 
and May, though at a slower pace than over the preced-
ing five months. 

Real personal consumption expenditures rose some-
what in the first quarter after falling in the second half 
of 2008, and available data suggested that spending was 
holding reasonably steady in the second quarter.  On 
the basis of the latest retail sales data, real expenditures 
on goods other than motor vehicles appeared to have 
risen slightly in May and to have changed little, on net, 
since the turn of the year.  Sales of light motor vehicles 
in April and May were slightly higher than the first-
quarter average.  Real outlays on services were reported 
to have picked up some in April from the average 
monthly gain seen over the first three months of the 
year.  The fundamental determinants of consumer de-
mand appeared to have improved a bit:  Despite the 
ongoing decline in employment, real disposable per-
sonal income rose in the first quarter and posted 
another sizable gain in April as various provisions of 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 
boosted transfer payments and reduced personal taxes.  
In addition, equity prices recorded substantial gains in 
April and May, reversing a small portion of the prior 
wealth declines.  Measures of consumer sentiment, 
while remaining at levels typically seen during reces-
sions, improved markedly from the historical lows rec-
orded around the turn of the year. 

Single-family housing starts edged up in May, and ad-
justed permit issuance for single-family houses was a 
little above the level of starts, as it had been since Janu-
ary.  In contrast, activity in the much smaller multifami-
ly sector fell significantly further, reflecting a sharp de-
terioration in the fundamentals in that sector.  The 
steep decline in the demand for new single-family 

houses seemed to have abated.  However, the pace of 
new home sales was still very low in April, and the 
months’ supply of new homes remained quite elevated 
relative to sales despite a decrease in the stock of un-
sold new single-family homes to a level roughly one-
half of its mid-2006 peak.  Sales of existing single-
family homes had been fairly steady from late 2008 
through May.  The relative stability of the resale market 
over this period coincided with a heightened propor-
tion of transactions involving bank-owned and other 
distressed properties.  The apparent stabilization in 
housing demand was likely due, in part, to the im-
provement in housing affordability that resulted from 
low mortgage rates and declining house prices.  Rates 
for conforming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages rose on 
net between late April and late June but remained be-
low the levels seen over most of 2008.  Although the 
market for private-label nonprime mortgages remained 
closed, spreads between rates for jumbo and standard 
conforming loans narrowed substantially since March.  
Meanwhile, national house prices continued to decline. 

Real investment in equipment and software (E&S) con-
tinued to contract; however, the decline in the second 
quarter appeared likely to be smaller than in either of 
the two preceding quarters.  Outlays on transportation 
equipment seemed to be firming after shrinking for an 
extended period, and the incoming data on shipments 
and orders of nondefense capital goods pointed to a 
moderation in the rate of decrease in other major com-
ponents of E&S.  The contraction in spending on 
computing equipment appeared to be leveling off, al-
though businesses continued to cut their real outlays on 
software.  Real spending on equipment outside of high-
tech and transportation seemed to have dropped less 
rapidly in the second quarter than in the first quarter.  
Data suggested a substantial increase in outlays for 
nonresidential construction in March and April, con-
centrated in energy-related sectors.  Outside of the 
energy-related sectors, demand for nonresidential 
building remained extremely weak and financing diffi-
cult to obtain.  Although the months’ supply of non-
farm business inventories remained elevated, large pro-
duction cutbacks in recent quarters allowed producers 
to stem the rise in stocks relative to sales.  The princi-
pal determinants of investment were still weak:  Busi-
ness output dropped further in the first quarter, the 
user cost of capital was higher than it was a year earlier, 
and credit remained tight.  However, corporate bond 
yields eased considerably in the weeks leading to the 
June meeting, and monthly surveys of business condi-

Minutes of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



tions and sentiment were generally less downbeat than 
earlier in the year.   

The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in 
April, as a decrease in imports was more than offset by 
a drop in exports.  Most major categories of exports 
fell, with exports of machinery, industrial supplies, and 
consumer goods exhibiting significant declines.  The 
value of imports of goods and services also edged 
down after remaining about unchanged in March.  Im-
ports of machinery and industrial supplies displayed 
significant decreases, and imports of services fell mod-
erately.  Imports of consumer goods increased.  The 
value of oil imports also rose, as higher prices out-
weighed lower volumes. 

The decline in output in the advanced foreign econo-
mies deepened in the first quarter.  Domestic demand 
fell in all major economies, led by double-digit declines 
in fixed investment and sizable negative contributions 
of inventories to growth.  Recent indicators, however, 
suggested that the pace of contraction likely moderated 
in the second quarter.  Purchasing managers indexes 
rebounded from the exceptionally low levels reached in 
the first quarter, and industrial production stabilized 
somewhat.  In emerging market economies, incoming 
data showed that first-quarter real gross domestic 
product (GDP) contracted sharply in Mexico, Hong 
Kong, Malaysia, and Singapore, edged up in Korea, and 
expanded considerably in India and Indonesia.  For the 
second quarter, indicators suggested a broader stabiliza-
tion of activity in emerging market economies. In Chi-
na, retail sales and fixed-asset investment rose strongly.  
Financial conditions continued to improve in most 
emerging market economies. 

In the United States, headline consumer prices were 
little changed between March and May, held down by 
declines in the prices of food and energy over that pe-
riod.  Core inflation was slightly higher from March to 
May than during the preceding three months, although 
core prices posted fairly small increases apart from a 
tax-induced jump in tobacco prices.  Near-term infla-
tion expectations in the Reuters/University of Michi-
gan Surveys of Consumers remained steady in May and 
then rose somewhat in the preliminary June survey.  
Survey measures of long-term inflation expectations 
showed no signs of moving lower despite the consider-
able margin of labor- and product-market slack present 
in the economy.  At earlier stages of processing, the 
producer price index for core intermediate materials 
continued to decline through May, albeit at a slower 
pace than that seen at the end of 2008.  Spot commodi-

ty prices, which had moved higher over the first four 
months of 2009, rose more rapidly since the end of 
April.  Nevertheless, these prices remained well below 
their year-earlier levels.  The incoming data on labor 
costs were mixed.  Although the rise in hourly compen-
sation in the nonfarm business sector picked up slightly 
in the first quarter, the employment cost index decele-
rated further.  Increases in average hourly earnings also 
slowed further in April and May.   

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The decision by the FOMC at its April 28-29 meeting 
to leave the target range for the federal funds rate un-
changed and the accompanying statement indicating 
that the FOMC would maintain the size of the large-
scale asset purchase program were largely anticipated, 
but yields on Treasury securities rose slightly, as a few 
investors apparently had seen some chance that the 
Committee would expand the purchase program.  The 
release of the April FOMC minutes three weeks later 
prompted a reversal of this move, as market partici-
pants reportedly focused on the suggestion that the 
total size of the purchase program might need to be 
increased at some point to spur a more rapid pace of 
recovery.  The expected path of the federal funds rate 
implied by futures prices was largely unchanged by the 
release of the Committee’s statement and minutes.  
However, in the days following the release of the May 
employment report, which was read as being signifi-
cantly less negative than anticipated, market partici-
pants marked up their expected path for the federal 
funds rate.  Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securi-
ties increased, on net, over the intermeeting period.  
These moves likely reflected a number of factors, in-
cluding investors’ perceptions of an improvement in 
the economic outlook, decreased concerns about the 
risk of deflation, a reversal of flight-to-quality flows, 
and selling of long-duration assets as exposure to mort-
gage prepayment risk dropped with a rise in mortgage 
rates.  In addition, inflation compensation rose over the 
intermeeting period as yields on inflation-indexed Trea-
sury securities increased much less than those on their 
nominal counterparts.  Some of the rise in inflation 
compensation may have reflected an increase in infla-
tion expectations, but an improvement in liquidity in 
the market for Treasury inflation-protected securities 
and mortgage-related hedging flows may have boosted 
inflation compensation as well. 

Pressures in short-term bank funding markets eased 
further, as evidenced by declines in London interbank 
offered rate (Libor) fixings and in spreads between 
one- and three-month Libor and comparable-maturity 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



overnight index swap (OIS) rates.  These spreads nar-
rowed to levels not seen since early 2008, transaction 
volume rose modestly, and tentative signs of increased 
liquidity reportedly emerged.  The market for repur-
chase agreements saw slight improvement, with bid-
asked spreads for most types of transactions narrowing 
a bit and haircuts roughly unchanged.  Spreads on 
A2/P2-rated commercial paper and AA-rated asset-
backed commercial paper were little changed, on net, 
since late April, remaining at the low end of their 
ranges over the previous 18 months.  

Over the intermeeting period, functioning in the mar-
ket for Treasury securities generally improved and trad-
ing picked up, but some strains remained.  The on-the-
run/off-the-run premium narrowed considerably at the 
short end of the yield curve.  Such spreads, however, 
remained somewhat wide for longer-dated issues, ap-
parently reflecting concerns about volatility linked to 
mortgage-related hedging flows.  Some strains, perhaps 
associated with these flows, emerged at times in the 
MBS market; market participants reacted to the large 
and rapid changes in MBS yields by widening bid-asked 
spreads on these securities.   

Broad stock price indexes rose, on net, over the inter-
meeting period, reflecting generally better-than-
expected economic news and further declines in risk 
premiums.  The spread between an estimate of the ex-
pected real equity return over the next 10 years for S&P 
500 firms and an estimate of the real 10-year Treasury 
yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium—
narrowed noticeably but remained high by historical 
standards.  Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 
index declined but remained elevated. 

Yields on speculative-grade and investment-grade cor-
porate bonds dropped, and spreads over yields on 
comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed con-
siderably.  Estimates of bid-asked spreads in the sec-
ondary market for speculative-grade corporate bonds 
fell significantly to about their average levels in the few 
years before the summer of 2007, while estimates of 
such spreads for investment-grade corporate bonds 
remained somewhat elevated.  Market sentiment to-
ward the syndicated leveraged loan market also im-
proved, with the average bid price increasing noticeably 
and bid-asked spreads narrowing a bit further.  The 
inclusion of commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBS) in the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Fa-
cility (TALF) program resulted initially in a narrowing 
of commercial mortgage credit default swap (CDS) 
spreads; however, spreads later widened as rating agen-

cies issued conflicting opinions regarding the credit 
quality of senior CMBS tranches. 

Market sentiment toward the financial sector improved 
over the intermeeting period, reflecting, in part, the 
release of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
(SCAP) results for the nation’s 19 largest bank holding 
companies (BHCs) on May 7.  Nearly all the BHCs 
evaluated had enough Tier 1 capital to absorb the high-
er losses envisioned under the hypothetical more ad-
verse scenario; however, 10 institutions were required 
to enhance their capital structure to put greater empha-
sis on common equity.  Following the announcement 
of the SCAP results, the 19 evaluated institutions 
raised, or announced plans to raise, around $70 billion 
in common equity through public offerings, conversion 
of preferred stock, and asset sales.  These offerings 
accounted for most of the record-high total financial 
equity issuance in May.  The evaluated BHCs have also 
issued additional debt under the Federal Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee 
Program (TLGP), as well as nonguaranteed debt.  On 
June 9, the Treasury announced that 10 large financial 
institutions were eligible to repay the $68 billion in cap-
ital that they had received through the Troubled Asset 
Relief Program (TARP).  CDS spreads for banking or-
ganizations declined considerably over the intermeeting 
period, although they remained well above historical 
norms.  Stock price indexes for the banking sector and 
the broader financial sectors rose significantly. 

The level of private-sector debt was estimated to have 
remained about unchanged in the second quarter, as a 
further modest decline in household debt about offset 
a slight increase in nonfinancial business debt.  Gross 
bond issuance by nonfinancial corporations was robust 
in May.  Investment-grade issuance rebounded after a 
lull in April.  Speculative-grade issuance was the highest 
since June 2007, but issuance of lower-rated specula-
tive-grade bonds remained minimal.  Meanwhile, the 
federal government issued large amounts of debt, and 
state and local government debt was estimated to have 
expanded moderately. 

The expansion of M2 slowed significantly in April and 
May, as the reallocation of household wealth toward 
the safety and liquidity of M2 assets evidently mod-
erated.  Retail money market mutual funds and small 
time deposits contracted in both months, probably in 
response to declining interest rates on these assets.  
The rise in currency diminished, likely reflecting pri-
marily a waning in foreign demand. 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



Commercial bank credit increased slightly in May fol-
lowing six consecutive monthly declines, but the turna-
round reflected a rise in securities holdings and in the 
volatile “other” loans category—that is, loans other 
than commercial and industrial (C&I), real estate, and 
consumer loans.  C&I loans dropped in May, amid 
subdued origination activity and broad-based paydowns 
of outstanding loans.  Home equity loans edged 
down—the first monthly decline in this category since 
October 2006—partly because of banks’ reductions in 
existing lines of credit.  Closed-end residential mort-
gages decreased; originations were reportedly strong 
but were more than offset by loan sales to the govern-
ment-sponsored enterprises.  The amount of outstand-
ing consumer loans originated by banks shrank during 
April and May; the quantity of consumer loans on 
banks’ balance sheets decreased even more because of 
a number of large credit card securitizations. 

The dollar depreciated substantially during the inter-
meeting period against all other major currencies.  This 
decline appeared to be driven by a renewed sense of 
optimism about global growth prospects, leading inves-
tors to shift away from safe-haven assets in the United 
States to riskier assets elsewhere.  Libor-to-OIS spreads 
in euros and sterling decreased, and several foreign 
banks took advantage of improved financial conditions 
to raise capital and increase issuance of debt outside of 
government guarantee programs.  The improved access 
to capital markets and better economic outlook buoyed 
bank stocks, which helped headline equity indexes 
move higher.  Most stock markets in emerging market 
economies rose considerably, and mutual fund flows 
into those markets strengthened. 

The European Central Bank lowered its main policy 
rate 25 basis points to 1 percent and announced that it 
would purchase up to €60 billion in covered bonds.  
The Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, and the 
Bank of Japan kept their policy rates constant over the 
intermeeting period, but the Bank of England increased 
the size of its planned asset purchases from £75 billion 
to £125 billion.  The Bank of Japan continued purchas-
ing commercial paper, corporate bonds, equities, and 
government bonds.  Chinese authorities held the ren-
minbi nearly unchanged against the dollar, and several 
central banks intervened to purchase dollars, attempt-
ing to slow the dollar’s depreciation against their cur-
rencies. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast prepared for the June meeting, the staff 
revised upward its outlook for economic activity during 

the remainder of 2009 and for 2010.  Consumer spend-
ing appeared to have stabilized since the start of the 
year, sales and starts of new homes were flattening out, 
and the recent declines in capital spending did not look 
as severe as those that had occurred around the turn of 
the year.  Recent declines in payroll employment and 
industrial production, while still sizable, were smaller 
than those registered earlier in 2009.  Household wealth 
was higher, corporate bond rates had fallen, the value 
of the dollar was lower, the outlook for foreign activity 
was better, and financial stress appeared to have eased 
somewhat more than had been anticipated in the staff 
forecast prepared for the prior FOMC meeting.  The 
projected boost to aggregate demand from these fac-
tors more than offset the negative effects of higher oil 
prices and mortgage rates.  The staff projected that real 
GDP would decline at a substantially slower rate in the 
second quarter than it had in the first quarter and then 
increase in the second half of 2009, though less rapidly 
than potential output.  The staff also revised up its pro-
jection for the increase in real GDP in 2010, to a pace 
above the growth rate of potential GDP.  As a conse-
quence, the staff projected that the unemployment rate 
would rise further in 2009 but would edge down in 
2010.  Meanwhile, the staff forecast for inflation was 
marked up.  Recent readings on core consumer prices 
had come in a bit higher than expected; in addition, the 
rise in energy prices, less-favorable import prices, and 
the absence of any downward movement in inflation 
expectations led the staff to raise its medium-term in-
flation outlook.  Nonetheless, the low level of resource 
utilization was projected to result in an appreciable de-
celeration in core consumer prices through 2010.   

Looking ahead to 2011 and 2012, the staff anticipated 
that financial markets and institutions would continue 
to recuperate, monetary policy would remain stimula-
tive, fiscal stimulus would be fading, and inflation ex-
pectations would be relatively well anchored.  Under 
such conditions, the staff projected that real GDP 
would expand at a rate well above that of its potential, 
that the unemployment rate would decline significantly, 
and that overall and core personal consumption ex-
penditures inflation would stay low. 

Participants’ Views and Committee Policy Action 
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting 
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve 
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the 
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for 
each year from 2009 through 2011 and over a longer 
horizon.  Longer-run projections represent each partic-

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable 
would be expected to converge over time under appro-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further 
shocks.  Participants’ forecasts through 2011 and over 
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum 
to these minutes. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, participants generally agreed that the information 
received since the April meeting indicated that the eco-
nomic contraction was slowing and that the decline in 
activity could cease before long.  Business and house-
hold confidence had picked up some, and survey data 
and anecdotal reports showed improved expectations 
for the future.  The inventory adjustment process was 
continuing, housing and consumption demand appar-
ently had leveled off, and financial market strains had 
eased further.  Nonetheless, most participants saw the 
economy as still quite weak and vulnerable to further 
adverse shocks.  Conditions in the labor market re-
mained poor, and the unemployment rate continued to 
rise.  These factors, along with past declines in wealth, 
would weigh on consumer spending.  Although finan-
cial market conditions had improved, credit was still 
quite tight in many sectors.  Economic activity in for-
eign economies was unlikely to be sufficiently strong to 
provide a substantial boost to U.S. exports.   Against 
this backdrop, participants generally judged that, while 
U.S. output would probably begin to grow again in the 
second half of the year, the rate of increase was likely to 
be relatively slow.  Most believed that downside risks to 
economic growth had diminished somewhat since the 
April meeting, but were still significant. 

Developments in financial markets over the intermeet-
ing period were seen as broadly positive, reflecting, at 
least in part, a reduction in the perceived risk of further 
severely adverse outcomes.  In particular, many partici-
pants noted that the results of the SCAP helped bolster 
confidence in banks and led to large infusions of pri-
vate capital in that sector.  Corporate credit markets 
continued to improve, and markets for asset-backed 
securities also showed an increasing amount of activity, 
supported in part by the TALF.  Increases in equity 
prices had favorable effects on household wealth and 
overall sentiment.  Still, participants generally noted 
that the improvement in market conditions was in part 
due to ongoing support from various government pro-
grams and that underlying financial conditions re-
mained fragile.  Credit was tight, with some banks quite 
reluctant to lend.  Worsening credit quality, especially 
for consumer and commercial real estate loans, was 

seen as an important reason for reduced lending and 
tighter terms, and banks could face substantial losses in 
their loan portfolios in coming quarters.  Many partici-
pants noted that obtaining financing for commercial 
real estate projects remained extremely difficult amid 
worsening fundamentals in the sector. 

Consumer spending appeared no longer to be declining 
but nonetheless remained weak.  The continued slug-
gishness in consumer expenditures mainly reflected 
falling employment, sharply lower wealth as a result of 
earlier steep declines in asset prices, and tight credit 
conditions.  Because these factors were not seen as like-
ly to dissipate quickly, most participants judged that 
consumer spending would continue to be subdued for 
some time.  Given the significant uncertainties in the 
economic outlook, a sizable reduction in the saving rate 
seemed unlikely in the near term; some saw the possi-
bility of further increases in the household saving rate.  
Participants also observed that, while personal income 
had expanded briskly of late, those increases had been 
boosted by special one-time factors such as fiscal stim-
ulus and large cost-of-living adjustments for Social Se-
curity recipients.  Personal income was likely to con-
tract for a time going forward as the effects of these 
factors waned, and there was some risk that consumer 
spending might also decline as a consequence. 

Indicators of single-family starts and sales suggested 
that housing activity may be leveling out, but most par-
ticipants viewed the sector as still vulnerable to further 
weakness.  Some expressed concern that the increases 
in mortgage rates seen over the intermeeting period 
had the potential to further depress the demand for 
housing and thus impede an economic recovery.  Oth-
ers noted that foreclosures were continuing at a very 
high rate and could push house prices down further 
and add to inventories of unsold homes, holding back 
housing activity and weighing on household wealth. 

Labor market conditions were of particular concern to 
meeting participants.  Although some improvements 
were evident in new and continuing unemployment 
insurance claims and the May payroll report was less 
weak than expected, job losses remained substantial 
over the intermeeting period and the unemployment 
rate continued to rise rapidly.  Rising labor force partic-
ipation contributed to the increase in the unemploy-
ment rate.  Some participants pointed out that house-
holds’ financial strains may be encouraging many indi-
viduals to enter the labor market despite difficult labor 
market conditions.  Reports from district contacts sug-
gested that workweeks were being trimmed and that 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



total hours worked were falling significantly.  The large 
number of people working part time for economic rea-
sons and the prevalence of permanent job reductions 
rather than temporary layoffs suggested that labor mar-
ket conditions were even more difficult than indicated 
by the unemployment rate.  With the recovery pro-
jected to be rather sluggish, most participants antic-
ipated that the employment situation was likely to be 
downbeat for some time. 

Anecdotal reports suggested that the weakness in activ-
ity was widespread across many industries and ex-
tended to the service sector.  However, some meeting 
participants highlighted evidence from regional surveys 
that pointed to a stabilization or even a slight pickup in 
manufacturing in some areas, and positive signs were 
apparent in the energy and agriculture sectors.  Partici-
pants noted an improvement in business sentiment in 
many districts, but contacts remained quite uncertain 
about the timing and extent of the recovery; elevated 
uncertainty was said to be inhibiting capital spending in 
many cases.  Many businesses had been successful in 
working down inventories of unsold goods.  Some par-
ticipants noted that, as this process continues, increases 
in sales will have to be met by increases in production, 
which would, in turn, support growth in hours worked 
and eventually in investment outlays. 

Many participants noted that the global nature of this 
recession meant that growth abroad was not likely to 
bolster U.S. exports and so contribute to a recovery in 
the United States.  In Europe, for example, unemploy-
ment was also rising sharply and financial strains re-
mained significant.  Some participants thought that 
recovery there was likely to lag behind that of the Unit-
ed States.  In Asia, the outlook appeared more promis-
ing, with some evidence that the rate of decline in ac-
tivity was diminishing.  Recent information from China 
suggested that economic growth may be picking up 
there.  Still, some participants mentioned that growth in 
that region was likely to remain importantly dependent 
on exports to major industrial economies that were 
likely to recover slowly. 

Although recent increases in oil and other commodity 
prices were likely to raise headline inflation over the 
near term, most participants expected core inflation to 
remain subdued for some time.  Several measures of 
labor compensation had slowed in recent quarters as 
unemployment mounted and wages were not likely to 
exert any significant upward pressures on prices, given 
the expectation that labor market conditions were likely 
to deteriorate further in coming months and probably 

would not improve quickly thereafter.  In addition, 
many participants noted that productivity growth had 
been surprisingly strong in recent quarters.  Although 
the measured increase in productivity might reflect cyc-
lical factors rather than changes in the underlying trend 
and was subject to data revisions, growth in unit labor 
costs was expected to continue to be restrained in com-
ing quarters.  Substantial resource slack was also likely 
to keep price inflation low in the future.  Participants 
noted the considerable uncertainty surrounding esti-
mates of the output and unemployment gaps and the 
extent of their effects on prices.  However, most agreed 
that, even taking account of such uncertainty, the 
economy was almost certainly operating well below its 
potential and that significant price pressures were un-
likely to materialize in the near and medium terms.  
Still, in light of the signs that economic activity was 
stabilizing, most participants saw less downside risk to 
their expectations for inflation.  Moreover, participants 
pointed out that some measures of inflation expecta-
tions had edged up recently from very low readings, 
perhaps reflecting in part reduced concerns about def-
lation, and were now at levels close to those prevailing 
prior to the onset of the crisis.  A few participants were 
concerned that inflation expectations could continue to 
rise, especially in light of the Federal Reserve’s greatly 
expanded balance sheet and the associated large vol-
ume of reserves in the banking system, and that as a 
result inflation could temporarily rise above levels con-
sistent with the Committee’s dual objectives of maxi-
mum employment and stable prices.  Most participants, 
however, expected that inflation would remain subdued 
for some time. 

In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, Committee members agreed that the stance of 
monetary policy should not be changed at this meeting.  
Given the prospects for weak economic activity, sub-
stantial resource slack, and subdued inflation, the 
Committee agreed that it should maintain its target 
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent.   The 
future path of the federal funds rate would depend on 
the Committee’s evolving expectations for the econo-
my, but for now, members thought it most likely that 
the federal funds rate would need to be maintained at 
an exceptionally low level for an extended period, given 
their forecasts for only a gradual upturn in activity and 
the lack of inflation pressures.  The Committee also 
agreed that changes to its program of asset purchases 
were not warranted at this time.  Although an expan-
sion of such purchases might provide additional sup-
port to the economy, the effects of further asset pur-

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



chases, especially purchases of Treasury securities, on 
the economy and on inflation expectations were uncer-
tain.  Moreover, it seemed likely that economic activity 
was in the process of leveling out, and the considerable 
improvements in financial markets over recent months 
were likely to lend further support to aggregate de-
mand.  Accordingly, the Committee agreed that the 
asset purchase programs should proceed for now on 
the schedule announced at previous meetings. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee 
seeks monetary and financial conditions 
that will foster price stability and promote 
sustainable growth in output.  To further 
its long-run objectives, the Committee 
seeks conditions in reserve markets consis-
tent with federal funds trading in a range 
from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee di-
rects the Desk to purchase agency debt, 
agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury se-
curities during the intermeeting period 
with the aim of providing support to pri-
vate credit markets and economic activity.  
The timing and pace of these purchases 
should depend on conditions in the mar-
kets for such securities and on a broader 
assessment of private credit market condi-
tions.  The Committee anticipates that the 
combination of outright purchases and 
various liquidity facilities outstanding will 
cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet to expand significantly in com-
ing months.  The Desk is expected to pur-
chase up to $200 billion in housing-related 
agency debt by the end of this year.  The 
Desk is expected to purchase up to $1.25 
trillion of agency MBS by the end of the 
year.  The Desk is expected to purchase up 
to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury se-
curities by the end of the third quarter.  
The System Open Market Account Man-
ager and the Secretary will keep the Com-
mittee informed of ongoing developments 
regarding the System's balance sheet that 
could affect the attainment over time of 
the Committee's objectives of maximum 
employment and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in April sug-
gests that the pace of economic contrac-
tion is slowing.  Conditions in financial 
markets have generally improved in recent 
months.  Household spending has shown 
further signs of stabilizing but remains 
constrained by ongoing job losses, lower 
housing wealth, and tight credit.  Business-
es are cutting back on fixed investment 
and staffing but appear to be making 
progress in bringing inventory stocks into 
better alignment with sales.  Although 
economic activity is likely to remain weak 
for a time, the Committee continues to an-
ticipate that policy actions to stabilize fi-
nancial markets and institutions, fiscal and 
monetary stimulus, and market forces will 
contribute to a gradual resumption of sus-
tainable economic growth in a context of 
price stability. 

The prices of energy and other commodi-
ties have risen of late.  However, substan-
tial resource slack is likely to dampen cost 
pressures, and the Committee expects that 
inflation will remain subdued for some 
time. 

In these circumstances, the Federal Re-
serve will employ all available tools to 
promote economic recovery and to pre-
serve price stability.  The Committee will 
maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues 
to anticipate that economic conditions are 
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of 
the federal funds rate for an extended pe-
riod.  As previously announced, to provide 
support to mortgage lending and housing 
markets and to improve overall conditions 
in private credit markets, the Federal Re-
serve will purchase a total of up to $1.25 
trillion of agency mortgage-backed securi-
ties and up to $200 billion of agency debt 
by the end of the year.  In addition, the 
Federal Reserve will buy up to $300 billion 
of Treasury securities by autumn.  The 
Committee will continue to evaluate the 
timing and overall amounts of its purchas-

Minutes of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11



es of securities in light of the evolving 
economic outlook and conditions in finan-
cial markets.  The Federal Reserve is moni-
toring the size and composition of its bal-
ance sheet and will make adjustments to its 
credit and liquidity programs as war-
ranted.” 

Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart, 
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action: None. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, August 11-12, 
2009.  The meeting adjourned at 12:40 p.m. on June 24, 
2009. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on May 19, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on April 28-29, 2009. 

Conference Call 
On June 3, 2009, the Committee met by conference call 
in a joint session with the Board of Governors to re-
view recent economic and financial developments, in-
cluding changes in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  
In addition, by unanimous vote, Brian Sack was se-
lected to serve as Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count, on the understanding that his selection was sub-
ject to being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.   

Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was 
received that the selection of Mr. Sack as 
Manager was satisfactory to the Board of Di-
rectors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York.  

 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Page 12                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Summary of Economic Projections 
 

In conjunction with the June 23-24, 2009, FOMC 
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of 
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub-
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, 
and inflation in 2009, 2010, 2011, and over the longer 
run.  Projections were based on information available 
through the end of the meeting and on each partici-
pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco-
nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary 
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the 
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for 
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or 
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.  
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s 
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be 
expected to converge over time under appropriate 
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. 

FOMC participants generally expected that, after de-
clining over the first half of this year, output would 
expand sluggishly over the remainder of the year.  Con-
sequently, as indicated in table 1 and depicted in figure 
1, all FOMC participants projected that real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) would contract over the entirety 
of this year and that the unemployment rate would in-
crease in coming quarters.  All participants also ex-
pected that overall inflation would be somewhat slower 

this year than in recent years, and most projected that 
core inflation would edge down this year.  Almost all 
participants viewed the near-term outlook for domestic 
output as having improved modestly relative to the 
projections they made at the time of the April FOMC 
meeting, reflecting both a slightly less severe contrac-
tion in the first half of 2009 and a moderately stronger, 
but still sluggish, recovery in the second half.  With the 
strong adverse forces that have been acting on the 
economy likely to abate only slowly, participants gener-
ally expected the recovery to be gradual in 2010.  Even 
though all participants had raised their near-term out-
look for real GDP, in light of incoming data on labor 
markets, they increased their projections for the path of 
the unemployment rate from those published in April.  
Participants foresaw only a gradual improvement in 
labor market conditions in 2010 and 2011, leaving the 
unemployment rate at the end of 2011 well above the 
level they viewed as its longer-run sustainable rate.  
Participants projected low inflation this year.  For 2010 
and 2011, the central tendencies of the participants’ 
inflation forecasts pointed to fairly stable inflation that 
would be modestly below most participants’ estimates 
of the rate consistent with the dual objectives; however, 
the divergence of participants’ views about the inflation 
outlook remained wide.  Most participants indicated 
that they expected the economy to take five or six years 
to converge to a longer-run path characterized by a 
sustainable rate of output growth and by rates of un-
employment and inflation consistent with the Federal 

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, June 2009 
Percent    

Variable 
Central tendency1 Range2 

2009 2010 2011 Longer run 2009 2010 2011 Longer run 
Change in real GDP. . . . . . -1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.7 -1.6 to -0.6 0.8 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 2.4 to 2.8 

April projection. . . . . . -2.0 to -1.3 2.0 to 3.0 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to -0.5 1.5 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8 4.8 to 5.0 9.7 to 10.5 8.5 to 10.6 6.8 to 9.2 4.5 to 6.0 
April projection. . . . . . 9.2 to 9.6 9.0 to 9.5 7.7 to 8.5 4.8 to 5.0 9.1 to 10.0 8.0 to 9.6 6.5 to 9.0 4.5 to 5.3 

PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . .  1.0 to 1.4 1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.0 to 1.8 0.9 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.1 
April projection. . . . . . 0.6 to 0.9 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.2 0.7 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.2 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5 
April projection. . . . . . 1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.3 0.8 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5 

   NOTE:  Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of 
the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in 
the fourth quarter of the year indicated.  Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the 
absence of further shocks to the economy.  The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 
28-29, 2009. 
   1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
   2.  The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
   3.  Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

9

10

Percent

Unemployment rate

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run

+
_0

1

2

3

4

Percent

PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run

+
_0

1

2

3

4

Percent

Core PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Reserve’s dual objectives, but several said full conver-
gence would take longer.  In contrast to recent projec-
tions, a majority of participants perceived the risks to 
growth as roughly balanced, although several still 
viewed those risks as tilted to the downside.  Most par-
ticipants saw the risks surrounding their inflation out-
look as roughly balanced, and fewer participants than in 
April characterized those risks as skewed to the down-
side.  With few exceptions, participants judged that the 
projections for economic activity and inflation re-
mained subject to a degree of uncertainty exceeding 
historical norms. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for the change in real GDP in 
2009 had a central tendency of negative 1.5 percent to 
negative 1.0 percent, somewhat above the central ten-
dency of negative 2.0 percent to negative 1.3 percent 
for their April projections.  Participants noted that the 
data received between the April and June FOMC meet-
ings pointed to a somewhat smaller decline in output 
during the first half of the year than they had antic-
ipated at the time of the April meeting.  Moreover, par-
ticipants saw additional indications that the economic 
downturn in the United States and worldwide was 
moderating in the second quarter, and they continued 
to expect that sales and production would begin to re-
cover gradually during the second half of the year, re-
flecting the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus, 
measures to support credit markets, and diminishing 
financial stresses.  As reasons for marking up their pro-
jections for near-term economic activity, participants 
pointed to a further improvement in financial condi-
tions during the intermeeting period, signs of stabiliza-
tion in consumer spending, and tentative indications of 
a leveling out of activity in the housing sector.  In addi-
tion, they observed that aggressive inventory reductions 
during the first half of this year appeared to have left 
firms’ stocks in better balance with sales, suggesting 
that production is likely to increase as sales stabilize 
and then start to turn up later this year.  Participants 
expected, however, that recoveries in consumer spend-
ing and residential investment initially would be 
damped by further deterioration in labor markets, the 
continued repair of household balance sheets, persis-
tently tight credit conditions, and still-weak housing 
demand.  They also anticipated that very low capacity 
utilization, sluggish growth in sales, uncertainty about 
the economic environment, and a continued elevated 
cost and limited availability of financing would contri-
bute to continued weakness in business fixed invest-
ment this year.  Some participants noted that weak 
economic conditions in other countries probably would 

hold down growth in U.S. exports.  A number of par-
ticipants also saw recent increases in some long-term 
interest rates and in oil prices as factors that could 
damp a near-term economic recovery. 

Looking further ahead, participants’ projections for real 
GDP growth in 2010 and 2011 were not materially dif-
ferent from those provided in April.  The projections 
for growth in 2010 had a central tendency of 2.1 to 3.3 
percent, and those for 2011 had a central tendency of 
3.8 to 4.6 percent.  Participants generally expected that 
household financial positions would improve only 
gradually and that strains in credit markets and in the 
banking system would ebb slowly; hence, the pace of 
recovery would continue to be damped in 2010.  But 
they anticipated that the upturn would strengthen in 
late 2010 and in 2011 to a pace exceeding the growth 
rate of potential GDP.  Participants noted several fac-
tors contributing to this pickup, including accommoda-
tive monetary policy, fiscal stimulus, and continued 
improvement in financial conditions and household 
balance sheets.  Beyond 2011, they expected that out-
put growth would remain above that of potential GDP 
for a time, leading to a gradual elimination of slack in 
resource utilization.  Over the longer run, most partici-
pants expected that, without further shocks, real GDP 
growth eventually would converge to a rate of 2.5 to 
2.7 percent per year, reflecting longer-term trends in 
the growth of productivity and the labor force. 

Even though participants raised their output growth 
forecasts, they also moved up their unemployment rate 
projections and continued to anticipate that labor mar-
ket conditions would deteriorate further over the re-
mainder of the year.  Their projections for the average 
unemployment rate during the fourth quarter of 2009 
had a central tendency of 9.8 to 10.1 percent, about ½ 
percentage point above the central tendency of their 
April projections and noticeably higher than the actual 
unemployment rate of 9.4 percent in May—the latest 
reading available at the time of the June FOMC meet-
ing.  All participants raised their forecasts of the unem-
ployment rate at the end of this year, reflecting the 
sharper-than-expected rise in unemployment that oc-
curred over the intermeeting period.  With little materi-
al change in projected output growth in 2010 and 2011, 
participants still expected unemployment to decline in 
those years, but the projected unemployment rate in 
each year was about ½ percentage point above the 
April forecasts, reflecting the higher starting point of 
the projections.  Most participants anticipated that out-
put growth next year would not substantially exceed its 
longer-run sustainable rate and hence that the unem-

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



ployment rate would decline only modestly in 2010; 
some also pointed to frictions associated with the re-
allocation of labor from shrinking economic sectors to 
expanding sectors as likely to restrain progress in re-
ducing unemployment.  The central tendency of the 
unemployment rate at the end of 2010 was 9.5 to 9.8 
percent.  With output growth and job creation generally 
projected to pick up appreciably in 2011, participants 
anticipated that joblessness would decline more notice-
ably, as evident from the central tendency of 8.4 to 8.8 
percent for their projections of the unemployment rate 
in the fourth quarter of 2011. They expected that the 
unemployment rate would decline considerably further 
in subsequent years as it moved back toward its longer-
run sustainable level, which most participants still saw 
as between 4.8 and 5.0 percent; however, a few partici-
pants raised their estimates of the longer-run unem-
ployment rate. 

The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in 
2009 was 1.0 to 1.4 percent, about ½ percentage point 
above the central tendency of their April projections.  
Participants noted that higher-than-expected inflation 
data over the intermeeting period and the anticipated 
influence of higher oil and commodity prices on con-
sumer prices were factors contributing to the increase 
in their inflation forecasts.  Looking beyond this year, 
participants’ projections for total PCE inflation had 
central tendencies of 1.2 to 1.8 percent for 2010 and 
1.1 to 2.0 percent for 2011, modestly higher than the 
central tendencies from the April projections.  Reflect-
ing the large increases in energy prices over the inter-
meeting period, the forecasts for core PCE inflation 
(which excludes the direct effects of movements in 
food and energy prices) in 2009 were raised by less than 
the projections for total PCE inflation, while the fore-
casts for core and total PCE inflation in 2010 and 2011 
increased by similar amounts.  The central tendency of 
projections for core inflation in 2009 was 1.3 to 1.6 
percent; those for 2010 and 2011 were 1.0 to 1.5 per-
cent and 0.9 to 1.7 percent, respectively.  Most partici-
pants expected that sizable economic slack would con-
tinue to damp inflation pressures for the next few years 
and hence that total PCE inflation in 2011 would still 
be below their assessments of its appropriate longer-
run level.  Some thought that such slack would generate 
a decline in inflation over the next few years.  Most, 
however, projected that, as the economy recovers, in-
flation would increase gradually and move closer to 
their individual assessments of the measured rate of 
inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 
mandate for maximum employment and price stability.  

Several participants, noting that the public’s longer-run 
inflation expectations had not changed appreciably, 
expected that inflation would return more promptly to 
levels consistent with their judgments about longer-run 
inflation than these participants had projected in April.  
A few participants also anticipated that projected infla-
tion in 2011 would be modestly above their longer-run 
inflation projections because of the possible effects of 
very low short-term interest rates and of the large ex-
pansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet on the 
public’s inflation expectations.  Overall, the range of 
participants’ projections of inflation in 2011 remained 
quite wide. 

As in April, the central tendency of projections of the 
longer-run inflation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent.  Most 
participants judged that a longer-run PCE inflation rate 
of 2 percent would be consistent with the Federal Re-
serve’s dual mandate; others indicated that inflation of 
1½ percent or 1¾ percent would be appropriate.  
Modestly positive longer-run inflation would allow the 
Committee to stimulate economic activity and support 
employment by setting the federal funds rate temporar-
ily below the inflation rate when the economy suffers a 
large negative shock to demands for goods and servic-
es. 

Uncertainty and Risks 
In contrast to the participants’ views over the past sev-
eral quarters, in June a majority of participants saw the 
risks to their projections for real GDP growth and the 
unemployment rate as broadly balanced.  In explaining 
why they perceived a reduction in downside risks to the 
outlook, these participants pointed to the tentative 
signs of economic stabilization, indications of some 
effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policy actions, and 
improvements in financial conditions.  In contrast, sev-
eral participants still saw the risks to their GDP growth 
forecasts as skewed to the downside and the associated 
risks to unemployment as skewed to the upside.  Al-
most all participants shared the judgment that their 
projections of future economic activity and unemploy-
ment continued to be subject to greater-than-average 
uncertainty.1  Many participants again high-lighted the 
still-considerable uncertainty about the future course of 
the financial crisis and the risk that a resurgence of fi-
                                                 
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the 
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008.  At 
the end of this summary, the box titled “Forecast Uncertain-
ty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in 
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess 
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



nancial turmoil could adversely impact the real econo-
my.  In addition, some noted the difficulty in gauging 
the macroeconomic effects of the credit-easing policies 
that have been employed by the Federal Reserve and 
other central banks, given the limited experience with 
such tools. 

Most participants judged the risks to the inflation out-
look as roughly balanced, with the number doing so 
higher than in April.  A few participants continued to 
view these risks as skewed to the downside, and one 
saw the inflation risks as tilted to the upside.  Some 
participants noted the risk that inflation expectations 
might drift downward in response to persistently low 
inflation outcomes and continued significant slack in 
resource utilization.  Several participants pointed to the 
possibility of an upward shift in expected and actual 
inflation if the stimulative monetary policy measures 
and the attendant expansion of the Federal Reserve’s 
balance sheet were not unwound in a timely fashion as 
the economy recovers.  Most participants again saw the 
uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as 
exceeding historical norms. 

Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes 
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in 
2009, 2010, 2011, and over the longer run.  The disper-
sion in participants’ June projections for the next three 
years reflects, among other factors, the diversity of 
their assessments regarding the effects of fiscal stimulus 
and nontraditional monetary policy actions as well as 
the likely pace of improvement in financial conditions.  
For real GDP growth, the distribution of projections 
for 2009 narrowed and shifted slightly higher, reflecting 
the somewhat better-than-expected data received dur-
ing the intermeeting period.  The distributions for 2010 
and 2011 changed little.  For the unemployment rate, 
the surprisingly large increases in unemployment re-
ported during the intermeeting period prompted an 
upward shift in the distribution.  Because of the persis-
tence exhibited in many of the unemployment fore-
casts, there were similar upward shifts in the distribu-
tions for 2010 and 2011.  The dispersion of these fore-
casts for all three years was roughly similar to that of 
April.  The distribution of participants’ projections of 
longer-run real GDP growth was about unchanged.  A 
few participants raised their longer-run projections of 
the  unemployment   rate,  widening  the  dispersion  of 

 

 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2009 2010 2011 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.5 ±1.6 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±0.8 ±1.0 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.0 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were 
released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.  
As described in the box titled “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain 
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes 
for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges 
implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further 
information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging 
the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting 
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).  

1.  For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure 

that has been most widely used in government and private economic 
forecasts.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous 
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

 

these estimates, as they incorporated the effects of un-
expectedly high recent unemployment data and of the 
reallocation of labor from declining sectors to expand-
ing ones.  The dispersion in participants’ longer-run 
projections reflected differences in their estimates re-
garding the sustainable rates of output growth and un-
employment to which the economy would converge 
under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence 
of any further shocks. 

Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
tion about the diversity of participants’ views regarding 
the inflation outlook.  The distribution of the projec-
tions for total and core PCE inflation in 2009 moved 
upward, reflecting the higher inflation data released 
over the intermeeting period, while distributions for the 
projections in 2010 and 2011 did not change signifi-
cantly.  The dispersion in participants’ projections for 
total and core PCE inflation for 2009, 2010, and 2011 
illustrates their varying assessments of the effects on 
inflation and inflation expectations of persistent eco-
nomic slack as well as of the recent expansion of the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  These varying assess-
ments are especially evident in the wide dispersion of 
inflation projections for 2011.  In contrast, the tight 
distribution of participants’ projections for longer-run 
inflation illustrates their substantial agreement about 
the measured rate of inflation that is most consistent 
with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum 
employment and stable prices. 

  

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

April projections

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Longer run

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

April projections

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Longer run

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

10.2-
10.3 

10.4-
10.5 

10.6-
10.7 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

April projections

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Longer run

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–11  

2009

April projections

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2010

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of participants

2011

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 23-24, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by 
the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understand-
ing of the basis for policy actions.  Considera-
ble uncertainty attends these projections, 
however.  The economic and statistical models 
and relationships used to help produce eco-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de-
scriptions of the real world.  And the future 
path of the economy can be affected by myr-
iad unforeseen developments and events.  
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, 
participants consider not only what appears to 
be the most likely economic outcome as em-
bodied in their projections, but also the range 
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of 
their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports 
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board 
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  The projection 
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the 
considerable uncertainty associated with eco-
nomic forecasts.  For example, suppose a par-
ticipant projects that real gross domestic 
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will 
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 
percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty at-
tending  those   projections  is  similar  to  that 
 

experienced in the past and the risks around 
the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP 
would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0 per-
cent in the current year, 1.5 to 4.5 percent in 
the second year, and 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the 
third year.  The corresponding 70 percent con-
fidence intervals for overall inflation would be 
1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 
3.0 percent in the second and third years. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
tory, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
jections of each variable is greater than, smaller 
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, are weighted to the 
downside, or are broadly balanced.  That is, 
participants judge whether each variable is 
more likely to be above or below their projec-
tions of the most likely outcome.  These judg-
ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
tending each participant’s projections are dis-
tinct from the diversity of participants’ views 
about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast un-
certainty is concerned with the risks associated 
with a particular projection rather than with 
divergences across a number of different pro-
jections. 

 
    

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee


	EMBARGOED for release at 2:00 p.m. EDT                                    July 15, 2009 



