









































FOMC Minutes--September 22-23, 2009 meeting


 
 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
September 22-23, 2009

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 22, 
2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, Sep-
tember 23, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.   
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia-

nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher and Plosser, Presidents of the Fed-

eral Reserve Banks of Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively 

 
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 
 

Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, 

Sullivan, Tracy, Weinberg, and Wilcox, Asso-
ciate Economists 

 
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
the Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Ms. Barger and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Di-

visions of Banking Supervision and Regulation 
and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of 
Governors  

 
Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, 

Senior Associate Directors, Divisions of Mon-
etary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Re-
search and Statistics, respectively, Board of 
Governors 

 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors  
 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Connolly,¹ First Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Boston 
 
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston 
and Dallas, respectively 

 
Mr. Hakkio, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rasche, Rude-

busch, and Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Phila-
delphia, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Cleve-
land, respectively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 

 
¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



 
 

Mr. McCarthy and Ms. O’Connor, Assistant Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

 
Mr. Chatterjee, Senior Economic Advisor, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
 

 
 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets.  The Manager also reported on 
System open market operations in Treasury securities, 
agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) since the Committee’s August 11-12 meeting.  
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified those 
transactions.  There were no open market operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the 
intermeeting period.  Since the Committee met in Au-
gust, the Federal Reserve’s total assets had risen about 
$125 billion, on balance, to approximately $2.1 trillion, 
as the System’s purchases of securities exceeded a fur-
ther decline in usage of the System’s credit and liquidity 
facilities. 

The staff briefed the Committee on the current status 
of the asset purchase programs.  Participants noted that 
the primary influence of the programs is likely through 
the cumulative effect that they generate on the publicly 
available stocks of securities.  However, they also ob-
served that the rate of new purchases could have an 
effect on asset prices, especially of MBS.  Given this 
possibility, participants remarked that a gradual reduc-
tion in the pace at which the Federal Reserve buys 
agency debt and agency MBS could help promote a 
smooth transition in markets as the announced asset 
purchases are completed.  Participants observed that 
such a strategy would be similar to the approach 
adopted in August for the purchases of Treasury se-
curities and generally viewed it as a useful step to miti-
gate the risk of a sharp change in yields as purchases 
end.  Participants expressed a range of views about the 
rate at which asset purchases should be slowed.  Some 
suggested tapering quickly and completing the purchas-
es by year-end, while a few preferred slowing the rate 
of purchases over a longer period in order to maintain 
flexibility regarding the pace and the cumulative 
amount purchased and thus potentially better calibrate 
the programs to evolving economic and financial mar-
ket conditions.  Most participants supported extending 
purchases of agency debt and agency MBS through the 

first quarter of 2010. 

The staff also briefed the Committee on the likely im-
plications of very high reserve balances for bank bal-
ance sheet management and for the economy.  The 
staff’s assessment, based in part on consultations with 
market participants, was that many banks were current-
ly comfortable holding high levels of reserves as a 
means of managing liquidity risks, and these balances 
or further increases along the lines implied by the an-
nounced programs were not likely to crowd out other 
lending through pressures on capital positions.  As the 
economy improves, however, banks could seek to low-
er their levels of reserve balances by purchasing securi-
ties, thereby putting downward pressure on market 
interest rates, or by easing their credit standards and 
terms in order to expand lending.  Such effects, if sig-
nificant, would provide further impetus to economic 
growth.  The staff analysis indicated that these effects 
would likely emerge only gradually and that their mag-
nitude could be quite limited.  However, some partici-
pants thought that declining demand for reserves might 
already be putting downward pressure on yields.  Par-
ticipants expressed a range of views about the likely 
stimulative effect of a further expansion of reserve bal-
ances on economic activity, as well as the potential im-
pact of elevated reserves on inflation expectations.  
Some meeting participants noted that the announced 
decrease in the balance in the Treasury’s Supplementary 
Financing Account (SFA) would increase reserves in 
the banking system unless it were offset by Federal Re-
serve actions or by a further reduction in borrowing 
from the Federal Reserve’s various credit and liquidity 
facilities, and that these increases could be expansion-
ary.  Others noted that the decrease in the SFA could 
well be temporary and, in any event, that the macro-
economic effects of the increase in reserves would 
probably be limited in the current environment.   

The staff presented an update on the continuing devel-
opment of several tools that could help support a 
smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation at the 
appropriate time.  These measures included executing 
reverse repurchase agreements on a large scale, poten-
tially with counterparties other than the primary deal-
ers; implementing a term deposit facility, available to 
depository institutions, to reduce the supply of reserve 
balances; and taking steps to tighten the link between 
the interest rate paid on reserve balances held at the 
Federal Reserve Banks and the federal funds rate.  Par-
ticipants expressed confidence that these tools, along 
with the payment of interest on reserves and possible 
sales of assets from the System’s portfolio, would allow 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

them to remove policy accommodation at the appro-
priate time and pace.  Completing development of 
these tools would remain a top priority of the Federal 
Reserve. 

The staff presented proposed schedules for operations 
under the Term Auction Facility (TAF) and Term Se-
curities Lending Facility (TSLF) through January 2010.  
As conditions in short-term funding markets had con-
tinued to improve, usage of these facilities had dimin-
ished.  The proposed schedules were consistent with 
not only the Federal Reserve’s previously announced 
intention to gradually scale back these facilities in re-
sponse to continued improvements in financial market 
conditions, but also with a desire to assure market par-
ticipants that the Federal Reserve will provide sufficient 
liquidity over year-end.  There was general agreement 
that the Federal Reserve should assess over the next 
several months whether to maintain a TAF on a per-
manent basis.   

Secretary’s note:  On September 24, 2009, 
the Federal Reserve announced schedules for 
operations under the TAF and the TSLF 
through January 2010 and indicated that it 
would seek public comment on a proposal 
for a permanent TAF. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the September 22-23 
meeting suggested that overall economic activity was 
beginning to pick up.  Factory output, particularly mo-
tor vehicle production, rose in July and August.  Con-
sumer spending on motor vehicles during that period 
was boosted by government rebates and greater dealer 
incentives, and household spending outside of motor 
vehicles appeared to rise in August after having been 
roughly flat from May through July.  Although em-
ployment continued to contract in August, the pace of 
job losses slowed noticeably from that of earlier in the 
year.  Investment in equipment and software (E&S) 
also seemed to be stabilizing.  Sales and construction of 
single-family homes during July and August, while still 
at low levels, were significantly above the readings at 
the beginning of the year.  The sharp cuts in produc-
tion this year reduced inventory stocks significantly, 
though they remained elevated relative to the recent 
level of sales.  Core consumer price inflation continued 
to be subdued in July and August, but higher gasoline 
prices raised overall consumer price inflation in August.   

Firms continued to reduce payrolls, but job losses   
abated further in August, with the decline in private 
payroll employment the smallest since that of August 

2008.  Although employment losses continued to be 
widespread, the rate of decline diminished in most in-
dustries.  The length of the average workweek for pro-
duction and nonsupervisory workers remained steady, 
albeit at a low level, and the rate of decline in aggregate 
hours for this group over July and August was the 
smallest of the past year.  In the household survey, al-
though the unemployment rate rose in August to 
9.7 percent, the rise in the unemployment rate slowed, 
on net, in recent months from its pace earlier in the 
year.  The labor force participation rate in August re-
mained at the low level that had prevailed through 
much of the year.  Continuing claims for unemploy-
ment insurance through regular state programs fell 
slightly, on balance, from its earlier peak, but the total 
including extended and emergency benefits stayed near 
its recent high level.  Initial claims for unemployment 
insurance fluctuated within a narrow range that was 
consistent with further declines in employment.  With 
labor markets still weak, the year-over-year increase in 
average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervi-
sory workers slowed further in August, even with the 
higher federal minimum wage that went into effect at 
the end of July. 

Industrial production rose in July and August, led by a 
rebound in motor vehicle production from the extraor-
dinarily low assembly rates in the first half of the year.  
Manufacturing production outside of motor vehicles 
increased solidly, likely reflecting stronger demand for 
materials from the motor vehicle sector and a slower 
pace of inventory liquidation elsewhere.  Business sur-
vey indicators suggested further gains in factory output 
over the near term.  Nevertheless, the factory utiliza-
tion rate in August was only modestly above its recent 
historical low. 

Real personal consumption expenditures increased 
modestly in July, led by a strong advance in motor ve-
hicle purchases, which were boosted appreciably by the 
government’s “cash-for-clunkers” program.  This pro-
gram contributed to a further surge in motor vehicle 
sales in August to their highest level since the first half 
of 2008.  After declining in July, sales at retailers, ex-
cluding those at motor vehicle dealers, building mate-
rials stores, and gasoline stations, rose significantly in 
August, suggesting an increase in real consumer ex-
penditures on non-motor-vehicle goods for the month.  
Even so, many determinants of spending continued to 
be tepid.  In particular, the weak labor market contin-
ued to restrain growth in household income, and the 
prior declines in household net worth probably contin-
ued to weigh on spending.  However, an increase in 

Minutes of the Meeting of September 22-23, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 
 

household net worth since March, a rise in nominal 
labor compensation in July, and increases in various 
measures of consumer sentiment indicated some im-
provement in the outlook for consumer spending. 

Data from the housing sector indicated that a gradual 
recovery in activity was under way.  Although single-
family housing starts fell modestly in August, this de-
crease followed five consecutive monthly increases, and 
the number of starts in August was well above the 
record low reached in the first quarter of the year.  In 
contrast, in the much smaller multifamily sector, where 
credit conditions were still particularly tight and vacan-
cy rates remained high, starts continued to be down, on 
net, in 2009 after a significant fall in the second half of 
2008.  The sales data for July indicated further increases 
in the demand for both new and existing single-family 
homes.  Even though new home sales remained mod-
est, they had been sufficient, given the slow pace of 
construction, to pare the overhang of unsold new sin-
gle-family houses:  In July, the level of inventories of 
such homes was about one-half of its peak in the sum-
mer of 2006, and the months’ supply had fallen consid-
erably from its record high in January.  Sales of existing 
homes in July were at their fastest pace since mid-2007, 
and pending home sales agreements suggested that re-
sale activity would rise further in following months.  
Although sales of distressed properties remained ele-
vated, the rise in total sales of existing homes over the 
summer appeared to have been driven by an increase in 
transactions involving nondistressed properties.  The 
apparent modest strengthening of housing demand was 
likely due, in part, to improvements in housing affor-
dability stemming from low interest rates for conform-
ing mortgages, a lower level of house prices, and possi-
bly the first-time homebuyer tax credit.  In addition, 
demand may have been buoyed by a sense that house 
prices were beginning to stabilize.  Through the end of 
the second quarter, many house price indexes had 
smaller year-over-year declines than they had shown 
earlier this year, and some indexes recorded positive 
changes for the second quarter. 

Real spending on E&S appeared to be stabilizing after 
falling sharply for more than a year.  Business purchas-
es of transportation equipment seemed to be expanding 
solidly in the third quarter.  Nominal shipments and 
orders for high-tech equipment in July were significant-
ly above their second-quarter averages; moreover, a few 
major producers of high-tech equipment reported 
some signs of improvement in demand.  Business in-
vestment in equipment other than high tech and trans-
portation showed tentative signs of stabilization.  Some 

forward-looking indicators of investment in E&S im-
proved, suggesting that conditions had become less 
adverse than earlier in the year.  Monthly surveys of 
business conditions and sentiment recently recovered 
to levels consistent with a modest rise in business 
spending, and corporate bond spreads over Treasury 
securities narrowed further.  In contrast, conditions in 
the nonresidential construction sector generally re-
mained quite poor, and measures of construction 
spending excluding energy-related projects stayed on a 
downward trajectory through July.  Vacancy rates con-
tinued to rise, property prices fell further, and financing 
for nonresidential construction projects remained very 
tight.  The nominal book value of businesses invento-
ries continued to fall in July, which contributed to fur-
ther declines in inventory-to-sales ratios; however, 
those ratios stayed elevated.   

After narrowing to a 10-year low in May, the U.S. inter-
national trade deficit widened in June and July, as 
strong increases in exports were more than offset by 
sizable rises in imports.  The July trade data provided 
additional evidence that the levels of both exports and 
imports probably reached their trough in the second 
quarter.  About one-half of the increase in exports of 
goods and services in July was in exports of automotive 
products; the other gains were widespread across other 
major categories of exports.  As with exports, the larg-
est increase in imports of goods and services in July 
was in automotive products, reflecting some recovery 
in North American motor vehicle production.  Imports 
of consumer goods, capital goods, and industrial sup-
plies also rose markedly.  Imports of oil increased more 
moderately, with the rise wholly reflecting higher pric-
es. 

Real gross domestic product (GDP) in the advanced 
foreign economies contracted more moderately in the 
second quarter than in the first quarter, with growth 
resuming in several countries.  In Japan, a trade-related 
rebound in industrial production led to an increase in 
overall output.  Government incentives for motor ve-
hicle purchases contributed to a modest expansion of 
the German and French economies, but the euro-area 
economy as a whole contracted slightly as inventory 
drawdowns weighed on activity.  Output also fell in 
Canada and the United Kingdom.  Purchasing manag-
ers indexes (PMIs) rose further in the major economies 
during the intermeeting period, and reached levels con-
sistent with stabilization or moderate expansion of out-
put in the third quarter.  Indicators of consumer senti-
ment continued to increase, but remained well below 
pre-recession levels, in part because of concerns about 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

rising unemployment.  In most emerging market econ-
omies, particularly in Asia, economic activity re-
bounded in the second quarter; however, output de-
clined again in Mexico.  Indicators of activity in the 
third quarter pointed to a continued expansion of out-
put in most emerging market countries, and PMIs 
moved into the expansionary range in many of them.  
International trade in emerging market economies 
picked up, supported by Chinese demand, while de-
mand from advanced economies still appeared weak. 

In the United States, core consumer price inflation re-
mained subdued in July and August, as price increases 
in housing services moderated and durable goods pric-
es declined.  Overall consumer price inflation increased 
in August, boosted by a sharp upturn in energy prices, 
particularly those of gasoline.  The latest available sur-
vey data indicated that gasoline prices edged up further 
in the first half of September.  Consumer food prices 
were little changed in August.  According to the prelim-
inary September release of the Reuters/University of 
Michigan Surveys of Consumers, median year-ahead 
inflation expectations decreased modestly in the first 
half of September, but remained somewhat above the 
low levels posted at the beginning of the year.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from this survey stayed in 
the narrow range that has prevailed over recent years.  
The producer price index for core intermediate mate-
rials rose in August, its third consecutive monthly in-
crease; over those three months, the index retraced 
about one-third of the decline of the previous eight 
months.  All measures of nominal hourly compensation 
and wages suggested that labor costs had decelerated 
markedly this year amid the considerable weakness in 
labor markets. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The decisions by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) at the August meeting to leave the target 
range for the federal funds rate unchanged and to 
maintain the maximum sizes of its large-scale asset pur-
chase programs, along with the accompanying state-
ment, were broadly in line with market expectations.  
The announcement in the statement of the decision to 
slow the pace of Treasury securities purchases so that 
the full amount of $300 billion would be completed by 
the end of October reduced uncertainty about the tim-
ing of the end of this program and the ultimate amount 
of purchases.  After the release of the statement, the 
expected path for the federal funds rate implied by 
money market futures prices declined modestly.  Sub-
sequently, the expected policy path shifted down fur-
ther, on net, as investors apparently interpreted weak 

labor market conditions and generally quiescent infla-
tion as consistent with an outlook that would lead the 
FOMC to maintain low policy rates over the medium 
term.  In addition, investors’ uncertainty about the fu-
ture policy rate path appeared to diminish, which may 
have also contributed to the lowering of the path im-
plied by futures prices by reducing term premiums.  
Yields on nominal Treasury securities also decreased 
since the Committee met in August.  A decline in im-
plied volatility on longer-term Treasury yields suggested 
that some of the drop in yields was due to reduced risk 
premiums.  Inflation compensation based on five-year 
Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) increased 
a little, on balance, over the intermeeting period, while 
five-year inflation compensation five years ahead de-
clined modestly; the decrease in forward inflation com-
pensation partially reversed increases in prior inter-
meeting periods.  Liquidity in the TIPS market report-
edly continued to be poor, complicating inferences 
about investors’ expectations of future inflation. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets showed 
modest further improvement over the intermeeting 
period.  Spreads between London interbank offered 
rates (Libor) and overnight index swaps (OIS) at the 
one- and three-month maturities returned to near the 
levels that prevailed before the onset of the financial 
crisis in August 2007.  Longer-term Libor-OIS spreads 
also narrowed, but they remained high by historical 
standards.  Reports continued to suggest that lending 
institutions were unusually selective about their coun-
terparties in funding markets.  Spreads on A2/P2-rated 
commercial paper and AA-rated asset-backed commer-
cial paper were little changed, on net, remaining at the 
low end of their ranges over the past two years.  Indica-
tors of Treasury market functioning showed no materi-
al change, and functioning continued to be somewhat 
impaired.  Bid-asked spreads held roughly steady, and 
trading volumes remained low.  The on-the-run liquidi-
ty premium for the 10-year Treasury note was little 
changed at an elevated level, although it was well below 
its peak last fall; the premiums on two- and five-year 
Treasury securities stayed low. 

Amid lower interest rates as well as further indications 
that the contraction in economic activity may have 
ended, broad stock price indexes rose, on net, over the 
intermeeting period.  The spread between an estimate 
of the expected real equity return over the next 10 years 
for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the real 10-year 
Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk pre-
mium—remained high by historical standards.  After 
having dropped significantly in prior months, option-

Minutes of the Meeting of September 22-23, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



 
 

implied volatility on the S&P 500 index declined mod-
estly, on balance, over the intermeeting period, but was 
still at a level comparable with that of previous reces-
sions.  Yields on corporate bonds fell a bit more than 
those on Treasury securities of similar duration.  Indi-
cators suggested that liquidity in the secondary market 
for corporate bonds increased a bit further.  Conditions 
in the secondary market for leveraged syndicated loans 
continued to improve slowly, as secondary-market 
prices rose slightly and bid-asked spreads narrowed. 

Changes in investor sentiment toward claims on finan-
cial firms were mixed over the intermeeting period.  
Equity prices for larger banks increased, but stock pric-
es for regional and smaller banks were little changed.  
Market participants reportedly took note of the in-
creased number of failures at regional and smaller 
banks and remained concerned about the credit quality 
of such banks’ loan portfolios and their ability to raise 
capital.  Credit default swap spreads for banking institu-
tions changed little, on net, over the intermeeting pe-
riod.  A number of financial institutions issued debt 
that was not guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation. 

The level of debt of the private domestic nonfinancial 
sector declined again in the second quarter, as both 
household and nonfinancial business debt fell.  Con-
sumer credit posted its sixth consecutive monthly de-
cline in July; both revolving and nonrevolving credit 
showed sizable drops.  While issuance of consumer 
credit asset-backed securities decreased in August, a 
large volume of securities eligible for the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility was issued in early Sep-
tember.  Gross bond issuance by nonfinancial corpora-
tions rose in August following a lull in July; the re-
bound was particularly robust for speculative-grade 
firms.  However, commercial paper outstanding was 
unchanged and bank loans fell again; as a result, bor-
rowing by the nonfinancial business sector declined, on 
net, again in August.  In contrast, the federal govern-
ment continued to issue debt at a rapid pace, and gross 
issuance of state and local government debt was robust, 
supported in part by issuance of Build America Bonds 
authorized under the fiscal stimulus program. 

Commercial bank credit contracted further in August; 
all major loan categories declined.  Commercial and 
industrial (C&I) lending again decreased steeply amid 
reported broad-based paydowns of outstanding loans.  
At the same time, the latest Survey of Terms of Busi-
ness Lending showed that C&I loan spreads over com-
parable-maturity market instruments rose noticeably in 

recent months.  The contraction of commercial real 
estate loans held by banks also intensified in August.  
Even though originations of residential mortgages ap-
parently increased during August, banks sold an un-
usually large volume of loans to the government-
sponsored enterprises; consequently, banks’ balance 
sheet holdings of residential mortgages decreased mar-
kedly. 

After declining in July, M2 contracted more quickly in 
August.  The reduced demand for M2 assets likely re-
flected low interest rates on retail deposits and money 
market mutual fund shares, as well as a continued real-
location of wealth toward riskier assets.  Small time 
deposits and retail money market mutual funds fell 
more sharply in August than earlier in the year.  Liquid 
deposits increased in August, but at a slower rate than 
in July.  Currency expanded less rapidly in July and Au-
gust than in the first half of the year, as demand from 
abroad evidently was restrained. 

Global financial markets showed some further signs of 
stabilization over the intermeeting period.  Stock in-
dexes in Europe rose solidly, apparently reflecting an 
improved economic outlook, but the Japanese stock 
market declined modestly.  In emerging markets, credit 
default swap spreads on sovereign debt declined 
slightly, and equity prices in most countries rose mod-
erately; however, stock prices fell notably in China, 
partly driven by reports that authorities were taking 
actions to moderate loan growth.  Despite fairly posi-
tive economic indicators, sovereign yields fell in major 
industrial economies, reportedly in part because of the 
reiteration by major central banks of their intention to 
keep policy interest rates low.  On a trade-weighted 
basis, the dollar depreciated against major foreign cur-
rencies, notably against the euro and Japanese yen; it 
was little changed, on average, against the currencies of 
the other major trading partners of the United States. 

The European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the 
Bank of Canada, and the Bank of Japan kept their re-
spective policy rates constant over the intermeeting 
period.  On the first day of the FOMC meeting, the 
Bank of Canada announced the expiration of two tem-
porary liquidity facilities at the end of October 2009. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast prepared for the September FOMC 
meeting, the staff raised its projection for real GDP 
growth over the second half of 2009 and over 2010.  
The information received during the intermeeting pe-
riod appeared to indicate a more noticeable upturn than 
anticipated at the time of the August meeting:  Sales 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

and starts of single-family homes provided evidence of 
some firming in housing activity, capital spending indi-
cators pointed to an earlier-than-anticipated trough for 
investment in E&S, and some data suggested a modest 
recovery in consumer spending.  These tentative signs 
of a recovery of economic activity were supported by 
other factors, including recent rises in house and equity 
prices that would support household net worth, de-
clines in interest rates on corporate bonds and fixed-
rate mortgages, and a stronger outlook for activity in 
foreign economies.  The staff expected that these posi-
tive factors would lead to a modest increase in final 
sales in the second half of 2009, despite continued 
weakness in commercial construction and some further 
deterioration in labor markets.  As a result of the ex-
pected increase in final sales and an anticipated reduc-
tion in inventory liquidation, the staff projected that 
real GDP would increase in the second half of 2009 at 
a rate somewhat above the growth rate of potential 
output.  For 2010, the staff forecast that output growth 
would continue to strengthen, supported by an ongoing 
improvement in financial conditions, a fading of the 
drag from earlier declines in income and wealth, ac-
commodative monetary and fiscal policy, and recovery 
in the housing sector.  These factors also contributed 
to an expected further increase in real GDP growth in 
2011, despite an anticipated decline in the impetus 
from fiscal policy.  Even though the upward revision to 
the projection for output was expected to generate 
larger gains in employment than previously forecast, 
the staff still projected only a slow improvement in la-
bor markets, with the unemployment rate moving 
down to about 9¼ percent by the end of 2010 and then 
falling to about 8 percent by the end of 2011. 

The staff forecast for inflation was little changed from 
that at the August meeting.  The recent data on con-
sumer price inflation were a little above staff expecta-
tions, but still indicated a slower increase in core prices 
compared with those of earlier in the year.  Survey 
measures of inflation expectations displayed no signifi-
cant change.  Nonetheless, with the significant under-
utilization of resources expected to persist through 
2011, the staff forecast core inflation to slow somewhat 
further over the next two years from the pace of the 
first half of 2009.  Because of recent increases in energy 
prices, overall consumer price inflation was projected 
to be somewhat above core inflation in the second half 
of 2009 and 2010, but it was expected to be near the 
core rate in 2011. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, meeting participants agreed that the incoming 
data and information received from business contacts 
suggested that economic activity had picked up follow-
ing its severe downturn; most thought an economic 
recovery was under way.  Many participants noted that 
since August, they had revised up their projections for 
the second half of 2009 and for subsequent years.  A 
number of factors were expected to support growth 
over the next few quarters:  Activity in the housing sec-
tor was evidently rising, and house prices had apparent-
ly stabilized or even increased; consumer spending 
seemed to be in the process of leveling out; reports 
from business contacts and regional surveys were con-
sistent with firms making progress in bringing invento-
ries into better alignment with sales and with produc-
tion stabilizing or beginning to rise in many sectors; the 
outlook for growth abroad had also improved, auguring 
well for U.S. exports; and financial market conditions 
had continued to improve over the past several 
months.  Despite these positive factors, many partici-
pants noted that the economic recovery was likely to be 
quite restrained.  Credit from banks remained difficult 
to obtain and costly for many borrowers; these condi-
tions were expected to improve only gradually.  In light 
of recent experience, consumers were likely to be cau-
tious in spending, and business contacts indicated that 
their firms would also be cautious in hiring and invest-
ing even as demand for their products picked up.  
Some of the recent gains in activity probably reflected 
government policy support, and participants expressed 
considerable uncertainty about the likely strength of the 
upturn once those supports were withdrawn or their 
effects waned.  Overall, the economy was projected to 
expand over the remainder of 2009 and during 2010, 
but at a pace that was unlikely to reduce the unem-
ployment rate appreciably.  Subsequently, as the hous-
ing market picked up further and financial conditions 
improved, economic growth was expected to streng-
then, leading to more-substantial increases in resource 
utilization over time.   

Nonetheless, most participants anticipated that slack in 
both labor and product markets would be substantial 
over the next few years, leading to subdued and poten-
tially declining wage and price inflation.  Some partici-
pants were skeptical of the usefulness of measures of 
resource utilization in gauging inflation pressures, partly 
because of the difficulty of measuring slack, especially 
in real time.  Also, those participants noted that the 

Minutes of the Meeting of September 22-23, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



 
 

degree to which slack reduces inflation depends on the 
stability of longer-term inflation expectations, which in 
turn depends on expectations for monetary policy.  In 
any case, all participants recognized that inflation ex-
pectations are a key determinant of inflation, and that 
various measures of inflation expectations, although 
imperfect, needed to be carefully monitored in the cur-
rent environment.  Participants discussed the extent to 
which the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
would affect inflation expectations going forward.  To 
keep inflation expectations well anchored, all agreed on 
the importance of the Federal Reserve continuing to 
communicate that it has the tools and willingness to 
begin withdrawing monetary policy accommodation at 
the appropriate time and pace to prevent any persistent 
increase in inflation.  Overall, many participants viewed 
the risks to their inflation outlook over the next few 
quarters as being roughly balanced.  A few continued to 
see some risk of substantial further disinflation, but 
that risk had eased somewhat further over the inter-
meeting period.  Over a longer horizon, a few felt the 
risks were tilted to the upside. 

Developments in financial markets were again regarded 
as broadly positive; participants saw the cumulative 
improvement in market functioning and pricing since 
the spring as substantial.  Over the intermeeting period, 
the strengthening in the economic outlook led to an 
increase in investors’ appetite for riskier assets.  Mar-
kets for corporate debt continued to improve, private 
credit spreads narrowed further, and equity prices rose.  
Given the improved economic prospects, the decline in 
longer-term Treasury yields and the apparent marking 
down of the implied path for the policy interest rate 
were seen as somewhat puzzling but supportive of re-
covery.  Some participants saw the decline in yields on 
Treasury securities and other instruments as an indica-
tion that the expansion of excess reserve balances was 
putting downward pressure on market rates; some oth-
ers viewed the configuration of rate movements as 
consistent with reduced concerns about inflation and 
with lower term premiums in a more settled economic 
environment.  In any event, the ongoing improvement 
in broader financial and economic conditions seemed 
to some participants to reflect the onset of a positive 
feedback loop in which better financial conditions con-
tribute to stronger growth in output and employment, 
which in turn bolsters expected returns and strengthens 
financial firms, leading to a further easing in financial 
conditions.  Others noted, however, that many financial 
markets and institutions were still strained and that 
downside financial risks remained.  In particular, be-

cause the improvement in financial markets was due, in 
part, to support from various government programs, 
market functioning might deteriorate as those programs 
wind down.  Moreover, credit remained quite tight for 
many businesses and households dependent on banks, 
and many regional and small banks were vulnerable to 
the deteriorating performance of commercial real estate 
loans.  Participants noted that all categories of bank 
lending continued to decline. 

Participants emphasized that labor market conditions 
remained weak.  Although recent data indicated that 
the pace at which employment was declining had 
slowed, job losses remained sizable and the unemploy-
ment rate was high.  The unusually large fraction of 
those who were working part time for economic rea-
sons, the unusually low level of the average workweek, 
and indications from business contacts that firms 
would be slow to hire additional staff as sales and pro-
duction turn up all pointed to a period of modest job 
gains, and thus only a slow decline in the unemploy-
ment rate as the economic recovery proceeds.  Signifi-
cant cost cutting by firms was thought to have led to a 
sizable increase in productivity growth in the first half 
of the year; sustained outsized gains in productivity 
could further damp hiring.  Finally, high levels of long-
term unemployment and permanent separations could 
lead to losses of skills and greater needs for labor real-
location that could slow employment growth. 

Consumer spending had picked up more than expected 
over the intermeeting period, but participants saw that 
increase as partly reflecting special factors like the cash-
for-clunkers program.  Recent increases in house prices 
and equity prices were positives, but participants gener-
ally expected no more than moderate growth in con-
sumer spending over the near term.  Households still 
faced considerable headwinds, including tight credit, 
high levels of debt, uncertain job prospects, and wealth 
levels that remained relatively low despite the recent 
rise in equity prices and stabilization in house prices.  
In that environment, households’ saving behavior re-
mained an important source of uncertainty in the out-
look.  The household saving rate had risen considerably 
in recent quarters, and the most likely outcome was for 
the saving rate to remain near its higher level; however, 
some participants noted that there was some chance 
that the sharp drop in household net worth over the 
past few years, reduced access to credit, and high 
household debt burdens could lead households to save 
a substantially larger fraction of their incomes going 
forward. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

Firms appeared to be reducing inventories and fixed 
investment at a slower pace than earlier in the year and 
had made substantial progress in reducing stocks to-
ward desired levels.  With inventories low, firms were 
beginning to raise production to meet at least a portion 
of new demand; this adjustment was likely to make an 
important contribution to economic recovery in the 
second half of this year.  Recent data on new orders 
and shipments pointed to an earlier bottoming out in 
equipment and investment spending than previously 
anticipated.  Some participants reported that while 
business contacts had expressed relief that the most 
severe economic outcomes had been avoided, they re-
mained cautious about the recovery.  This caution, to-
gether with low utilization rates and substantial excess 
capacity, could hold back the rate of increase of new 
capital spending. 

In the residential real estate sector, home sales and con-
struction had increased from very low levels, and house 
prices appeared to be stabilizing.  Participants wel-
comed the cumulating evidence that the housing sector 
was beginning to recover, and many participants had 
marked up their forecasts for housing activity.  Howev-
er, some viewed the improvement as quite tentative, 
pointing to the pending termination of the temporary 
tax credit for first-time homebuyers and the winding 
down of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS purchase 
program as potential risks to the outlook for the sector.  
Also, some participants questioned whether the recent 
stabilization in house prices would be sustained as likely 
further increases in foreclosures would probably put 
downward pressure on prices.  Still, a better outlook 
for house prices was an important input to the im-
proved economic outlook; not only would household 
wealth benefit from a turnaround in such prices, but 
the exposure of lenders to real estate losses would be 
diminished.  In contrast to developments in the resi-
dential sector, commercial real estate activity continued 
to fall markedly in most districts, reflecting deteriorat-
ing fundamentals, including declining occupancy and 
rental rates and very tight credit conditions. 

Participants marked up their outlook for foreign econ-
omies, mainly reflecting better-than-expected incoming 
data from a range of countries.  The pickup in foreign 
economic activity, especially in Asia, had buoyed U.S. 
export growth, and several participants noted that 
higher growth abroad would support growth in U.S. 
exports going forward. 

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, Committee members agreed that no significant 
changes to its policy target rate or large-scale asset pur-
chase programs were warranted at this meeting.  Al-
though the economic outlook had improved further in 
recent weeks and the risks to the forecast had become 
more balanced, the level of economic activity was likely 
to be quite weak and resource utilization low.  With 
substantial resource slack likely to persist and longer-
term inflation expectations stable, the Committee antic-
ipated that inflation would remain subdued for some 
time.  Under these circumstances, the Committee 
judged that the costs of growth turning out to be weak-
er than anticipated could be relatively high.  According-
ly, the Committee agreed that it was appropriate to 
maintain its target range for the federal funds rate at    
0 to ¼ percent and to reiterate its view that economic 
conditions were likely to warrant an exceptionally low 
level of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  
With respect to the large-scale asset purchase pro-
grams, some members thought that an increase in the 
maximum amount of the Committee’s purchases of 
agency MBS could help to reduce economic slack more 
quickly than in the baseline outlook.  Another member 
believed that the recent improvement in the economic 
outlook could warrant a reduction in the Committee’s 
maximum purchases.  However, all members were able 
to support an indication by the Committee of its inten-
tion at this time to purchase the full $1.25 trillion of 
agency MBS that it had previously established as the 
maximum for this program.  With respect to agency 
debt, the Committee agreed to reiterate its intention to 
purchase up to $200 billion of these securities.  To 
promote a smooth transition in markets as these pro-
grams are concluded, members decided to gradually 
slow the pace of both its agency MBS and agency debt 
purchases and to extend their completion through the 
end of the first quarter of 2010.  The Committee 
agreed that it would continue to evaluate the timing and 
overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of 
the evolving economic outlook and conditions in fi-
nancial markets.  Members discussed the importance of 
maintaining flexibility to expand the asset purchase 
programs should the economic outlook deteriorate or 
to scale back the programs should economic and finan-
cial conditions improve more than anticipated. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-

Minutes of the Meeting of September 22-23, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 
 

ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run 
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions 
in reserve markets consistent with federal 
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  
The Committee directs the Desk to purchase 
agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term 
Treasury securities during the intermeeting 
period with the aim of providing support to 
private credit markets and economic activity.  
The timing and pace of these purchases 
should depend on conditions in the markets 
for such securities and on a broader assess-
ment of private credit market conditions.  
The Desk is expected to complete purchases 
of about $300 billion of longer-term Treas-
ury securities by the end of October.  It is al-
so expected to execute purchases of up to 
$200 billion in housing-related agency debt 
and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by 
the end of the first quarter of 2010.  The 
Desk is expected to gradually slow the pace 
of these purchases as they near completion.  
The Committee anticipates that outright pur-
chases of securities will cause the size of the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand 
significantly in coming months.  The System 
Open Market Account Manager and the Sec-
retary will keep the Committee informed of 
ongoing developments regarding the Sys-
tem’s balance sheet that could affect the at-
tainment over time of the Committee’s ob-
jectives of maximum employment and price 
stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in August sug-
gests that economic activity has picked up 
following its severe downturn.  Conditions in 
financial markets have improved further, and 
activity in the housing sector has increased.  
Household spending seems to be stabilizing, 
but remains constrained by ongoing job 
losses, sluggish income growth, lower hous-
ing wealth, and tight credit.  Businesses are 

still cutting back on fixed investment and 
staffing, though at a slower pace; they con-
tinue to make progress in bringing inventory 
stocks into better alignment with sales.  Al-
though economic activity is likely to remain 
weak for a time, the Committee anticipates 
that policy actions to stabilize financial mar-
kets and institutions, fiscal and monetary 
stimulus, and market forces will support a 
strengthening of economic growth and a 
gradual return to higher levels of resource 
utilization in a context of price stability.  

With substantial resource slack likely to con-
tinue to dampen cost pressures and with 
longer-term inflation expectations stable, the 
Committee expects that inflation will remain 
subdued for some time. 

In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve 
will continue to employ a wide range of tools 
to promote economic recovery and to pre-
serve price stability.  The Committee will 
maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to 
anticipate that economic conditions are likely 
to warrant exceptionally low levels of the 
federal funds rate for an extended period.  
To provide support to mortgage lending and 
housing markets and to improve overall 
conditions in private credit markets, the Fed-
eral Reserve will purchase a total of $1.25 
trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities 
and up to $200 billion of agency debt.  The 
Committee will gradually slow the pace of 
these purchases in order to promote a 
smooth transition in markets and anticipates 
that they will be executed by the end of the 
first quarter of 2010.  As previously an-
nounced, the Federal Reserve’s purchases of 
$300 billion of Treasury securities will be 
completed by the end of October 2009.  The 
Committee will continue to evaluate the tim-
ing and overall amounts of its purchases of 
securities in light of the evolving economic 
outlook and conditions in financial markets.  
The Federal Reserve is monitoring the size 
and composition of its balance sheet and will 
make adjustments to its credit and liquidity 
programs as warranted.” 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

Voting for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart, 
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, November 3-4, 
2009.  The meeting adjourned at 12:35 p.m. on Sep-
tember 23, 2009. 

Notation Votes 
By notation vote completed on August 28, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the designation of 
Matthew M. Luecke as the Committee’s Chief Freedom 

of Information Act Officer, with authority to subdele-
gate duties as appropriate. 

By notation vote completed on September 1, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on August 11-12, 2009. 

 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Minutes of the Meeting of September 22-23, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11




