













































Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, February 7, and March 17-18, 2009


 
 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
March 17-18, 2009

 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, March 17, 2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on 
Wednesday, March 18, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.   
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia-

nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, 

Sullivan, Weinberg, Wilcox, and Williams, As-
sociate Economists 

 
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open 

Market Account 
 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
the Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Ms. Bailey and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Di-

visions of Banking Supervision and Regulation 
and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of 
Governors  

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Leahy, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wasch-

er,1 Associate Directors, Divisions of Interna-
tional Finance, Monetary Affairs, Research and 
Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respec-
tively, Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division 

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors  
 
Mr. Lewis, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-

fairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Beattie,¹ Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of St. Louis 
 
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston 
and Dallas, respectively 

 
Messrs. Hilton and Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presi-

dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York 
and Cleveland, respectively 

                                                 
1 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

 
 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



 
 

 
Messrs. Clark, Gavin, Klitgaard, and Yi, Vice Pres-

idents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, 
St. Louis, New York, and Philadelphia, respec-
tively 

 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis 
 

Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets.  The Manager also reported on 
System open market operations in Treasury securities 
and in agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi-
ties (MBS) during the period since the Committee’s 
January 27-28 meeting.  By unanimous vote, the Com-
mittee ratified those transactions.  There were no open 
market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
tem’s account during the period since the Committee’s 
January 27-28 meeting. 

Staff reported on recent developments in System li-
quidity programs and on changes in the System’s bal-
ance sheet.  As of March 12, the System’s total assets 
and liabilities were about $2 trillion, close to the level of 
that just before the January 27-28 meeting.  Holdings 
of agency debt and agency MBS had increased, while 
foreign central bank drawings on reciprocal currency 
arrangements had declined.  Credit extended by the 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility also had declined, 
as 90-day paper purchased in the early weeks of the 
program matured and a large portion was not renewed 
through the facility.  Primary credit extended by the 
Federal Reserve was about unchanged, and credit out-
standing under the Term Auction Facility increased 
somewhat over the period as the February auctions 
experienced higher demand than previous auctions.  In 
contrast, credit extended under the Primary Dealer 
Credit Facility declined somewhat over the intermeet-
ing period, and credit extended under the Asset-Backed 
Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquid-
ity Facility edged down. 

Most meeting participants interpreted the evidence as 
indicating that credit markets still were not working 
well, and that the Federal Reserve’s lending programs, 
asset purchases, and currency swaps were providing 
much-needed support to economic activity by reducing 
dislocations in financial markets, lowering the cost of 
credit, and facilitating the flow of credit to businesses 

and households.  Participants discussed the prospective 
further increase in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, 
with a focus on the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan 
Facility (TALF) and open market purchases of longer-
term assets. 

The launch of the TALF was announced on March 3.  
In the initial phase of the program, the Federal Reserve 
offered to provide up to $200 billion of three-year 
loans, on a nonrecourse basis, against AAA-rated asset-
backed securities (ABS) backed by newly and recently 
originated auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, 
loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration, 
and, potentially, certain other closely related types of 
ABS.  The Federal Reserve and the Treasury had pre-
viously announced their expectation that the program 
would be expanded to accept other types of ABS.  The 
demand for TALF funding appeared likely to be mod-
est initially, and some participants saw a risk that pri-
vate firms might be reluctant to borrow from the 
TALF out of concern about potential future changes in 
government policies that could affect TALF borrowers.  
However, other participants anticipated that TALF 
loans would increase over time as financial market in-
stitutions became more familiar with the program.  
Most participants supported the expansion of the lend-
ing capacity of the TALF, subject to receiving addition-
al capital from the Treasury, and the inclusion of addi-
tional categories of recently issued, highly rated ABS as 
acceptable collateral.  However, some participants ex-
pressed concern about the risks that might arise from 
the possible extension of the TALF to include older 
and lower-quality assets, noting, in particular, the great-
er uncertainty over the value of such assets. 

The Federal Reserve’s programs to buy direct debt ob-
ligations of the federal housing agencies and agency-
guaranteed MBS were on track to reach their initial tar-
gets of $100 billion and $500 billion, respectively, by 
the end of June.  Participants agreed that the asset pur-
chase programs were helping to reduce mortgage inter-
est rates and improve market functioning, thereby pro-
viding support to economic activity.  Some participants 
stated a preference for communicating the Committee’s 
intention regarding such purchases in terms of the 
growth rate of Federal Reserve holdings rather than a 
dollar target for total purchases.  However, others 
noted that the pace of MBS issuance was likely to be 
especially brisk over the next few months, in part be-
cause of the Administration’s new Making Home Af-
fordable program, and observed that it could be advan-
tageous to be able to front-load purchases to accom-
modate the pattern of mortgage refinancing.  Partici-

 
 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

pants also discussed the relative merits of increasing the 
Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency MBS versus in-
itiating purchases of longer-term Treasury securities.  
Some participants remarked that experience suggested 
that purchases of Treasury securities would have effects 
across a variety of long-term debt markets and should 
ease financial conditions generally while minimizing the 
Federal Reserve’s influence on the allocation of credit.  
However, purchases of agency securities could have a 
more direct effect on mortgage rates, thus providing 
greater benefits to the housing sector, and on private 
borrowing rates more generally.  Also, some partici-
pants were concerned that Federal Reserve purchases 
of longer-term Treasury securities might be seen as an 
indication that the Federal Reserve was responding to a 
fiscal objective rather than its statutory mandate, thus 
reducing the Federal Reserve’s credibility regarding 
long-run price stability.  Most participants, however, 
saw this risk as low so long as the Federal Reserve was 
clear about the importance of its long-term price stabil-
ity objective and demonstrated a commitment to take 
the necessary steps in the future to achieve its objec-
tives. 

In light of the economic and financial conditions, meet-
ing participants viewed the expansion of the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet that might be associated with 
these and other programs as appropriate in order to 
foster the dual objectives of maximum employment 
and price stability.  It was noted that the Treasury and 
the Federal Reserve will seek legislation to give the 
Federal Reserve tools in addition to interest on reserves 
to manage the federal funds rate while providing the 
funding necessary for the TALF and other key credit-
easing programs. 

The Committee also took up a proposal to augment the 
existing network of central bank liquidity swap lines by 
adding several temporary swap lines that could provide 
foreign currency liquidity to U.S. institutions, analogous 
to the arrangements that currently provide U.S. dollar 
liquidity abroad.  There was no evidence that these in-
stitutions were encountering difficulty in meeting for-
eign currency obligations at this time, but these facili-
ties would be available should pressures develop in the 
future.  The Committee unanimously approved the 
following resolution: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee autho-
rizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to 
enter into additional temporary reciprocal cur-
rency arrangements (swap lines) with the Bank 
of England, the European Central Bank 

(ECB), the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss Na-
tional Bank to support the provision of liquidi-
ty in British pounds, euros, Japanese yen, and 
Swiss francs.  The swap arrangements with 
each foreign central bank shall be subject to 
the following limits:  an aggregate amount of 
up to £30 billion with the Bank of England; an 
aggregate amount of up to €80 billion with the 
ECB; an aggregate amount of up to ¥10 tril-
lion with the Bank of Japan; and an aggregate 
amount of up to SwF 40 billion with the Swiss 
National Bank.  These arrangements shall ter-
minate no later than October 30, 2009, unless 
extended by mutual agreement of the Commit-
tee and the respective foreign central banks.  
The Committee also authorizes the Federal Re-
serve Bank of New York to provide the for-
eign currencies obtained under the arrange-
ments to U.S. financial institutions by means of 
swap transactions to assist such institutions in 
meeting short-term liquidity needs in their for-
eign operations.  Requests for drawings on the 
central bank swap lines and distribution of the 
foreign currency proceeds to U.S. financial in-
stitutions shall be initiated by the appropriate 
Reserve Bank and approved by the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee.” 

Staff Review of the Economic and Financial Situa-
tion 
The information reviewed at the March 17-18 meeting 
indicated that economic activity had fallen sharply in 
recent months.  The contraction was reflected in wide-
spread declines in payroll employment and industrial 
production.  Consumer spending appeared to remain at 
a low level after changing little, on balance, in recent 
months.  The housing market weakened further, and 
nonresidential construction fell.  Business spending on 
equipment and software continued to fall across a 
broad range of categories.  Despite the cutbacks in 
production, inventory overhangs appeared to worsen in 
a number of areas.  Both headline and core consumer 
prices edged up in January and February. 

Labor market conditions continued to deteriorate.  Pri-
vate payroll employment dropped considerably over 
the three months ending in February.  Employment 
losses remained widespread across industries, with the 
notable exception of health care.  Meanwhile, the aver-
age workweek of production and nonsupervisory 
workers on private payrolls continued to be low in Feb-
ruary, and the number of aggregate hours worked for 
this group was markedly below the fourth-quarter aver-

 
 

Minutes of the Meeting of March 17-18, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 
 

age.  The civilian unemployment rate climbed ½ per-
centage point in February, to 8.1 percent.  The labor 
force participation rate declined in January and Febru-
ary, on balance, likely in response to weakened labor 
demand.  The four-week moving average of initial 
claims for unemployment insurance continued to move 
up through early March, and the level of insured un-
employed rose further. 

Industrial production fell in January and February, with 
cutbacks again widespread, and capacity utilization in 
manufacturing declined to a very low level.   Although 
production of light motor vehicles turned up in Febru-
ary, it remained well below the pace of the fourth quar-
ter as manufacturers responded to the significant dete-
rioration in demand over the past few months.  The 
output of high-tech products declined as production of 
computers and semiconductors extended the sharp 
declines that began in the fourth quarter of 2008.  The 
production of other consumer durables and business 
equipment weakened further, and broad indicators of 
near-term manufacturing activity suggested that factory 
output would continue to contract over the next few 
months. 

The available data suggested that real consumer spend-
ing held steady, on balance, in the first two months of 
this year after having fallen sharply over the second half 
of last year.  Real spending on goods excluding motor 
vehicles was estimated to have edged up, on balance, in 
January and February.  In contrast, real outlays on mo-
tor vehicles contracted further in February after a de-
cline in January.  The financial strain on households 
intensified over the previous several months; by the 
end of the fourth quarter, household net worth for the 
first time since 1995 had fallen to less than five times 
disposable income, and substantial declines in equity 
and house prices continued early this year.  Consumer 
sentiment declined further in February as households 
voiced greater concerns about income and job pros-
pects.  The Reuters/University of Michigan index in 
early March stood only slightly above its 29-year low 
reached in November, and the Conference Board in-
dex, which includes questions about employment con-
ditions, fell in February to a new low. 

Housing activity continued to be subdued.  Single-
family starts ticked up in February, and adjusted permit 
issuance in this sector moved up to a level slightly 
above starts.  Multifamily starts jumped in February 
from the very low level in January, and the level of mul-
tifamily starts was close to where it had been at the end 
of the third quarter of 2008.  Housing demand re-

mained very weak, however.  Although the stock of 
unsold new single-family homes fell in January to its 
lowest level since 2003, inventories continued to move 
up relative to the slow pace of sales.  Sales of existing 
single-family homes fell in January, reversing the uptick 
seen in December.   Over the previous 12 months, the 
pace of existing home sales declined much less than 
that of new home sales, reflecting in part increases in 
foreclosure-related and other distressed sales.  The 
weakness in home sales persisted despite historically 
low mortgage rates for borrowers eligible for conform-
ing loans.  After having fallen significantly late last year, 
rates for conforming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages fluc-
tuated in a relatively narrow range during the intermeet-
ing period.  In contrast, the market for nonconforming 
loans remained severely impaired.  House prices con-
tinued to decline. 

Business spending on transportation equipment con-
tinued to fall from already low levels, and demand both 
for high-tech equipment and software and for equip-
ment other than high-tech and transportation dropped 
sharply in the fourth quarter.  In January, nominal 
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air-
craft declined, and new orders fell significantly further.  
The fundamental determinants of equipment and soft-
ware spending worsened appreciably:  Business output 
dropped, and rising corporate bond yields boosted the 
user cost of capital in the fourth quarter.  After holding 
up surprisingly well through most of last year, outlays 
on nonresidential structures began to show declines 
consistent with the weak fundamentals for this sector.  
In real terms, investment declined for most types of 
buildings over the previous few months.   Census data 
on book-value inventory investment for January sug-
gested that firms had further pared their stocks; how-
ever, sales continued to fall more quickly than invento-
ries, apparently exacerbating the overhangs that devel-
oped in the second half of 2008. 

The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in De-
cember and January, as a steep fall in imports more 
than offset a decline in exports.  All major categories of 
exports decreased, especially sales of industrial supplies, 
machinery, and automotive products.  All major cate-
gories of imports decreased as well, with large declines 
in imports of oil, automotive products, and industrial 
supplies.  The drop in the value of oil imports reflected 
a lower price.  Imports of automotive products de-
clined as automakers made significant production cut-
backs throughout North America. 

 
 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

Output in the advanced foreign economies contracted 
in the fourth quarter, with large reductions in real gross 
domestic product (GDP) in all the major economies 
and a double-digit rate of decline in Japan.  Trade and 
investment in those countries were particularly weak.  
Indicators of economic activity, especially industrial 
production, suggested that the pace of contraction ac-
celerated late in the fourth quarter and into the first 
quarter.  Economic activity in emerging market econ-
omies also weakened significantly in the fourth quarter.  
Exports, industrial production, and confidence indica-
tors dropped notably in both Latin America and emerg-
ing Asia.  Incoming data for January and February sug-
gested a further significant decline in the first quarter. 

In the United States, overall consumer prices increased 
in January and February, led by an increase in energy 
prices, after posting sizable declines late last year.  Ex-
cluding the categories of food and energy, consumer 
prices edged higher in January and February after three 
months of no change.  The producer price index for 
core intermediate materials dropped for a fifth month 
in February, reflecting, in part, weaker global demand 
and steep declines in the prices of a wide variety of 
energy-intensive goods, such as chemicals and plastics.  
Low readings on overall and core consumer price infla-
tion in recent months, as well as the weakened eco-
nomic outlook, kept near-term inflation expectations 
reported in surveys well below their high levels in mid-
2008.  In contrast, measures of longer-term expecta-
tions remained close to their averages over the past 
couple of years.  Hourly earnings continued to increase 
at a moderate rate in February. 

The Federal Open Market Committee’s decision at the 
January meeting to leave the target range for the federal 
funds rate unchanged was widely anticipated by inves-
tors and had little impact on short-term money mar-
kets.  Over the intermeeting period, the path for the 
federal funds rate implied by futures rates shifted down 
somewhat, on net, mostly on incoming news about the 
financial sector and the economic outlook.  Yields on 
nominal Treasury coupon securities increased over the 
period, reportedly because market participants had as-
signed some probability to the possibility that the Fed-
eral Reserve would establish a purchase program for 
longer-term Treasury securities that was not, in fact, 
forthcoming; yields were also reported to have re-
sponded to concerns over the federal deficit and the 
growing supply of Treasury securities.  Yields on long-
er-term inflation-indexed Treasury securities increased 
more than those on their nominal counterparts, leaving 
longer-term inflation compensation lower over the pe-

riod, and inflation compensation at shorter horizons 
was little changed.  Poor liquidity in the market for 
Treasury inflation-protected securities continued to 
make these readings difficult to interpret. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets were mixed 
over the intermeeting period.  In unsecured interbank 
funding markets, spreads of dollar London interbank 
offered rates (Libor) over comparable-maturity over-
night index swap rates trended higher, on net, especially 
at longer maturities, and forward spreads increased, 
evidently on renewed concerns about the financial 
condition of some large banks.  Conditions in the 
commercial paper (CP) market continued to improve, 
on balance, over the intermeeting period.  Spreads on 
30-day A2/P2-rated CP trended down further, and 
those on AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper re-
mained at the lower end of the range recorded over the 
past year.  Conditions in repurchase agreement markets 
for most collateral types improved over the period, but 
volumes remained low. 

Trading conditions in the secondary market for nomin-
al Treasury coupon securities showed some limited 
signs of improvement.  Average bid-asked spreads for 
on-the-run nominal Treasury notes were relatively sta-
ble near their pre-crisis levels.  Daily trading volumes 
for on-the-run securities, however, inched lower, and 
spreads between the yields of on- and off-the-run 10-
year Treasury notes remained very high. 

Broad equity price indexes dropped significantly, on 
balance, over the intermeeting period amid continued 
concerns about the health of the financial sector, un-
certainty regarding the efficacy of government support 
to the sector, and a further weakening of the economic 
outlook.  Bank stock prices were particularly hard hit, 
and the credit default swap (CDS) spreads of many 
banks rose above the peaks recorded last fall on anxie-
ties about the financial conditions of the largest bank-
ing firms.  Stock prices of insurance companies 
dropped sharply over the period, reflecting concerns 
about the adequacy of their capital positions. On 
March 2, American International Group, Inc. (AIG), 
reported losses of more than $60 billion for the fourth 
quarter of last year, and the Treasury and the Federal 
Reserve announced a restructuring of the government 
assistance to AIG to enhance the company’s capital 
and liquidity to facilitate the orderly completion of its 
global divestiture program. 

Measures of liquidity in the secondary market for spe-
culative-grade corporate bonds worsened somewhat 
over the period but remained significantly better than 

 
 

Minutes of the Meeting of March 17-18, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



 
 

in the fall of 2008.  Spreads of yields on both BBB-
rated and speculative-grade bonds relative to those on 
comparable-maturity Treasury securities were little 
changed on net.  The investment- and speculative-
grade CDS indexes widened significantly, on net, over 
the intermeeting period.  Gross bond issuance by non-
financial firms was very strong in January and February, 
as investment-grade issuance more than doubled from 
its already solid pace in the fourth quarter; speculative-
grade issuance, however, remained sluggish.  Trading 
conditions in the leveraged syndicated loan market im-
proved slightly, but issuance continued to be very weak.  
The market for commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBS) also remained under heavy stress.  Indexes of 
CDS spreads on AAA-rated CMBS widened to record 
levels, as Moody’s downgraded a large portion of the 
2006 and 2007 vintages after a reevaluation of its rating 
criteria. 

The debt of the domestic private nonfinancial sector, 
which was about unchanged in the fourth quarter of 
last year, was estimated to have remained about flat in 
the first quarter.  Household debt appeared to have 
contracted in the first quarter for the second quarter in 
a row, primarily as a result of declines in both consum-
er and home mortgage debt.  Declines in consumer and 
mortgage debt stemmed, in turn, from very weak 
household spending, the continued drop in house pric-
es, and tighter terms and standards for loans.  Business 
debt was projected to expand at a moderate pace in the 
first quarter, largely because of a burst of corporate 
bond issuance.  Reflecting heavy borrowing by the 
Treasury, total debt of the domestic nonfinancial sector 
was projected to have continued to expand in the first 
quarter, but at a pace below that recorded in the fourth 
quarter of last year. 

The rise in M2 slowed in February from the rapid pace 
recorded over the previous few months.  Liquid depo-
sits, while decelerating, continued to expand briskly.  
Savings deposits increased while demand deposits de-
creased.  Retail money funds fell in February, reflecting 
sizable outflows from Treasury-only funds, which gen-
erally provided low yields.  Small time deposits also 
contracted, as the institutions that had been bidding 
aggressively for these retail funds stopped doing so.  
The expansion in currency remained robust. 

Bank credit continued to decline in January and Febru-
ary, and commercial and industrial (C&I) loans de-
creased over these months.  The February Survey of 
Terms of Business Lending indicated that C&I loan 
rate spreads over comparable-maturity market instru-

ments rose modestly overall from the November sur-
vey.  Commercial real estate loans outstanding also de-
clined over the first part of 2009.  In contrast, consum-
er loans on banks’ books jumped over the first two 
months of the year because of sizable increases at a few 
banks that purchased loans from their affiliated finance 
companies.  In addition, some banks brought consumer 
loans that had previously been securitized back onto 
their books.  After 12 consecutive months of contrac-
tion, residential mortgage loans on banks’ books in-
creased in February, likely a result of the pickup in refi-
nancing activity.  In contrast, the rise in home equity 
loans slowed noticeably in January and February. 

Among the advanced foreign economies, headline equi-
ty price indexes generally fell significantly over the pe-
riod, with the sharpest drops in the banking sector.  In 
particular, European bank shares fell steeply as earnings 
reports for the fourth quarter came in weaker than ex-
pected and fears about the exposure of many western 
European banks to emerging Europe increased.  The 
major currencies index of the dollar rose, on net, over 
the intermeeting period; foremost among the contribu-
tors to the rise was a significant appreciation of the 
dollar against the yen.  Financial conditions in emerging 
markets also worsened, with their exchange rates and 
equity prices generally falling and CDS premiums rising 
a bit on balance. 

Several foreign governments and central banks took 
further steps to support their financial markets and 
economies.  The Bank of England announced its inten-
tion to purchase substantial quantities of government 
and corporate bonds through its Asset Purchase Facili-
ty, after which yields on long-term British gilts fell sig-
nificantly.  In addition, the British government 
launched its Asset Protection Scheme, which insured 
assets placed in the scheme by the Royal Bank of Scot-
land and Lloyds Bank.  The Bank of Japan stated that it 
would resume purchases of equities held on banks’ bal-
ance sheets, announced plans to purchase corporate 
bonds, and began its previously announced purchases 
of commercial paper.  The Swiss National Bank an-
nounced that it would purchase both domestic corpo-
rate debt and foreign currency to increase liquidity. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff re-
vised down its outlook for economic activity.  The de-
terioration in labor market conditions was rapid in re-
cent months, with steep job losses across nearly all sec-
tors.  Industrial production continued to contract ra-
pidly as firms responded to the falloff in demand and 

 
 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

the buildup of some inventory overhangs.  The incom-
ing data on business spending suggested that business 
investment in equipment and structures continued to 
decline.  Single-family housing starts had fallen to a 
post–World War II low in January, and demand for 
new homes remained weak.  Both exports and imports 
retreated significantly in the fourth quarter of last year 
and appeared headed for comparable declines this 
quarter.  Consumer outlays showed some signs of sta-
bilizing at a low level, with real outlays for goods out-
side of motor vehicles recording gains in January and 
February.  Financial conditions overall were even less 
supportive of economic activity, with broad equity in-
dexes down significantly amid continued concerns 
about the health of the financial sector, the dollar 
stronger, and long-term interest rates higher.  The 
staff’s projections for real GDP in the second half of 
2009 and in 2010 were revised down, with real GDP 
expected to flatten out gradually over the second half 
of this year and then to expand slowly next year as the 
stresses in financial markets ease, the effects of fiscal 
stimulus take hold, inventory adjustments are worked 
through, and the correction in housing activity comes 
to an end.  The weaker trajectory of real output re-
sulted in the projected path of the unemployment rate 
rising more steeply into early next year before flattening 
out at a high level over the rest of the year.  The staff 
forecast for overall and core personal consumption 
expenditures (PCE) inflation over the next two years 
was revised down slightly.  Both core and overall PCE 
price inflation were expected to be damped by low 
rates of resource utilization, falling import prices, and 
easing cost pressures as a result of the sharp net de-
clines in oil and other raw materials prices since last 
summer. 

Meeting Participants’ Views and Committee Poli-
cy Action 
In the discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, nearly all meeting participants said that conditions 
had deteriorated relative to their expectations at the 
time of the January meeting.  The slowdown was wide-
spread across sectors.  Large declines in equity prices, a 
further drop in house prices, and mounting job losses 
threatened to further depress consumer spending, de-
spite some firming in the recent retail sales data and 
forthcoming tax reductions.  Business capital spending 
was weakening in an environment of uncertainty and 
low business confidence.  Of particular note was the 
apparent sharp fall in foreign economic activity, which 
was having a negative effect on U.S. exports.  Credit 
conditions remained very tight, and financial markets 

remained fragile and unsettled, with pressures on finan-
cial institutions generally intensifying this year.  Overall, 
participants expressed concern about downside risks to 
an outlook for activity that was already weak.  With 
regard to the outlook for inflation, all participants 
agreed that inflation pressures were likely to remain 
subdued, and several expressed the view that inflation 
was likely to persist below desirable levels. 

District business contacts indicated that production 
and sales were declining steeply.  Some industries that 
previously were less affected, such as agriculture and 
energy, had begun to suffer the effects of the slow-
down.  Businesses reported that bank financing was 
becoming more expensive and more difficult to obtain.  
Expenditures were being cut substantially for a wide 
range of capital equipment, and spending on nonresi-
dential structures had recently turned down.  Inventory 
liquidation was continuing, but inventory-sales ratios 
remained elevated as sales slowed.  Against this back-
drop, participants anticipated further employment cut-
backs over coming months, though perhaps at a gradu-
ally diminishing rate. 

Several participants said that the degree and pervasive-
ness of the decline in foreign economic activity was one 
of the most notable developments since the January 
meeting.  In light of this development, it was widely 
agreed that exports were not likely to be a source of 
support for U.S. economic activity in the near term. 

Participants did not interpret the uptick in housing 
starts in February as the beginning of a new trend, but 
some noted that there was only limited scope for hous-
ing activity to fall further.  Nonetheless, large invento-
ries of unsold homes relative to sales and the prospect 
of a continued high level of distressed sales would con-
tinue to hold down residential investment in the near 
term.  Several participants noted the tentative signs of 
stabilization in consumer spending in January and Feb-
ruary.  However, others suggested that strains on 
household balance sheets from falling equity and house 
prices, reduced credit availability, and the fear of un-
employment could well lead to further increases in the 
saving rate that would damp consumption growth in 
the near term. 

Overall, most participants viewed downside risks as 
predominating in the near term, mainly owing to poten-
tial adverse feedback effects as reduced employment 
and production weighed on consumer spending and 
investment, and as the weakening economy boosted the 
prospective losses of financial institutions, leading to a 
further tightening of credit conditions. 

 
 

Minutes of the Meeting of March 17-18, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



 
 

Looking beyond the very near term, a number of mar-
ket forces and policies now in place were seen as even-
tually leading to economic recovery.  Notably, the low 
level of mortgage interest rates, reduced house prices, 
and the Administration’s new programs to encourage 
mortgage refinancing and mitigate foreclosures ulti-
mately could bring about a lower cost of homeowner-
ship, a sustained increase in home sales, and a stabiliza-
tion of house prices.  The household saving rate, which 
had already risen considerably, would eventually level 
out and cease to hold back consumption growth.  
Business inventories would come into line with even a 
low level of sales, and the pressure on production from 
inventory drawdowns would diminish.  Fiscal and 
monetary policies were likely to contribute significantly 
to aggregate demand in coming quarters.  Participants 
expressed a variety of views about the strength and 
timing of the recovery, however.  Some believed that 
the natural resilience of market forces would become 
evident later this year.  Others, who saw recovery as 
delayed and potentially weak, were concerned about a 
possible further rise in the saving rate and a very slow 
improvement in financial conditions.  Some partici-
pants also cautioned that, because of the poor func-
tioning of the financial system, capital and labor were 
not being allocated to their most productive uses, and 
this failure threatened to damp the recovery and reduce 
the potential growth of the economy over the medium 
term. 

Participants saw little chance of a pickup in inflation 
over the near term, as rising unemployment and falling 
capacity utilization were holding down wages and pric-
es and inflation expectations appeared subdued.  Sever-
al expressed concern that inflation was likely to persist 
below desired levels, with a few pointing to the risk of 
deflation.  Even without a continuation of outright 
price declines, falling expectations of inflation would 
raise the real rate of interest and thus increase the bur-
den of debt and further restrain the economy. 

Some indicators, including share prices and CDS 
spreads of financial institutions, suggested a worsening 
of financial market strains since January.  However, for 
the most part, participants viewed conditions in finan-
cial markets as little changed but remaining extraordi-
narily stressed.  The large volume of issuance of in-
vestment-grade corporate bonds in recent weeks was a 
notable bright spot.  Participants shared comments 
received from financial industry contacts on their expe-
riences with and concerns about recent government 
programs to stabilize the financial system.  These con-
tacts feared that uncertainties about future actions the 

government might take and future regulations it might 
impose were making it more difficult to plan and were 
discouraging participation in government efforts to 
stabilize the financial system.  Participants agreed that a 
credible and widely understood program to deal with 
the troubles of the banking system could help restore 
business and consumer confidence.  Many viewed the 
strengthening of the banking system as essential for a 
sustained and robust recovery. 

In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
ing period, Committee members agreed that substantial 
additional purchases of longer-term assets eligible for 
open market operations would be appropriate.  Such 
purchases would provide further monetary stimulus to 
help address the very weak economic outlook and re-
duce the risk that inflation could persist for a time be-
low rates that best foster longer-term economic growth 
and price stability.  One member preferred to focus 
additional purchases on longer-term Treasury securi-
ties, whereas another member preferred to focus on 
agency MBS.  However, both could support expanded 
purchases across a range of assets, and several mem-
bers noted that working across a range of assets and 
instruments was appropriate when the effects of any 
one tactic were uncertain.  Members agreed that the 
monetary base was likely to grow significantly as a con-
sequence of additional asset purchases; one, in particu-
lar, stressed that sustained increases in the monetary 
base were important to ensure that policy was consis-
tently expansionary.  Members expressed a range of 
views as to the preferred size of the increase in pur-
chases.  Several members felt that the significant dete-
rioration in the economic outlook merited a very sub-
stantial increase in purchases of longer-term assets.  In 
contrast, the potential for a large increase over time in 
the size of the balance sheet from the TALF program 
was seen as supporting a more modest, though still 
substantial, increase in asset purchases.  Ultimately, 
members agreed to undertake additional purchases of 
agency MBS of up to $750 billion and of agency debt 
of up to $100 billion, and they also agreed to purchase 
up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities.  
The Committee believed that purchases of these 
amounts would help to promote a return to economic 
growth and price stability.  The period for conducting 
the agency debt and MBS purchases was extended from 
the next three months to the next nine months; mem-
bers agreed to allow the Desk flexibility within this ho-
rizon to respond to market conditions.  Treasury pur-
chases were to be conducted over the next six months.  
Members also noted the recent launch of the TALF, 

 
 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

and they agreed to include in the Committee’s state-
ment an indication that the range of assets accepted as 
eligible collateral for the TALF was likely to be ex-
panded.  Committee members decided to keep the tar-
get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent 
and to communicate to the public the Committee’s 
view that the federal funds rate was likely to remain 
exceptionally low for an extended period. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run ob-
jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in 
reserve markets consistent with federal funds 
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The 
Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE 
debt, GSE-guaranteed MBS, and longer-term 
Treasury securities during the intermeeting 
period with the aim of providing support to 
private credit markets and economic activity.  
The timing and pace of these purchases 
should depend on conditions in the markets 
for such securities and on a broader assess-
ment of private credit market conditions.  The 
Committee anticipates that the combination 
of outright purchases and various liquidity fa-
cilities outstanding will cause the size of the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand 
significantly in coming months.  The Desk is 
expected to purchase up to $200 billion in 
housing-related GSE debt by the end of this 
year.  The Desk is expected to purchase at 
least $500 billion in GSE-guaranteed MBS by 
the end of the second quarter of this year and 
is expected to purchase up to $1.25 trillion of 
these securities by the end of this year.  The 
Committee also directs the Desk to purchase 
longer-term Treasury securities during the in-
termeeting period.  Over the next six months, 
the Desk is expected to purchase up to $300 
billion of longer-term Treasury securities.  
The System Open Market Account Manager 
and the Secretary will keep the Committee in-
formed of ongoing developments regarding 
the System’s balance sheet that could affect 
the attainment over time of the Committee’s 

objectives of maximum employment and price 
stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal Open 
Market Committee met in January indicates 
that the economy continues to contract.  Job 
losses, declining equity and housing wealth, 
and tight credit conditions have weighed on 
consumer sentiment and spending.  Weaker 
sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining 
credit have led businesses to cut back on in-
ventories and fixed investment.  U.S. exports 
have slumped as a number of major trading 
partners have also fallen into recession.  Al-
though the near-term economic outlook is 
weak, the Committee anticipates that policy 
actions to stabilize financial markets and insti-
tutions, together with fiscal and monetary 
stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resump-
tion of sustainable economic growth. 

In light of increasing economic slack here and 
abroad, the Committee expects that inflation 
will remain subdued.  Moreover, the Commit-
tee sees some risk that inflation could persist 
for a time below rates that best foster eco-
nomic growth and price stability in the longer 
term. 

In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve 
will employ all available tools to promote 
economic recovery and to preserve price sta-
bility.  The Committee will maintain the target 
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ per-
cent and anticipates that economic conditions 
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels 
of the federal funds rate for an extended pe-
riod.  To provide greater support to mortgage 
lending and housing markets, the Committee 
decided today to increase the size of the Fed-
eral Reserve’s balance sheet further by pur-
chasing up to an additional $750 billion of 
agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing 
its total purchases of these securities to up to 
$1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its pur-
chases of agency debt this year by up to 
$100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion.  
Moreover, to help improve conditions in pri-
vate credit markets, the Committee decided to 
purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term 
Treasury securities over the next six months.  

 
 

Minutes of the Meeting of March 17-18, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 
 

 
 

The Federal Reserve has launched the Term 
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to facili-
tate the extension of credit to households and 
small businesses and anticipates that the range 
of eligible collateral for this facility is likely to 
be expanded to include other financial assets.  
The Committee will continue to carefully 
monitor the size and composition of the Fed-
eral Reserve's balance sheet in light of evolv-
ing financial and economic developments.” 

Voting for this action:  Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart, 
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, April 28-29, 
2009.  The meeting adjourned at 1:35 p.m. on March 
18, 2009. 

Conference Call 
On February 7, 2009, the Committee met by confe-
rence call in a joint session with the Board of Gover-
nors to discuss the potential role of the Federal Reserve 
in the Treasury’s forthcoming financial stabilization 
plan.  After hearing an overview of the version of the 
plan envisioned at the time of the meeting, meeting 
participants discussed its principal elements and shared 
a range of perspectives on its implications for financial 
markets and institutions.  The Federal Reserve’s prima-
ry direct role in the plan would be through an expan-
sion of the previously announced TALF, which would 
be supported by additional funds from the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP).  In the current envi-

ronment, it was anticipated that such an expansion 
would provide additional assistance to financial markets 
and institutions in meeting the credit needs of house-
holds and businesses and thus would support overall 
economic activity.  While several participants expressed 
some concern that the expansion of the TALF pro-
gram could increase the Federal Reserve’s exposure to 
credit risk, the program’s requirements for highly rated 
collateral that would exceed the value of the related 
loans, in combination with the added TARP funds as a 
backstop against losses, were generally seen as provid-
ing the Federal Reserve with adequate protection.  Par-
ticipants also discussed the implications of the ex-
panded TALF program for the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet over time.  Participants agreed it would be 
important to work with the Treasury to obtain tools to 
ensure that any reserves added to the banking system 
through this program could be removed at the appro-
priate time. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on February 17, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on January 27-28, 2009. 

 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

 
 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee


	20090318.minutes.press.release.pdf
	EMBARGOED for use at 2:00 p.m. EDT                                    April 8, 2009 




