













































Summary of Economic Projections


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
April 28-29, 2009

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2009, 
at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 29, 
2009, at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT:  

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo  
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. Yellen 
 
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia-

nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of 

the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, 

Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate 
Economists 

 
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open 

Market Account 
 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the 

Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-

retary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of 
the Staff Director for Management, Board of 
Governors 

 
Ms. Barger and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Di-

visions of Banking Supervision and Regulation 
and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of 
Governors  

 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Messrs. Levin, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wasch-

er, Associate Directors, Divisions of Monetary 
Affairs, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statis-
tics, and Research and Statistics, respectively, 
Board of Governors 

 
Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Mr. Carpenter, Deputy Associate Director, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Palumbo, Assistant Director, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 

Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Judson and Mr. Nichols,² Economists, Divi-

sions of Monetary Affairs and Research and 
Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors 

 
Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Atlanta 
 
 
 
 

¹ Attended Wednesday’s session only.  
² Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Messrs. Rosenblum and Sniderman, Executive Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas 
and Cleveland, respectively 

 
Mr. Hakkio, Ms. Mester, and Messrs. Rasche and 

Rolnick, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Re-
serve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, St. 
Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Messrs. Burke, Hornstein, and Olivei, Vice Presi-

dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 
Richmond, and Boston, respectively 

 
Mr. Rich, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 
 

 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets.  The Manager also reported on 
System open market operations in Treasury securities 
and in agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi-
ties (MBS) during the period since the Committee’s 
March 17-18 meeting.  By unanimous vote, the Com-
mittee ratified those transactions.  There were no open 
market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
tem’s account over the intermeeting period. 

The staff reported on recent developments in System 
liquidity programs and on changes in the System’s bal-
ance sheet.  As of April 22, the System’s total assets 
and liabilities were close to $2.2 trillion, about $130 
billion higher than just before the March meeting.  Sys-
tem holdings of agency debt and agency MBS ex-
panded by $215 billion over the same period.  Credit 
extended through the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facili-
ties decreased, owing, at least in part, to the recent im-
provement in short-term funding markets. 

The staff also provided the Committee with projections 
that were intended to illustrate the potential evolution 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over coming 
years under a variety of assumptions about the eco-
nomic and financial outlook and the associated path of 
monetary policy.  The general contours of the projec-
tions—a rapid near-term increase in Federal Reserve 
assets and the monetary base, followed by a decline for 
a time—were the same in each case, but the timing and 
magnitude varied significantly depending upon the un-
derlying assumptions.  Moreover, many aspects of the 
economic and financial outlook were subject to sub-

stantial risks, implying considerable uncertainty regard-
ing those assumptions and the resulting projections of 
the balance sheet and the monetary base.  

The staff briefed the Committee on recent develop-
ments related to the Term Asset-Backed Securities 
Loan Facility (TALF), which was authorized by the 
Board of Governors last November under section 
13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act.  Under the TALF, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York extended three-
year loans secured by AAA-rated asset-backed securi-
ties (ABS); these securities were backed by new and 
recently originated loans made by financial institutions.  
The first two monthly subscriptions of the TALF set-
tled during the intermeeting period.  At this meeting, 
the Committee discussed the potential benefits of ac-
cepting newly issued, AAA-rated commercial mort-
gage-backed securities and insurance premium finance 
ABS as eligible collateral for TALF loans.  Meeting par-
ticipants also discussed the possibility that some new 
TALF loans would have a longer maturity of five years. 

Secretary’s note:  The Board of Governors 
subsequently approved the broadening of 
the list of TALF-eligible collateral and the 
addition of five-year loans to the facility, as 
announced on May 1, 2009. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee decided to extend 
the reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrangements with the 
Bank of Canada and the Banco de Mexico for an addi-
tional year, beginning in mid-December 2009; these 
arrangements are associated with the Federal Reserve’s 
participation in the North American Framework 
Agreement of 1994.  The arrangement with the Bank of 
Canada is in the amount of $2 billion equivalent, and 
that with the Banco de Mexico is in the amount of $3 
billion equivalent.  The vote to renew the System’s par-
ticipation in these swap arrangements was taken at this 
meeting because of the provision in the arrangements 
that requires each party to provide six months’ prior 
notice of an intention to terminate its participation. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the April 28-29 meeting 
indicated that the pace of decline in some components 
of final demand appeared to have slowed recently.  
Consumer spending firmed in the first quarter after 
dropping markedly during the second half of 2008.  
Housing activity remained depressed but seemed to 
have leveled off in February and March.  In contrast, 
businesses cut production and employment substantial-
ly in recent months—likely reflecting, in part, inventory 
overhangs that persisted into the early part of the 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



year—and fixed investment continued to contract.  
Headline and core consumer prices rose at a moderate 
pace over the first three months of the year. 

Labor market conditions deteriorated further in March.  
Private nonfarm payroll employment registered its fifth 
consecutive large monthly decrease, with losses wide-
spread across industries.  Moreover, the average work-
week of production and nonsupervisory workers on 
private payrolls ticked down in March from the low 
level recorded in January and February, and total hours 
worked for this group stayed below the fourth-quarter 
average.  The civilian unemployment rate climbed to 
8.5 percent, and the labor force participation rate edged 
down from its February level.  The four-week moving 
average of initial claims for unemployment insurance 
remained elevated in April, and the number of individ-
uals receiving unemployment benefits relative to the 
size of the labor force reached its highest level since 
1982. 

Industrial production fell substantially in March and for 
the first quarter as a whole, with cutbacks widespread 
across sectors, and manufacturing capacity utilization 
decreased to a very low level.  First-quarter domestic 
production of light motor vehicles reached the lowest 
level in more than three decades as inventories of such 
vehicles, while low, remained high relative to sales.  
The output of high-technology products decreased in 
March and in the first quarter overall, with production 
of computers and semiconductors extending the 
downward trend that had begun in the second half of 
2008.  In contrast, the production of communications 
equipment edged up in the first quarter.  The output of 
other consumer durables and business equipment 
stayed low, and broad indicators of near-term manufac-
turing activity suggested that factory output would con-
tract over the next few months. 

The available data suggested that real consumer spend-
ing rose moderately in the first quarter after having fal-
len in the second half of last year.  Real spending on 
goods and services excluding motor vehicles fell in 
March but was up, on balance, for the first quarter as a 
whole.  Real outlays on new and used motor vehicles 
expanded in the first quarter following six consecutive 
quarterly declines.  Despite the upturn in consumer 
spending, the fundamentals for this sector remained 
weak:  Wages and salaries dropped, house prices were 
markedly lower than a year ago, and, despite recent 
increases, equity prices were down substantially from 
their levels of 12 months earlier.  As measured by the 
Reuters/University of Michigan survey, consumer sen-

timent strengthened a bit in early April, as households 
expressed somewhat more optimism about long-term 
economic conditions; however, even with this im-
provement, the measure was only slightly above the 
historical low for the series recorded last November. 

The latest readings from the housing market suggested 
that the contraction in housing activity might have 
moderated over the first quarter.  Single-family housing 
starts flattened out in February and March, and, after 
adjusting for activity outside of permit-issuing areas, 
the level of permits in March remained above the level 
of starts.  The contraction in the multifamily sector also 
showed signs of slowing, as the drop in starts in the 
first quarter was well below the pace experienced dur-
ing the fourth quarter of 2008.  Recent data also indi-
cated that housing demand might have stabilized.  Sales 
of new single-family homes held steady in March after 
edging up in February, but the level of such sales re-
mained low, leaving the supply of new homes relative 
to the pace of sales very high by historical standards.  
Existing home sales in March were slightly below the 
average pace for January and February.  Most national 
indexes of house prices stayed on a downward trajecto-
ry.  Lower mortgage rates and house prices contributed 
to an increase in housing affordability.  Rates for con-
forming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages extended the sig-
nificant decline that began late last year.  Rates on jum-
bo loans came down as well, although the spread be-
tween the rates on jumbo and conforming loans was 
still wide and the market for private-label nonprime 
MBS remained impaired. 

Real spending on equipment and software dropped 
markedly in the first quarter, with declines about as 
steep and widespread as in the fourth quarter of 2008.  
Orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods 
excluding aircraft fell in March, turning negative again 
after having been flat in February.  The fundamental 
determinants of equipment and software investment 
stayed weak in the first quarter:  Business output con-
tinued to drop sharply, and credit availability was still 
tight.  In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey 
on Bank Lending Practices, the net percentages of res-
pondents that reported they tightened their business 
lending policies over the previous three months, al-
though continuing to be very elevated, edged down for 
the second consecutive survey.  Real spending on non-
residential structures contracted in the first quarter.  
Despite the significant cuts in production in recent 
quarters, inventories remained sizable early in the year, 
although the overhang appeared to be less severe than 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



in late 2008.  Given the elevated level of inventories, 
firms continued their efforts to reduce their stocks. 

The U.S. international trade deficit diminished in Feb-
ruary to its lowest level since November 1999, as im-
ports fell and exports rose a bit.  Most major categories 
of exports increased, especially sales of consumer 
goods, and within that category, pharmaceuticals.  Ex-
ports of capital goods rose despite a modest decrease in 
exports of aircraft, and exports of automotive products 
increased following a marked drop in January; in con-
trast, exports of services declined in February.  All ma-
jor categories of imports decreased.  The fall in oil im-
ports was driven by lower volumes as prices moved up 
slightly; prices of non-oil imports moved down, but 
falling volumes accounted for most of the decline in 
this category. 

Economic conditions again worsened in the advanced 
foreign economies in the first quarter.  Industrial pro-
duction continued to drop through February, employ-
ment declined substantially, and retail sales were weak.  
However, indicators of developments late in the first 
quarter, particularly the purchasing managers indexes 
for all of the major advanced economies, increased, 
suggesting some moderation in the pace of contraction 
of economic activity going forward.  The first-quarter 
data also offered a few tentative signs that the decelera-
tion of economic activity in emerging markets might 
have started to abate.  In particular, the growth of real 
gross domestic product (GDP) in China appeared to 
pick up on a quarterly basis following fiscal stimulus 
measures and steps to foster credit expansion.  

In the United States, overall consumer prices increased 
over the first three months of 2009 after falling in the 
fourth quarter of 2008:  Energy prices rebounded 
somewhat after their substantial late-year drop, and 
core prices picked up.  In contrast, the producer price 
index for core intermediate materials fell, though at a 
noticeably slower pace than in late 2008.  Indexes of 
commodity prices rose in March but stayed far below 
their year-earlier values.  Near-term inflation expecta-
tions increased in early April but did not appear to in-
fluence longer-term expectations, whose levels in April 
were still at the low end of the range seen over the past 
few years.  Hourly earnings of production and nonsu-
pervisory workers edged up in March. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The decision by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) at the March meeting to leave the target range 
for the federal funds rate unchanged was widely antic-
ipated and had little effect on short-term money mar-

kets.  However, investors were apparently surprised by 
the Committee’s announcement that it would increase 
significantly further the size of the Federal Reserve’s 
balance sheet by purchasing up to $300 billion in Trea-
sury securities and expanding purchases of agency MBS 
and agency debt.  In addition, market participants re-
portedly interpreted the statement that the federal 
funds rate was likely to remain exceptionally low “for 
an extended period” as stronger than the phrase “for 
some time” in the previous statement.  Rates on Euro-
dollar futures contracts and yields on Treasury and 
agency securities fell considerably in response to the 
statement.  The initial drop in the expected path for the 
federal funds rate was reversed over subsequent weeks, 
however, likely in response to the somewhat better 
economic outlook.  Similarly, a portion of the substan-
tial declines in yields on nominal Treasury coupon se-
curities that followed the FOMC announcement was 
subsequently unwound amid the improved economic 
outlook, an easing of concern about financial institu-
tions, and perhaps some reversal of flight-to-quality 
flows.  Yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities 
fell a bit more than those on their nominal counter-
parts, which decreased modestly, on net, over the pe-
riod.  As a result, inflation compensation rose at short-
er horizons but changed little at longer horizons.  Poor 
liquidity in the market for Treasury inflation-protected 
securities continued to make these readings difficult to 
interpret. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets improved 
somewhat over the intermeeting period.  In unsecured 
bank funding markets, spreads of dollar London inter-
bank offered rates (Libor) over comparable-maturity 
overnight index swap (OIS) rates edged down, al-
though Libor fixings beyond the one-month maturity 
stayed elevated.  Spreads on A2/P2-rated commercial 
paper and AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper 
narrowed a bit, on net, staying at the low end of their 
respective ranges over the past year.  Functioning in the 
repurchase agreement (repo) market showed additional 
improvement, as bid-asked spreads and “haircuts” on 
most collateral either narrowed or held steady, although 
repo volumes were still low.  Consistent with modestly 
better conditions in the term repo market, all seven 
auctions under the Term Securities Lending Facility 
were undersubscribed over the intermeeting period, 
including two auctions that garnered no bids. 

Trading conditions in the secondary market for nomin-
al Treasury securities also showed some signs of im-
provement.  Premiums paid for on-the-run Treasury 
securities fell, and average bid-asked spreads for Trea-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



sury notes were relatively stable near their pre-crisis 
levels.  Still, daily trading volumes for Treasury securi-
ties remained low. 

Broad stock price indexes rose significantly, reportedly 
buoyed by announcements of policy measures to en-
hance credit markets and clean up banks’ balance 
sheets and perhaps by some reduction in concerns 
about the economic outlook.  Financial stocks outper-
formed broader markets, boosted by relatively favora-
ble first-quarter earnings reports from a few major 
firms.  The spread between the forward trend earnings-
price ratio for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the 
real long-run Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the eq-
uity risk premium—narrowed during the intermeeting 
period but was still very high by historical standards.  
Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index de-
creased but stayed well above historical norms. 

On net, yields on lower-rated investment-grade and 
speculative-grade corporate bonds dropped, resulting in 
a narrowing of spreads in yields on such bonds over 
those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities.  
Even so, corporate bond spreads remained extremely 
high by historical standards.   

Indicators of functioning in the corporate bond mar-
ket—such as bid-asked spreads estimated by the 
staff—suggested that conditions in the speculative-
grade segment of the market had become less strained 
since last autumn.  Corresponding measures for in-
vestment-grade bonds hovered at moderately elevated 
levels.  The leveraged loan market showed some im-
provement over the past few months, with the average 
bid-asked spread narrowing and the average bid price 
moving up from a very depressed level.  The basis be-
tween an index of credit default swap spreads and 
measures of investment-grade corporate spreads—a 
rough proxy for unexploited arbitrage opportunities in 
the corporate credit market—stayed at high levels, re-
portedly reflecting an ongoing lack of financing capaci-
ty at major financial institutions.  No issuance of com-
mercial MBS occurred over the intermeeting period.   

The debt of the domestic private nonfinancial sector 
appeared to have contracted in the first quarter at 
about the same pace as in the fourth quarter of 2008.  
Activity in the mortgage market reflected mainly refi-
nancing, and staff estimates indicated that residential 
mortgage debt contracted again in the first quarter, de-
pressed by the very low pace of home sales, falling 
house prices, and write-downs of nonperforming loans.  
Consumer credit was essentially flat in January and 
February.  Expansion of nonfinancial business debt 

was tepid, as robust bond issuance was partly offset by 
declines in commercial paper and bank loans.  Federal 
debt rose briskly in the first quarter. 

M2 expanded rapidly in March.  A strong increase in 
liquid deposits, the largest component of M2, likely 
reflected further reallocations by households toward 
safer assets.  Retail money market mutual funds and 
small time deposits contracted modestly.  Currency 
growth was apparently bolstered by elevated foreign 
demand. 

Commercial bank credit contracted in March and was 
estimated to have dropped again in April.  The decline 
in bank credit in March was due importantly to a de-
crease in loans to businesses that reflected, in part, pay-
downs with the proceeds of bond issuance.  Commer-
cial real estate loans also fell.  Bank lending to house-
holds was weak, although credit extended under revolv-
ing home equity lines of credit again expanded robustly.  
Residential mortgage loans on banks’ books fell, on 
balance, in March and the first part of April; banks re-
portedly sold a considerable amount of single-family 
mortgages to the government-sponsored enterprises.  
Consumer loans held by banks also shrank, amid heavy 
securitization.  The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur-
vey conducted in April indicated that banks continued 
to tighten their credit standards and terms on all major 
loan categories over the previous three months. 

Stock markets around the world rose substantially over 
the intermeeting period amid somewhat better senti-
ment regarding economic prospects, reports of better-
than-expected performance from some financial firms 
in the United States and Europe, and continued sup-
port from monetary policies.  Pressures in bank fund-
ing markets seemed to ease over the period:  Spreads 
between both euro and sterling Libor and their respec-
tive OIS rates narrowed significantly, and financial 
conditions in most emerging market economies im-
proved.  The dollar depreciated against the other major 
currencies in an environment of seemingly increased 
investor appetite for risk. 

During the intermeeting period, foreign authorities 
took additional steps to address the weaknesses in their 
economies and financial systems.  The European Cen-
tral Bank and the Bank of Canada, along with several 
other central banks in both the advanced and emerging 
market economies, cut policy rates, while the Bank of 
England and the Bank of Japan continued their asset 
purchases to provide further monetary stimulus.  Sev-
eral governments, including Japan and Taiwan, an-
nounced new fiscal stimulus packages, and a number of 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



European countries took additional measures to sup-
port their banking sectors. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the forecast for the meeting, which was prepared 
prior to the release of the advance estimates of the 
first-quarter national income and product accounts, the 
staff revised up its outlook for economic activity in 
response to recent favorable financial developments as 
well as better-than-expected readings on final sales.  
Consumer purchases appeared to have stabilized after 
falling in the second half of 2008, and the steep decline 
in the housing sector seemed to be abating.  However, 
the contraction in the labor market persisted into 
March, industrial production again fell rapidly, and the 
broad-based decline in equipment and software in-
vestment continued.  Conditions in financial markets 
improved more than had been expected:  Private bor-
rowing rates moved lower, stock prices rose substan-
tially, and some measures of financial stress eased.  The 
staff’s projections for economic activity in the second 
half of 2009 and in 2010 were revised up, with real 
GDP expected to edge higher in the second half and 
then increase moderately next year.  The key factors 
expected to drive the acceleration in activity were the 
boost to spending from fiscal stimulus, the bottoming 
out of the housing market, a turn in the inventory cycle 
from liquidation to modest accumulation, and ongoing 
gradual recovery of financial markets.  The staff again 
expected that the unemployment rate would rise 
through the beginning of 2010 before edging down 
over the rest of that year.  The staff forecast for overall 
and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) 
inflation over the next two years was revised up 
slightly.  The staff raised its near-term estimate of core 
PCE inflation because recent data on core and overall 
PCE price inflation came in a bit higher than antic-
ipated.  Beyond the near term, however, the staff antic-
ipated that the low level of resource utilization and a 
gradual decline in inflation expectations would lead to a 
deceleration in core PCE prices.  Looking out to 2011, 
the staff anticipated that financial markets and institu-
tions would continue to recuperate, monetary policy 
would remain stimulative, fiscal stimulus would be fad-
ing, and inflation expectations would be relatively well 
anchored.  Under such conditions, the staff projected 
that real GDP would expand at a rate well above that 
of its potential, that the unemployment rate would de-
cline significantly, and that overall and core PCE infla-
tion would stay in a low range. 

Participants’ Views and Committee Policy Action 
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting 
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve 
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the 
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for 
each year from 2009 through 2011 and over a longer 
horizon.  Longer-run projections represent each partic-
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable 
would be expected to converge over time under appro-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further 
shocks.  Participants’ forecasts through 2011 and over 
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum 
to these minutes. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, participants agreed that the information received 
since the March meeting provided some tentative evi-
dence that the pace of contraction in real economic 
activity was starting to diminish.  Participants noted 
that financial market conditions had generally streng-
thened, and surveys and anecdotal reports pointed to a 
pickup in household and business confidence, which 
nonetheless remained at very low levels.  Some signs 
pointing toward economic stabilization were seen in 
data on consumer spending, housing, and factory or-
ders.  Although economic activity was being damped 
by the efforts of businesses to pare excess inventories, 
the substantial drawdown in inventories over recent 
months was viewed as raising the prospects for a gra-
dual expansion in industrial production later this year.  
Participants anticipated that the acceleration in final 
demand and economic activity over the next few quar-
ters would be modest.  Growth of consumption ex-
penditures was likely to be restrained by the weakness 
in labor markets and the lagged effects of past reduc-
tions in household wealth.  Business investment spend-
ing would probably shrink further.  Adverse global 
economic and financial conditions would continue to 
weigh on the demand for U.S. exports.   

Financial market developments over the intermeeting 
period were mainly seen as positive.  Equity prices in-
creased, money markets were functioning better, and 
corporate issuance of bonds and convertible securities 
was relatively brisk.  Measures of volatility and financial 
stress moved down and risk spreads narrowed in many 
markets, perhaps partly because of investors’ percep-
tions of diminished downside tail risks.  Even so, risk 
spreads remained unusually wide and markets contin-
ued to be fragile.  Despite the improvement in financial 
markets, credit conditions stayed quite restrictive for 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



many households and businesses.  The April Senior 
Loan Officer Opinion Survey showed that a large net 
fraction of banks had tightened their terms and stan-
dards for credit during the previous three months, al-
beit a modestly smaller fraction than indicated by the 
January survey.   Moreover, meeting participants noted 
that the volume of credit extended to households and 
businesses was still contracting as a result of shrinking 
demand, declining credit quality, capital constraints on 
financial institutions, and the limited availability of fi-
nancing through securitization markets. 

Consumer spending firmed somewhat during the first 
quarter despite the rising unemployment rate and sig-
nificant financial strains.  Participants generally ex-
pected that household demand would gradually streng-
then over coming quarters in response to the rise in 
household wealth from the substantial increase in equi-
ty prices that had occurred over the intermeeting pe-
riod as well as the support for income provided by fis-
cal policy.  Nevertheless, participants judged that the 
recovery in consumer demand over the next few quar-
ters would be slow, reflecting adverse labor market 
conditions and continuing adjustments to earlier reduc-
tions in household wealth. 

Some participants referred to the possibility that activi-
ty in the housing market might finally be approaching a 
trough.  Indicators of new home sales appeared to be 
stabilizing, and inventories of unsold homes diminished 
somewhat.  Participants also reported some signs that 
the decline in home prices might be slowing.   

Labor market conditions were still deteriorating.  Un-
employment claims were exceptionally elevated, and 
the ratio of permanent job cuts to temporary layoffs 
was substantially higher than in previous economic 
downturns.  Staff reductions were under way even at 
traditionally stable employers such as hospitals and 
nonprofit institutions.  An unusually large proportion 
of employed persons indicated that they were engaged 
in part-time work because they could not obtain full-
time jobs. 

Participants cited the magnitude of the retrenchment in 
production and capital spending, but they also noted 
that manufacturing surveys and informal contacts sug-
gested a noticeable upturn in business sentiment:  A 
number of participants highlighted regional surveys 
reporting that greater numbers of industrial firms antic-
ipated that their orders and shipments would start ex-
panding over the next six months.  Some participants 
expected that a gradual strengthening of retail sales 
would lead to an abatement of the decline in capital 

investment and would tend to induce manufacturers to 
begin rebuilding depleted stocks of inventories later 
this year, thereby reinforcing the pickup in industrial 
production.  The outlook in some other sectors seemed 
less propitious; for example, one participant described 
survey data indicating that firms in the service sector 
were expecting sales to decrease further in coming 
months, and others referred to cutbacks in drilling and 
mining. 

The economies of many key trading partners were seen 
as experiencing quite severe contractions.  Participants 
noted that banking institutions in a number of coun-
tries remained exposed to substantial further losses, 
and the process of repairing the balance sheets of such 
institutions would likely continue to restrain growth in 
those economies over coming quarters and hence 
damp the outlook for U.S. export demand.  A few 
countries did show some signs that weakness was abat-
ing, perhaps reflecting, in part, rapid implementation of 
fiscal stimulus; furthermore, the recent firming of 
commodity prices gave an indication that global weak-
ness might be starting to subside. 

Although the near-term economic outlook had im-
proved modestly since March, participants emphasized 
the tentative nature of the incoming data, which are 
volatile and subject to revision.  The experience of pre-
vious recessions underscored the challenges of identify-
ing the onset of economic recovery using real-time in-
dicators.  Also, empirical analysis of past episodes in 
the United States and abroad in which economic down-
turns had been triggered by financial crises generally 
concluded that such contractions tended to be more 
severe and protracted than other recessions.  Moreover, 
participants continued to see significant downside risks 
to the economic outlook.  In particular, while financial 
strains and risk spreads had lessened somewhat over 
the intermeeting period, participants agreed that the 
global financial system remained vulnerable to further 
shocks.  In discussing the Supervisory Capital Assess-
ment Program, which was being conducted jointly by 
the Federal Reserve and other bank supervisory author-
ities, a number of participants noted that investors were 
concerned that the upcoming publication of stress test 
results might trigger volatility in financial markets.  
Some participants also referred to mounting losses in 
commercial real estate, which could have substantial 
adverse consequences for regional banks and other 
financial institutions with significant concentrations of 
such assets.   

Minutes of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



Looking further ahead, participants considered a num-
ber of factors that would be likely to restrain the pace 
of economic recovery over the medium term.  Strains 
in credit markets were expected to recede only gradual-
ly as financial institutions continued to rebuild their 
capital and remained cautious in their approach to as-
set-liability management, especially given that the out-
look for credit performance was likely to improve slow-
ly.  Some sectors—such as financial services and resi-
dential construction—might well account for a smaller 
share of the economy in coming years, and the result-
ing reallocation of labor across sectors could weigh on 
labor markets for some time.  Households would likely 
remain cautious, and their desired saving rates would 
be relatively high over the extended period that would 
be required to bring their stock of wealth back up to 
more normal levels relative to income.  The stimulus 
from fiscal policy was expected to diminish over time 
as the government budget moved to a sustainable path.  
Demand for U.S. exports would also take time to re-
vive, reflecting the gradual recovery of major trading 
partners. 

Most participants expected inflation to remain subdued 
over the next few years, and they saw some risk that 
elevated unemployment and low capacity utilization 
could cause inflation to remain persistently below the 
rates that they judged as most consistent with sustaina-
ble economic growth and price stability.  Nonetheless, 
recent monthly readings on consumer price inflation 
had been above the low rates observed late last year, 
and survey measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
tions had remained reasonably stable, leading many 
participants to judge that the risk of a protracted period 
of deflation had diminished.  Some participants hig-
hlighted the potential pitfalls of making inflation pro-
jections based on contemporaneously available meas-
ures of resource slack, especially during periods when 
the economy was facing large supply shocks and signif-
icant sectoral reallocation.  Several participants referred 
to contacts who had expressed concerns that the ex-
pansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet might 
not be reversed in a sufficiently timely manner and 
hence that inflation could rise above rates consistent 
with price stability. 

In their discussion of monetary policy for the inter-
meeting period, Committee members agreed that the 
Federal Reserve’s large-scale securities purchases were 
providing financial stimulus that would contribute to 
the gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth 
in a context of price stability.  Members also agreed 
that it would be appropriate to continue making pur-

chases in accordance with the amounts that had pre-
viously been announced—that is, up to $1.25 trillion of 
agency MBS and up to $200 billion of agency debt by 
the end of this year, and up to $300 billion of Treasury 
securities by autumn.  Some members noted that a fur-
ther increase in the total amount of purchases might 
well be warranted at some point to spur a more rapid 
pace of recovery; all members concurred with waiting 
to see how the economy and financial conditions re-
spond to the policy actions already in train before de-
ciding whether to adjust the size or timing of asset pur-
chases.  The Committee reaffirmed the need to moni-
tor carefully the size and composition of the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet in light of economic and finan-
cial developments.  The Committee also discussed its 
strategy for communicating the anticipated path of its 
asset purchases and the circumstances under which 
adjustments to that path would be appropriate.  All 
members agreed that the statement should note that 
the timing and overall amounts of the Committee’s 
asset purchases would continue to be evaluated in light 
of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in 
financial markets. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee 
seeks monetary and financial conditions 
that will foster price stability and promote 
sustainable growth in output.  To further its 
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks 
conditions in reserve markets consistent 
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 
to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the 
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, 
and longer-term Treasury securities during 
the intermeeting period with the aim of 
providing support to private credit markets 
and economic activity.  The timing and pace 
of these purchases should depend on condi-
tions in the markets for such securities and 
on a broader assessment of private credit 
market conditions.  The Committee antic-
ipates that the combination of outright pur-
chases and various liquidity facilities out-
standing will cause the size of the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet to expand signifi-
cantly in coming months.  The Desk is ex-
pected to purchase up to $200 billion in 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



housing-related agency debt by the end of 
this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase 
at least $500 billion in agency MBS by the 
end of the second quarter of this year and is 
expected to purchase up to $1.25 trillion of 
these securities by the end of this year.  The 
Desk is expected to purchase up to $300 
billion of longer-term Treasury securities by 
the end of the third quarter.  The System 
Open Market Account Manager and the 
Secretary will keep the Committee informed 
of ongoing developments regarding the Sys-
tem’s balance sheet that could affect the at-
tainment over time of the Committee’s ob-
jectives of maximum employment and price 
stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in March in-
dicates that the economy has continued to 
contract, though the pace of contraction 
appears to be somewhat slower.  Household 
spending has shown signs of stabilizing but 
remains constrained by ongoing job losses, 
lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  
Weak sales prospects and difficulties in ob-
taining credit have led businesses to cut 
back on inventories, fixed investment, and 
staffing.  Although the economic outlook 
has improved modestly since the March 
meeting, partly reflecting some easing of fi-
nancial market conditions, economic activi-
ty is likely to remain weak for a time.   
Nonetheless, the Committee continues to 
anticipate that policy actions to stabilize fi-
nancial markets and institutions, fiscal and 
monetary stimulus, and market forces will 
contribute to a gradual resumption of sus-
tainable economic growth in a context of 
price stability.  

In light of increasing economic slack here 
and abroad, the Committee expects that in-
flation will remain subdued.  Moreover, the 
Committee sees some risk that inflation 
could persist for a time below rates that 
best foster economic growth and price sta-
bility in the longer term. 

In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve 
will employ all available tools to promote 

economic recovery and to preserve price 
stability.  The Committee will maintain the 
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 
to ¼ percent and anticipates that economic 
conditions are likely to warrant exceptional-
ly low levels of the federal funds rate for an 
extended period.  As previously announced, 
to provide support to mortgage lending and 
housing markets and to improve overall 
conditions in private credit markets, the 
Federal Reserve will purchase a total of up 
to $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed 
securities and up to $200 billion of agency 
debt by the end of the year.  In addition, the 
Federal Reserve will buy up to $300 billion 
of Treasury securities by autumn.  The 
Committee will continue to evaluate the 
timing and overall amounts of its purchases 
of securities in light of the evolving eco-
nomic outlook and conditions in financial 
markets.  The Federal Reserve is facilitating 
the extension of credit to households and 
businesses and supporting the functioning 
of financial markets through a range of li-
quidity programs.  The Committee will con-
tinue to carefully monitor the size and 
composition of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet in light of financial and econom-
ic developments.” 

Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley, 
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart, 
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen. 

Voting against this action: None. 

Governor Kohn reported to the Committee on the 
progress of a Federal Reserve workgroup in its review 
of the information provided to the public regarding 
Federal Reserve programs and activities.  That review 
was being conducted to identify opportunities for pro-
viding additional information to the public without 
compromising the Federal Reserve’s mandated policy 
objectives.  The workgroup had been devoting particu-
lar attention to approaches to enhancing the transpa-
rency of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity and credit facili-
ties, including regular reporting on the number, types, 
and concentration of borrowers from each program; 
the amount and nature of collateral accepted; detailed 
background information on special purpose vehicles; 
and contracts with private-sector firms that had been 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



engaged to help carry out some of these programs.  In 
the Committee’s discussion of these issues, it was noted 
that disclosing the identities of individual borrowers 
would very likely discourage use of the Federal Re-
serve’s liquidity and credit facilities because prospective 
borrowers would be concerned that their creditors and 
counterparties would see borrowing from the Federal 
Reserve as a sign of financial weakness.  The resulting 
stigma would undermine the effectiveness of those 
programs in promoting financial stability and economic 
recovery. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, June 23-24, 
2009.  The meeting adjourned at 11:50 a.m. on April 
29, 2009. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on April 7, 2009, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on March 17-18, 2009. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Summary of Economic Projections 
 

In conjunction with the April 28-29, 2009, FOMC 
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of 
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub-
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, 
and inflation in 2009, 2010, 2011, and over the longer 
run.  Projections were based on information available 
through the end of the meeting and on each partici-
pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco-
nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary 
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the 
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for 
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or 
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.  
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s 
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be 
expected to converge over time under appropriate 
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. 

As indicated in table 1 and depicted in figure 1, all 
FOMC participants projected that real GDP would 
contract this year, that the unemployment rate would 
increase in coming quarters, and that inflation would be 
slower this year than in recent years.  Almost all partici-
pants viewed the near-term outlook for economic activ-
ity as having weakened relative to the projections they 
made at the time of the January FOMC meeting, but 
they continued to expect a recovery in sales and pro-
duction to begin during the second half of 2009.  With 

the strong adverse forces that have been acting on the 
economy likely to abate only slowly, participants gener-
ally expected a gradual recovery:  All anticipated that 
unemployment, though declining in coming years, 
would remain well above its longer-run sustainable rate 
at the end of 2011; most indicated they expected the 
economy to take five or six years to converge to a long-
er-run path characterized by a sustainable rate of output 
growth and by rates of unemployment and inflation 
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives, 
but several said full convergence would take longer.  
Participants projected very low inflation this year; most 
expected inflation to edge up over the next few years 
toward the rate they consider consistent with the dual 
objectives.  Most participants—though fewer than in 
January—viewed the risks to the growth outlook as 
skewed to the downside.  Most participants saw the 
risks to the inflation outlook as balanced; fewer than in 
January viewed those risks as tilted to the downside.  
With few exceptions, participants judged that their pro-
jections for economic activity and inflation remained 
subject to a degree of uncertainty exceeding historical 
norms. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for 2009 real GDP growth had 
a central tendency of negative 2.0 percent to negative 
1.3 percent, somewhat below the central tendency of 
negative 1.3 percent to negative 0.5 percent for their 
January projections.  Participants noted that the data 
received between the January and April FOMC meet-

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, April 2009 
Percent    

Variable 
Central tendency1 Range2 

2009 2010 2011 Longer run 2009 2010 2011 Longer run 
Change in real GDP. . . . . . -2.0 to -1.3 2.0 to 3.0 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to -0.5 1.5 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

January projection. . . . . -1.3 to -0.5 2.5 to 3.3 3.8 to 5.0 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to 0.2 1.5 to 4.5 2.3 to 5.5 2.4 to 3.0 

Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.2 to 9.6 9.0 to 9.5 7.7 to 8.5 4.8 to 5.0 9.1 to 10.0 8.0 to 9.6 6.5 to 9.0 4.5 to 5.3 
January projection. . . . . 8.5 to 8.8 8.0 to 8.3 6.7 to 7.5 4.8 to 5.0 8.0 to 9.2 7.0 to 9.2 5.5 to 8.0 4.5 to 5.5 

PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . .  0.6 to 0.9 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.2 0.7 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 
January projection. . . . . 0.3 to 1.0 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.8 0.2 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.3 0.8 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5 
January projection. . . . . 0.9 to 1.1 0.8 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 1.5 0.4 to 1.7 0.0 to 1.8 

   NOTE:  Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of 
the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in 
the fourth quarter of the year indicated.  Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the 
absence of further shocks to the economy.  The January projections were made in conjunction with the FOMC meeting on January 27-28, 2009.
   1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
   2.  The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
   3.  Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 

 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



2

1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

9

10

Percent

Unemployment rate

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run

+
_0

1

2

3

Percent

PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run

+
_0

1

2

3

Percent

Core PCE inflation

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ings pointed to a larger decline in output and employ-
ment during the first quarter than they had anticipated 
at the time of the January meeting.  However, partici-
pants also saw recent indications that the economic 
downturn was slowing in the second quarter, and they 
continued to expect that sales and production would 
begin to recover—albeit gradually—during the second 
half of the year, reflecting the effects of monetary and 
fiscal stimulus and of measures to support credit mar-
kets and stabilize the financial system along with market 
forces.  In particular, participants noted some im-
provement in financial conditions in recent months, 
signs that consumer spending was leveling out, and ten-
tative indications that activity in the housing sector 
might be nearing its bottom.  In addition, they ob-
served that the large reduction in stocks of unsold 
goods that resulted from firms’ aggressive inventory 
cutting during the first quarter would make firms more 
likely to increase production as their sales stabilize and 
then begin to turn up later this year.  Participants ex-
pected, however, that recoveries in consumer spending 
and residential investment initially would be damped by 
further deterioration in labor markets, still-tight credit 
conditions, and a continuing, if less pronounced, de-
cline in house prices.  Moreover, they anticipated that 
very low capacity utilization, sluggish growth in sales, 
and the high cost and limited availability of financing 
would contribute to further weakness in business fixed 
investment this year. 

Looking further ahead, participants’ projections for real 
GDP growth in 2010 had a central tendency of 2.0 to 
3.0 percent, and those for 2011 had a central tendency 
of 3.5 to 4.8 percent. Participants generally expected 
that strains in credit markets and in the banking system 
would ebb slowly, and hence that the pace of recovery 
would continue to be damped in 2010.  But they antic-
ipated that the upturn would strengthen in 2011 to a 
pace exceeding the growth rate of potential GDP as 
financial conditions continue to improve, and that it 
would remain above that rate long enough to eliminate 
slack in resource utilization over time.  Several partici-
pants anticipated that rapid growth in the monetary 
base in 2009—a result of the Federal Reserve’s sizable 
purchases of longer-term assets—would result in a 
more pronounced pickup in output and employment 
growth in 2010 and a somewhat quicker convergence to 
longer-run equilibrium.  Most participants expected 
that, absent further shocks, real GDP growth eventually 
would converge to a rate of 2.5 to 2.7 percent per year, 
reflecting longer-term trends in the growth of produc-
tivity and the labor force. 

In light of their expectation that the recovery will begin 
gradually, with output initially rising at a below-
potential rate, participants anticipated that labor market 
conditions would continue to deteriorate over the re-
mainder of this year.  Their projections for the average 
unemployment rate during the fourth quarter of 2009 
had a central tendency of 9.2 to 9.6 percent, noticeably 
higher than the actual unemployment rate of 8.5 per-
cent in March—the latest reading available at the time 
of the April FOMC meeting.  All participants revised 
up their forecasts of the unemployment rate at the end 
of this year relative to their January projections, reflect-
ing the sharper-than-expected rise in actual unemploy-
ment that occurred during the first quarter as well as 
the downward revisions in their forecasts of output 
growth in 2009.  Most participants anticipated that 
growth next year would not substantially exceed its 
longer-run sustainable rate and hence that the unem-
ployment rate would decline only modestly in 2010; 
some also pointed to the friction of a reallocation of 
resources away from shrinking economic sectors as 
likely to restrain progress in reducing unemployment.  
With output growth and job creation generally pro-
jected to pick up appreciably in 2011, participants antic-
ipated that joblessness would decline more noticeably, 
as evident from the central tendency of 7.7 to 8.5 per-
cent for their projections of the unemployment rate in 
late 2011.  Even so, they expected that the unemploy-
ment rate at the end of 2011 would still be declining 
toward its longer-run sustainable level.  Participants 
projected that unemployment would decline further 
after 2011; most saw the unemployment rate eventually 
converging to 4.8 to 5.0 percent. 

The central tendency of participants’ projections for 
2009 PCE inflation was 0.6 to 0.9 percent, an interval 
that is somewhat narrower but neither higher nor lower 
than the central tendency of their January projections.  
Looking beyond this year, participants’ projections for 
total PCE inflation had central tendencies of 1.0 to 1.6 
percent for 2010 and 1.0 to 1.9 percent for 2011.  The 
central tendency of projections for core inflation in 
2009 was 1.0 to 1.5 percent; those for 2010 and 2011 
were 0.7 to 1.3 percent and 0.8 to 1.6 percent, respec-
tively.  Most participants expected that economic slack, 
though diminishing, would continue to damp inflation 
pressures for the next few years and hence that total 
PCE inflation in 2011 would still be below their as-
sessments of its appropriate longer-run level.  Some 
thought that persistent economic slack would be ac-
companied by declining inflation over the next few 
years.  Most, however, projected that, as the economy 
recovers, inflation would increase gradually and move 

 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



toward their individual assessments of the measured 
rate of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s 
dual mandate for maximum employment and price sta-
bility.  Several participants, noting that the public’s 
longer-run inflation expectations have not changed ap-
preciably, anticipated that inflation would return more 
promptly to levels consistent with their judgments 
about appropriate longer-run inflation. 

In April as in January, the central tendency of projec-
tions of the longer-run inflation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 per-
cent.  Most participants judged that a longer-run PCE 
inflation rate of 2 percent would be consistent with the 
Federal Reserve’s dual mandate; others indicated that 
inflation of 1½ or 1¾ percent would be appropriate.  
Modestly positive longer-run inflation would allow the 
Committee to stimulate economic activity and support 
employment by setting the federal funds rate temporari-
ly below the inflation rate when the economy suffers a 
large negative shock to demands for goods and servic-
es. 

Uncertainty and Risks 
A majority of participants continued to view the risks 
to their projections for real GDP growth as skewed to 
the downside and saw the associated risks to their pro-
jections for the unemployment rate as tilted to the up-
side, but a larger number than in January now saw the 
risks as broadly balanced.  Participants shared the 
judgment that their projections of future economic ac-
tivity and unemployment continued to be subject to 
greater-than-average uncertainty.1  Some participants 
highlighted the still-considerable uncertainty about the 
future course of the financial crisis and the risk that a 
resurgence of financial turmoil could adversely impact 
the real economy.  In addition, some noted the difficul-
ty in gauging the macroeconomic effects of the credit-
easing policies that are now being employed by the 
Federal Reserve and other central banks, given limited 
experience with such tools. 

Most participants judged the risks to the inflation out-
look as roughly balanced; some continued to view these 
risks as skewed to the downside, while one saw infla-
tion risks as tilted to the upside.  Some participants 
noted the risk that inflation expectations might become  

                                                 
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the 
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008.  At 
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” 
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in 
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess 
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2009 2010 2011 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . .  ±1.0 ±1.5 ±1.6 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . .  ±0.5 ±0.8 ±1.0 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . .  ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were 
released in the spring by various private and government forecasters.  As 
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, 
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real 
GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by 
the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further informa-
tion is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the 
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting 
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).  

1.  For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure 

that has been most widely used in government and private economic 
forecasts.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous 
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

unanchored and drift downward in response to persis-
tently low inflation outcomes; several pointed to the 
possibility of an upward shift in expected and actual 
inflation if investors become concerned that stimulative 
monetary policy measures and the attendant expansion 
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet might not be 
unwound in a timely fashion as the economy recovers.   
Most participants again saw the uncertainty surround-
ing their inflation projections as exceeding historical 
norms. 

Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes 
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in 
2009, 2010, and 2011.  The dispersion in participants’ 
April projections reflects, among other factors, the di-
versity of their assessments regarding the effects of fis-
cal stimulus and the likely pace of recovery in the finan-
cial sector.  Though the dispersion in projections for 
each variable was roughly the same in April as in Janu-
ary, the downward shift in the distribution of partici-
pants’ projections of real GDP growth in 2009, coupled 
with essentially unchanged distributions of projections 
for growth in 2010 and 2011, resulted in an upward 
shift from January to April in the distribution of projec-
tions for the unemployment rate in all three years.  The 
dispersion in participants’ longer-run projections re-
flected differences in their estimates regarding the sus-
tainable rates of output growth and unemployment to 
which the economy would converge under appropriate 
policy and in the absence of any further shocks; these 
distributions did not change appreciably from January 
to April. 

 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
tion about the diversity of participants’ views regarding 
the inflation outlook.  The dispersion in participants’ 
projections for total and core PCE inflation during 
2009 and the following two years illustrates their vary-
ing assessments of the inflation outcomes that will re-
sult from persistent economic slack, from expansion 
and subsequent contraction of the Federal Reserve’s 

balance sheet, and perhaps also from changes in the 
public’s expectations of future inflation.  In contrast, 
the tight distribution of participants’ projections for 
longer-run inflation illustrates their substantial agree-
ment about the measured rate of inflation that is most 
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of 
maximum employment and stable prices. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

January projections

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2010

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

-2.6-
-2.5 

-2.4-
-2.3 

-2.2-
-2.1 

-2.0-
-1.9 

-1.8-
-1.7 

-1.6-
-1.5 

-1.4-
-1.3 

-1.2-
-1.1 

-1.0-
-0.9 

-0.8-
-0.7 

-0.6-
-0.5 

-0.4-
-0.3 

-0.2-
-0.1 

0.0-
0.1 

0.2-
0.3 

0.4-
0.5 

0.6-
0.7 

0.8-
0.9 

1.0-
1.1 

1.2-
1.3 

1.4-
1.5 

1.6-
1.7 

1.8-
1.9 

2.0-
2.1 

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

January projections

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2010

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–11 and over the longer run  

2009

January projections

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2010

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

-0.5-
-0.4 

-0.3-
-0.2 

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–11  

2009

January projections

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2010

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

-0.1-
0.0 

0.1-
0.2 

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

2.5-
2.6 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 28-29, 2009                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 
 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by 
the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understand-
ing of the basis for policy actions.  Considera-
ble uncertainty attends these projections, 
however.  The economic and statistical models 
and relationships used to help produce eco-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de-
scriptions of the real world.  And the future 
path of the economy can be affected by my-
riad unforeseen developments and events.  
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, 
participants consider not only what appears to 
be the most likely economic outcome as em-
bodied in their projections, but also the range 
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of 
their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports 
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board 
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  The projection 
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the 
considerable uncertainty associated with eco-
nomic forecasts.  For example, suppose a par-
ticipant projects that real gross domestic 
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will 
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 
percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty   
attending those  projections  is  similar to  that 
 

experienced in the past and the risks around 
the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP 
would expand between 2 percent to 4 percent 
in the current year, 1.5 percent to 4.5 percent in 
the second year, and 1.4 percent to 4.6 percent 
in the third year.  The corresponding 70 per-
cent confidence intervals for overall inflation 
would be 1.2 percent to 2.8 percent in the cur-
rent year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the 
second and third years. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed on average over his-
tory, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
jections of each variable is greater than, smaller 
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, downside, or are 
broadly balanced.  That is, participants judge 
whether each variable is more likely to be 
above or below their projections of the most 
likely outcome.  These judgments about the 
uncertainty and the risks attending each partic-
ipant’s projections are distinct from the diversi-
ty of participants’ views about the most likely 
outcomes.  Forecast uncertainty is concerned 
with the risks associated with a particular pro-
jection, rather than with divergences across a 
number of different projections. 

 
    

 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee


	20090429.minutes.FOMC.final.pdf
	Staff Review of the Economic Situation
	Staff Review of the Financial Situation
	Staff Economic Outlook

	20090520.minutes.press.release.pdf
	EMBARGOED for release at 2:00 p.m. EDT                                    May 20, 2009 

	20090520.minutes.press.release.pdf
	EMBARGOED for release at 2:00 p.m. EDT                                    May 20, 2009 




