









































FOMC Minutes, August 10,2010


 

Minutes of  the Federal Open Market Committee 
August 10, 2010

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 10, 
2010, at 8:00 a.m.  
 
PRESENT:  

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
James Bullard 
Elizabeth Duke 
Thomas M. Hoenig 
Donald L. Kohn 
Sandra Pianalto 
Eric Rosengren 
Daniel K. Tarullo  
Kevin Warsh 
 
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. 

Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. 
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

 
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. 

Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis-
co, respectively 

 
William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel 
Nathan Sheets, Economist  
 
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. 

Kamin, Lawrence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, 
and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 

Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank 
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 

Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, 
Office of the Staff Director for Management, 
Board of Governors 

 
William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
David Reifschneider and William Wascher,  
Senior Associate Directors, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Ste-
phen D. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-

fice of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Eric M. Engen, Assistant Director, Division of Re-

search and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
John C. Driscoll and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior 

Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-

fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Kimberley E. Braun, Records Project Manager, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



 

 
Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors 

 
David Sapenero, First Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of St. Louis 
 
Loretta J. Mester and Robert H. Rasche, Executive 

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and St. Louis, respectively 

 
David Altig, Ron Feldman, Craig S. Hakkio, Glenn 

D. Rudebusch, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Geoff 
Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Re-
serve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Kansas 
City, San Francisco, Chicago, and Boston, re-
spectively 

 
Linda Goldberg, Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 
 
Annmarie S. Rowe-Straker, Assistant Vice Presi-

dent, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
 
Pia Orrenius, Research Officer, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Dallas 
 
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Richmond 
 
 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and 
foreign financial markets during the period since the 
Committee met on June 22–23, 2010.  He also reported 
on System open market operations during the inter-
meeting period, noting that the Desk at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York had engaged in coupon 
swap transactions in agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) to substantially reduce the number of the 
Committee’s earlier agency MBS purchases that re-
mained to be settled.  In addition, the Manager briefed 
the Committee on the System’s progress in developing 
tools for possible future reserve draining operations.  
The Federal Reserve successfully conducted two more 
small-value auctions of term deposits to confirm opera-
tional readiness for such auctions at the Federal Re-
serve and at the depository institutions that chose to 
participate.  The Manager noted that the staff was de-

veloping plans for additional small-value tests of the 
Term Deposit Facility.  In early August, the Federal 
Reserve successfully executed a few small-value term 
reverse repurchase operations, including the first the 
Federal Reserve conducted using agency MBS as collat-
eral, to ensure operational readiness for such transac-
tions at the Federal Reserve, the clearing banks, and the 
primary dealers.  There were no open market opera-
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account 
over the intermeeting period.  By unanimous vote, the 
Committee ratified the Desk’s transactions over the 
intermeeting period. 

The Manager also noted the staff’s projection that, if 
mortgage rates were to remain near their levels at the 
time of the meeting, repayments of principal on the 
agency MBS held in the SOMA likely would reduce the 
face value of those holdings by roughly $340 billion 
from August 2010 through the end of 2011.  The level 
of repayments would be expected to increase further if 
mortgage rates were to decline from those levels.  In 
addition, about $55 billion of agency debt held in the 
SOMA portfolio would mature over the same time 
frame. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the August 10 meeting 
indicated that the pace of the economic recovery 
slowed in recent months and that inflation remained 
subdued.  In addition, revised data for 2007 through 
2009 from the Bureau of Economic Analysis showed 
that the recent recession was deeper than previously 
thought, and, as a result, the level of real gross domes-
tic product (GDP) at the end of 2009 was noticeably 
lower than estimated earlier.  Private employment in-
creased slowly in June and July, and industrial produc-
tion was little changed in June after a large increase in 
May.  Consumer spending continued to rise at a mod-
est rate in June, and business outlays for equipment and 
software moved up further.  However, housing activity 
dropped back, and nonresidential construction re-
mained weak.  Additionally, the trade deficit widened 
sharply in May.  A further decline in energy prices and 
unchanged prices for core goods and services led to a 
fall in headline consumer prices in June. 

Private nonfarm employment expanded slowly in re-
cent months.  The average monthly gain in private pay-
roll employment during the three months ending in 
July was small, considerably less than the average in-
crease over the preceding three months.  However, 
average weekly hours of all employees continued to 
recover.  The net addition of jobs in manufacturing and 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

related industries, and in nonbusiness services such as 
health and education, continued to contribute impor-
tantly to the net increase in private employment.  Em-
ployment in construction and financial activities fell 
further.  The unemployment rate moved down in June 
from its level earlier in the year, and was unchanged in 
July, as declining civilian employment was accompanied 
by decreases in labor force participation.  Initial claims 
for unemployment insurance remained at an elevated 
level over the intermeeting period. 

Industrial production was little changed in June after 
three months of strong increases.  The output of utili-
ties was boosted by unseasonably hot weather while 
manufacturing production declined.  The drop in man-
ufacturing output included a reduction in motor vehicle 
assemblies, but they were scheduled to increase notice-
ably in July.  The June decrease in factory output also 
reflected weaker production in industries producing 
non-automotive consumer goods and construction and 
business supplies.  The output of high-technology 
items and other business equipment continued to rise.  
Capacity utilization in manufacturing in June stood well 
above its mid-2009 low, but it was still substantially 
short of its longer-run average. 

Revised data indicated that consumer spending fell 
more sharply in 2008 and in the first half of 2009, and 
subsequently recovered more slowly, than previously 
estimated.   Real personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE) rose gradually during the second quarter.  Sales 
of light motor vehicles continued to move up, on bal-
ance, with the level of sales in July slightly higher than 
the second-quarter average.  Real disposable personal 
income increased at a noticeably stronger pace than 
spending in recent months, and the personal saving rate 
moved up further from the upwardly revised level re-
ported in the revisions to the national income and 
product accounts.  Indicators of household net 
worth—such as stock prices and house prices—were 
little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period.  
Consumer confidence fell back in July, with households 
expressing greater concern about their personal fi-
nances and the outlook for the recovery. 

The housing market, which had been supported earlier 
in the year by activity associated with the homebuyer 
tax credits, was quite soft for a second consecutive 
month in June.  Sales of new single-family homes re-
bounded some in June after their sharp drop in May, 
but they remained at a depressed level.  Sales of existing 
homes fell for a second month in June, and the index 
of pending home sales suggested another decline in 

July.  Starts of new single-family houses, which had 
dropped steeply in May, edged down in June to the 
lowest level since the spring of 2009.  The low number 
of new permits issued in June appeared to signal that 
little improvement in new homebuilding was likely in 
July.  House prices were largely stable, on balance, in 
recent months.  The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate 
conforming mortgages fell further during July, reaching 
a record low for the 39-year history of the series. 

Real business spending on equipment and software 
rose strongly again in the second quarter, with increases 
widespread across the categories of spending.  New 
orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft 
remained on a solid uptrend, although their three-
month change for the period ending in June was less 
rapid than earlier in the year.  Survey indicators of 
business conditions and sentiment softened in July but 
remained consistent with further gains in production 
and capital spending in the near term.  Business in-
vestment in nonresidential structures turned up in the 
second quarter, with spending boosted by the rise in 
outlays for drilling and mining structures.  The decline 
in spending for other types of nonresidential buildings 
appeared to be slowing, and there were a few signs that 
financial conditions in commercial real estate markets, 
though still difficult, were stabilizing.  In the second 
quarter, businesses appeared to add to inventories at a 
faster rate.  However, ratios of inventories to sales for 
most industries did not point to any sizable overhangs. 

Inflation remained subdued in recent months.  Head-
line consumer prices declined in May and June because 
of sizable drops in consumer energy prices.  At the 
same time, the core PCE price index moved up only 
slightly, and the year-over-year increase in the index in 
June was lower than earlier in the year.  In recent 
months, prices of core consumer goods continued to 
decline while prices of non-energy services rose mod-
erately.  At earlier stages of production, producer prices 
of core intermediate materials fell back in June; in con-
trast, most indexes of spot commodity prices moved 
up during July.  Inflation compensation based on  
Treasury inflation-protected securities moved down 
further over the intermeeting period, partly in response 
to softer-than-expected data on economic activity, but 
survey measures of short- and long-term inflation ex-
pectations were largely stable. 

Nominal hourly labor compensation—as measured by 
compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector 
and the employment cost index—rose modestly during 
the year ending in the second quarter.  Average hourly 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 10, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



 

earnings of all employees rose slowly over the            
12 months ending in July.  Output per hour in the non-
farm business sector declined in the second quarter 
after rising rapidly in the preceding three quarters.  On 
net, unit labor costs remained well below their level one 
year earlier. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened sharply in 
May, as a significant increase in exports was more than 
offset by a surge in imports.  The corresponding de-
cline in real net exports made a significant negative 
contribution to U.S. GDP growth in the second quar-
ter.  The increase in exports was broadly based, with 
particular strength in exports of capital equipment.  
Imports of capital goods also were strong, as were im-
ports of consumer goods and automotive products.  In 
contrast, imports of petroleum products fell in May, 
held back by both lower prices and reduced volumes. 

Available data suggested that aggregate GDP growth in 
foreign economies remained strong in the second quar-
ter.  Recent indicators of economic activity for the euro 
area showed little imprint of the fiscal stresses that 
emerged in the spring.  Industrial production continued 
to grow in May, with particularly solid gains in Germa-
ny and France, and purchasing managers indexes and 
economic sentiment turned up in July.  In Japan, ex-
ports continued to support economic growth, even as 
indicators of household spending remained weak.  Ma-
chinery orders declined in May, however, and industrial 
production moved down in June, suggesting some de-
celeration in economic activity.  In the emerging market 
economies (EMEs), incoming data generally pointed to 
a moderation of economic growth, albeit to a still-solid 
pace, with a notable slowing in China in the second 
quarter.  In other EMEs, purchasing managers indexes 
generally still pointed to expansions in manufacturing 
activity, though industrial production in many countries 
began to decelerate.  In contrast, Mexican indicators 
suggested that economic activity rebounded in the 
second quarter after contracting in the first quarter.  
Headline inflation rates generally declined abroad,   
reflecting prior declines in oil and other commodity 
prices. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The decision taken by the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee (FOMC) at its June meeting to maintain the 0 to 
¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate was 
about in line with investor expectations and elicited 
little market reaction; the same was true of the wording 
of the accompanying statement.  Over the intermeeting 
period, investors appeared to mark down the path for 

monetary policy in response to weaker-than-expected 
economic data releases and Federal Reserve communi-
cations that were read as suggesting that policymakers’ 
concerns about the economic outlook had increased. 

Reflecting the same factors, yields on nominal Treasury 
coupon securities fell noticeably on net.  Treasury auc-
tions were generally well received, with bid-to-cover 
ratios mostly exceeding historical averages.  Yields on 
investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds 
decreased, and their spreads relative to yields on com-
parable-maturity Treasury securities declined moderate-
ly.  Secondary-market bid prices on syndicated lever-
aged loans rose a bit, while bid-asked spreads in that 
market edged down. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets improved 
somewhat over the intermeeting period.  Spreads of 
term London interbank offered rates (Libor) over rates 
on overnight index swaps moved down at most hori-
zons, and liquidity in term funding markets reportedly 
increased.  Spreads on unsecured commercial paper 
were little changed.  In secured funding markets, 
spreads on asset-backed commercial paper moved 
down, while rates and haircuts on collateral for repur-
chase agreements involving Treasury and agency col-
lateral held steady. 

Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased slightly, on 
net, as generally positive corporate earnings news and 
an easing of investors’ worries about the potential ef-
fects of fiscal strains in Europe were partly offset by 
concerns about the strength of the economic recovery.  
Most firms in the S&P 500 reported second-quarter 
earnings that exceeded analysts’ forecasts.  Option-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index declined but 
remained somewhat elevated by historical standards.  
The spread between the staff’s estimate of the expected 
real return on equities over the next 10 years and an 
estimate of the expected real return on a 10-year Treas-
ury note—a rough measure of the equity risk pre-
mium—was little changed at an elevated level.  Finan-
cial stock prices moved about in line with broader in-
dexes, and credit default swap spreads for large finan-
cial institutions narrowed moderately. 

Gross bond issuance by U.S. investment-grade nonfi-
nancial corporations rebounded in July from relatively 
subdued levels in May and June.  Nonfinancial com-
mercial paper outstanding also increased.  Issuance of 
syndicated leveraged loans rose in the second quarter, 
but terms on such deals reportedly tightened some-
what.  Measures of the credit quality of nonfinancial 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

firms remained solid.  Gross equity issuance was mod-
erate in June and July. 

Prices of commercial real estate appeared to have in-
creased in the second quarter, though the number of 
transactions was small.  Nonetheless, commercial real 
estate markets remained under pressure.  Delinquency 
rates for securitized commercial mortgages continued 
to rise in June, and commercial mortgage debt was es-
timated to have contracted by a sizable amount again in 
the second quarter.  However, investor demand for 
high-quality commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBS) reportedly was robust, although issuance of 
CMBS remained muted. 

Consumer credit contracted again in the second quar-
ter, as revolving credit continued to decline and nonre-
volving credit edged down.  Issuance of consumer as-
set-backed securities slowed a bit in July, reflecting, in 
part, typical seasonal patterns.  Consumer credit quality 
continued to show improvement.  Delinquency and 
charge-off rates for most types of consumer loans 
moved down in recent months, although these rates 
remained elevated.  Spreads of credit card interest rates 
over those on Treasury securities stayed elevated in 
May, while interest rate spreads on auto loans remained 
near their average level over the past decade. 

Commercial banks’ core loans—the sum of commercial 
and industrial (C&I), real estate, and consumer loans—
continued to contract in June and July.  However, the 
recent runoff in core loans was appreciably smaller 
than the declines posted earlier in the year, reflecting a 
more modest contraction in C&I loans.  The July Se-
nior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending 
Practices showed, for the second straight quarter, that a 
small net fraction of respondents had eased standards 
for C&I loans over the previous three months.  Com-
mercial real estate loans continued to decline steeply in 
June and July, and residential real estate loans also de-
creased.  Consumer loans at commercial banks were 
about flat, on balance, as reductions in credit card loans 
about offset an increase in nonrevolving consumer 
loans.  Securities holdings by banks increased substan-
tially in recent weeks. 

M2 was little changed in July after expanding slightly in 
the second quarter.  Its subdued growth in recent 
months likely reflected a continued unwinding of earli-
er safe-haven flows as well as the very low rates of re-
turn on some components of M2, particularly small 
time deposits and retail money market mutual funds. 

In foreign exchange markets, the value of the dollar 
declined on balance over the intermeeting period, likely 
reflecting some reversal of flight-to-safety flows, better-
than-expected European economic data, and the softer 
economic outlook for the United States.  The release of 
the results of the European Union stress-test exercise, 
including data on European banks’ exposures to sover-
eign debt, appeared to ease concerns about the poten-
tial for severe financial dislocations in Europe.  Inves-
tors also seemed to take comfort from several oversub-
scribed auctions of government debt by Spain, Portu-
gal, Ireland, and Greece.  Accordingly, risk spreads on 
these governments’ bonds, though elevated, generally 
declined, and European banks’ access to dollar funding 
improved somewhat.  The lack of any disruption to 
market functioning following the expiration, on July 1, 
of the European Central Bank’s first one-year refinanc-
ing operation also supported investor sentiment.  Mar-
ket indicators of expectations for future overnight rates 
in the euro area shifted up during the period.  No 
changes were made to policy interest rates in the euro 
area, the United Kingdom, or Japan.  The Bank of 
Canada tightened policy a step further during the pe-
riod, raising its target for the overnight rate 25 basis 
points to ¾ percent. 

Notwithstanding the improved investor sentiment to-
ward Europe, data releases pointing to lower-than-
expected growth in economic activity in the United 
States and China may have weighed on global sovereign 
bond yields, which declined on net in Canada, Germa-
ny, the United Kingdom, and Japan.  Equity prices, 
while up in Europe over the intermeeting period, were 
little changed in Canada and down in Japan.  By con-
trast, share prices rose in emerging markets and flows 
into emerging market equity funds continued to be 
strong.  The central banks of a number of EMEs, in-
cluding Brazil, Chile, India, Malaysia, South Korea, 
Taiwan, and Thailand, increased policy interest rates. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the economic forecast prepared for the August 
FOMC meeting, the staff lowered its projection for the 
increase in real economic activity during the second 
half of 2010 but continued to anticipate a moderate 
strengthening of the expansion in 2011.  The softer 
tone of incoming economic data suggested that the 
pace of the expansion would be slower over the near 
term than previously projected.  Financial conditions, 
however, became somewhat more supportive of eco-
nomic growth.  Interest rates on Treasury securities, 
corporate bonds, and mortgages moved down further 
over the intermeeting period; the dollar reversed its 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 10, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



 

April to June appreciation; and equity prices edged 
higher.  Over the medium term, the recovery in eco-
nomic activity was expected to receive support from 
accommodative monetary policy, further improvement 
in financial conditions, and greater household and 
business confidence.  Over the forecast period, the in-
crease in real GDP was projected to be sufficient to 
slowly reduce economic slack, although resource slack 
was still anticipated to remain quite elevated at the end 
of 2011. 

Overall inflation was projected to remain subdued over 
the next year and a half.  The staff’s forecasts for head-
line and core inflation in 2010 were revised up slightly 
in response to the higher prices of oil and other com-
modities and the depreciation of the dollar.  Even so, 
the wide margin of economic slack was projected to 
contribute to some slowing in core inflation in 2011, 
though the extent of that slowing would be tempered 
by stable inflation expectations. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, meeting participants generally characterized the 
economic information received during the intermeeting 
period as indicating a slowing in the pace of recovery in 
output and employment in recent months.  Real GDP 
growth was noticeably weaker in the second quarter of 
2010 than most had anticipated, and monthly data sug-
gested that the pace of recovery remained sluggish 
going into the third quarter.  Private payrolls and con-
sumer spending had risen less than expected.  Business 
spending on equipment and software had increased 
strongly but reportedly was concentrated in replace-
ments and upgrades that had been postponed during 
the economic downturn.  Investment in nonresidential 
structures continued to be weak.  Housing starts and 
sales remained at depressed levels, falling back after the 
expiration of the temporary homebuyer tax credits.  
The incoming data suggested that economic growth 
abroad had been somewhat stronger than anticipated 
and remained solid, boosting U.S. exports and support-
ing a pickup in U.S. manufacturing output and em-
ployment, though a surprising surge in imports in the 
second quarter widened the U.S. trade deficit.  Condi-
tions in financial markets had become somewhat more 
supportive of growth over the intermeeting period, in 
part reflecting perceptions of diminished risk of finan-
cial dislocations in Europe:  Medium- and longer-term 
interest rates had fallen, some risk spreads had nar-
rowed, and the decline in equity prices that had oc-
curred in the months before the Committee’s June 

meeting had been partly reversed.  Moreover, partici-
pants saw some indications that credit conditions for 
households and smaller businesses were beginning to 
improve, albeit gradually.  Thus, while they saw growth 
as likely to be more modest in the near term, partici-
pants continued to anticipate that growth would pick 
up in 2011. 

Revised national income and product account data 
showed that the contraction in aggregate output during 
the recent recession had been larger than previously 
reported.  In particular, consumer spending had con-
tracted more over the course of 2008 and the first half 
of 2009, and recovered less rapidly, than previously 
estimated, even as households’ after-tax incomes had 
increased more than shown by the earlier data.  In 
combination, these revisions indicated that the personal 
saving rate had been higher and had risen somewhat 
more during the past three years than previously 
thought.  Participants recognized that the implications 
of these new data for the outlook were unclear.  On the 
one hand, the revised data might indicate that house-
holds have made greater progress in repairing their bal-
ance sheets than had been realized, potentially allowing 
stronger growth in consumer spending as the recovery 
proceeds.  On the other hand, the revised data might 
signify that households are seeking to raise their net 
worth more substantially than previously understood, 
or to build greater precautionary balances in what they 
perceive to be a more uncertain economic environ-
ment, with the result that growth in consumer spending 
could remain restrained for some time. 

Many participants noted that the protracted downturn 
in house prices and in residential investment seemed to 
have ended, although ups and downs in housing starts 
and home sales associated with the temporary tax credit 
for homebuyers made it difficult to be certain.  A few 
commented that home sales and prices appeared to be 
edging up in their Districts.  While recognizing that the 
housing sector likely had bottomed out, participants 
observed that large inventories of vacant and unsold 
homes, along with continuing foreclosures that would 
increase the number of houses for sale, likely would 
continue to damp residential construction, indicating 
that a sustained upturn from very low levels was not 
imminent. 

Business investment in equipment and software had 
grown at a robust pace, but growth in new orders for 
nondefense capital goods, though volatile from month 
to month, appeared to have stepped down.  Many par-
ticipants noted that capital investment was heavily con-

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

centrated in replacement investment and upgrades that 
firms had postponed during the economic downturn.  
A number of participants reported that business con-
tacts again indicated that their uncertainty about the 
fiscal and regulatory environment made them reluctant 
to expand capacity.  Other participants cited business 
surveys and reports from business contacts indicating 
that slow growth in sales and uncertainty about the 
strength and durability of the recovery likely were more 
important factors.  Except in the extractive industries 
(drilling and mining), investment in nonresidential 
structures had continued to decline.  The near-term 
outlook for commercial real estate investment re-
mained weak despite a decline in vacancy rates in some 
markets. 

Participants agreed that credit conditions did not ap-
pear to be an important restraint on investment spend-
ing by larger firms that have access to the capital mar-
kets.  Such firms were able to borrow readily and at 
relatively low rates; moreover, many businesses held 
substantial cash balances.  In addition, survey results 
suggested that a sizable fraction of banks had eased 
loan terms, and a few had eased lending standards, on 
C&I loans.  Some participants observed that small 
businesses continued to find credit hard to obtain.  
However, several participants noted recent survey evi-
dence indicating that most small firms that requested 
credit were able to borrow, and that relatively few small 
firms thought that access to credit was their most im-
portant problem.  Standards for commercial real estate 
loans and residential mortgages remained very tight, 
and banks did not appear to be easing standards on 
such loans.  Some limited easing of lending standards 
was noted for consumer loans, but credit availability 
remained a constraint and consumer credit continued 
to contract.  However, several participants noted that 
with credit quality improving, some bankers were more 
actively seeking loan growth, though the same bankers 
also indicated that the demand for loans remained 
weak. 

Many participants noted that European countries’ ef-
forts to address their fiscal imbalances, and the release 
of the results of the stress test of European banks 
along with information about their exposures to sover-
eign debt, had reduced investor concern about down-
side risks in Europe.  These factors appeared to have 
supported improvements in financial markets both here 
and abroad.  Moreover, growth in Europe and Asia 
apparently remained solid, boosting U.S. exports.  
Nonetheless, a continuation of strong foreign growth 
would require a pickup in private demand abroad to 

offset a decline in policy stimulus and a smaller boost 
from inventory investment.  Several participants noted 
that the same shift in the sources of demand would 
need to take place in the United States:  Waning fiscal 
stimulus on the part of the federal government and 
continuing retrenchment in spending by state and local 
governments would weigh on the economic recovery, 
and recent data raised questions as to whether private 
demand would strengthen enough to increase resource 
utilization. 

The incoming data on the labor market were weaker 
than meeting participants had anticipated.  Private-
sector payrolls grew sluggishly in recent months.  The 
unemployment rate declined a bit, but that reflected a 
decrease in labor force participation rather than an in-
crease in employment.  Policymakers discussed a vari-
ety of factors that appeared to be contributing to the 
slow pace of job growth.  A number of participants 
reported that business contacts again indicated that 
uncertainty about future taxes, regulations, and health-
care costs made them reluctant to expand their work-
forces.  Instead, businesses had continued to meet 
growth in demand for their products largely through 
productivity gains and by increasing existing employees’ 
hours.  Several participants suggested that structural 
factors such as mismatches between unemployed 
workers’ skills and the needs of employers with job 
openings, or unemployed workers’ inability to move to 
a new locale, were contributing to the elevated level 
and long average duration of unemployment.  Other 
participants, while agreeing that such factors could re-
strain job growth and contribute to high rates of un-
employment, noted that employment was lower than a 
year earlier and that job openings were only slightly 
above their lowest level in 10 years, indicating that few 
firms saw a need to add employees.  Most participants 
viewed weak demand for firms’ outputs as the primary 
problem; they saw substantial scope for stronger aggre-
gate demand for goods and services to spur employ-
ment in a wide range of industries. 

Weighing the available information, participants again 
expected the recovery to continue and to gather 
strength in 2011.  Nonetheless, most saw the incoming 
data as indicating that the economy was operating 
farther below its potential than they had thought, that 
the pace of recovery had slowed in recent months, and 
that growth would be more modest during the second 
half of 2010 than they had anticipated at the time of the 
Committee’s June meeting.  Some policymakers whose 
forecasts for growth had been in the low end of the 
range of participants’ earlier projections viewed the 

Minutes of the Meeting of August 10, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



 

recent data as consistent with their earlier forecasts for 
a weak recovery.  A few participants, observing that 
month-to-month data releases are noisy and subject to 
revision, did not see the recent data as clearly indicating 
a change in the outlook.  Many policymakers judged 
that downside risks to the U.S. recovery had become 
somewhat larger; a few saw the incoming data as sug-
gesting a greater risk that private demand for goods and 
services might not grow enough to offset waning fiscal 
stimulus and a smaller impetus from inventory restock-
ing.  In contrast, most saw a reduced risk of financial 
turmoil in Europe and attendant spillovers to U.S. fi-
nancial markets. 

Policymakers generally saw the inflation outlook as lit-
tle changed.  They observed that a range of measures 
continued to indicate subdued underlying inflation and 
that growth in wages and compensation remained quite 
moderate.  Many said they expected underlying infla-
tion to stay, for some time, below levels they judged 
most consistent with the dual mandate to promote 
maximum employment and price stability.  Participants 
viewed the risk of deflation as quite small, but a num-
ber judged that the risk of further disinflation had in-
creased somewhat despite the stability of longer-run 
inflation expectations.  One noted that survey measures 
of longer-run inflation expectations had remained posi-
tive in Japan throughout that country’s bout of defla-
tion.  A few saw the continuation of exceptionally ac-
commodative monetary policy in the United States as 
posing some upside risk to inflation expectations and 
actual inflation in the medium run. 

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, Committee members agreed that it would be 
appropriate to maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ per-
cent for the federal funds rate.  Members still saw the 
economic expansion continuing, and most believed that 
inflation was likely to stabilize near recent low readings 
in coming quarters and then gradually rise toward levels 
they consider more consistent with the Committee’s 
dual mandate for maximum employment and price sta-
bility.  Nonetheless, members generally judged that the 
economic outlook had softened somewhat more than 
they had anticipated, particularly for the near term, and 
some saw increased downside risks to the outlook for 
both growth and inflation.  Some members expressed a 
concern that in this context any further adverse shocks 
could have disproportionate effects, resulting in a sig-
nificant slowing in growth going forward.  While no 
member saw an appreciable risk of deflation, some 
judged that the risk of further near-term disinflation 

had increased somewhat.  More broadly, members gen-
erally saw both employment and inflation as likely to 
fall short of levels consistent with the dual mandate for 
longer than had been anticipated. 

Against this backdrop, the Committee discussed the 
implications for financial conditions and the economic 
outlook of continuing its policy of not reinvesting prin-
cipal repayments received on MBS or maturing agency 
debt.  The decline in mortgage rates since spring was 
generating increased mortgage refinancing activity that 
would accelerate repayments of principal on MBS held 
in the SOMA.  Private investors would have to hold 
more longer-term securities as the Federal Reserve’s 
holdings ran off, making longer-term interest rates 
somewhat higher than they would be otherwise.  Most 
members thought that the resulting tightening of finan-
cial conditions would be inappropriate, given the eco-
nomic outlook.  However, members noted that the 
magnitude of the tightening was uncertain, and a few 
thought that the economic effects of reinvesting prin-
cipal from agency debt and MBS likely would be quite 
small.  Most members judged, in light of current condi-
tions in the MBS market and the Committee’s desire to 
normalize the composition of the Federal Reserve’s 
portfolio, that it would be better to reinvest in longer-
term Treasury securities than in MBS.  While reinvest-
ing in Treasury securities was seen as preferable given 
current market conditions, reinvesting in MBS might 
become desirable if conditions were to change.  A few 
members worried that reinvesting principal from agen-
cy debt and MBS in Treasury securities could send an 
inappropriate signal to investors about the Committee’s 
readiness to resume large-scale asset purchases.  
Another member argued that reinvesting repayments of 
principal from agency debt and MBS, thereby postpon-
ing a reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet, was likely to complicate the eventual exit 
from the period of exceptionally accommodative mon-
etary policy and could have adverse macroeconomic 
consequences in future years. 

All but one member concluded that it would be appro-
priate to begin reinvesting principal received from 
agency debt and MBS held in the SOMA by purchasing 
longer-term Treasury securities in order to keep con-
stant the face value of securities held in the SOMA and 
thus avoid the upward pressure on longer-term interest 
rates that might result if those holdings were allowed to 
decline.  Several members emphasized that in addition 
to continuing to develop and test instruments to facili-
tate an eventual exit from the period of unusually ac-
commodative monetary policy, the Committee would 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 

need to consider steps it could take to provide addi-
tional policy stimulus if the outlook were to weaken 
appreciably further.  Given the softer tone of recent 
data and the more modest near-term outlook, members 
agreed that some changes to the statement’s characteri-
zation of the economic and financial situation were 
necessary.  All members but one judged that it was ap-
propriate to reiterate the expectation that economic 
conditions—including low levels of resource utilization, 
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expecta-
tions—were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels 
of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  One 
member argued that the recovery was proceeding about 
as outlined earlier this year and that starting a gradual 
process of removing policy accommodation fairly soon 
would better foster the Committee’s long-run objec-
tives of maximum employment and price stability. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run 
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions 
in reserve markets consistent with federal 
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  
The Committee directs the Desk to maintain 
the total face value of domestic securities 
held in the System Open Market Account at 
approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting prin-
cipal payments from agency debt and agency 
mortgage-backed securities in longer-term 
Treasury securities.  The Committee directs 
the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon 
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate 
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency 
MBS transactions.  The System Open Market 
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep 
the Committee informed of ongoing devel-
opments regarding the System’s balance 
sheet that could affect the attainment over 
time of the Committee’s objectives of maxi-
mum employment and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in June indi-

cates that the pace of recovery in output and 
employment has slowed in recent months.  
Household spending is increasing gradually, 
but remains constrained by high unemploy-
ment, modest income growth, lower housing 
wealth, and tight credit.  Business spending 
on equipment and software is rising; howev-
er, investment in nonresidential structures 
continues to be weak and employers remain 
reluctant to add to payrolls.  Housing starts 
remain at a depressed level.  Bank lending 
has continued to contract.  Nonetheless, the 
Committee anticipates a gradual return to 
higher levels of resource utilization in a con-
text of price stability, although the pace of 
economic recovery is likely to be more mod-
est in the near term than had been antic-
ipated. 

Measures of underlying inflation have 
trended lower in recent quarters and, with 
substantial resource slack continuing to re-
strain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to 
be subdued for some time. 

The Committee will maintain the target 
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to         
¼ percent and continues to anticipate that 
economic conditions, including low rates of 
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, 
and stable inflation expectations, are likely to 
warrant exceptionally low levels of the feder-
al funds rate for an extended period. 

To help support the economic recovery in a 
context of price stability, the Committee will 
keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings 
of securities at their current level by reinvest-
ing principal payments from agency debt and 
agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-
term Treasury securities.¹  The Committee 
will continue to roll over the Federal Re-
serve’s holdings of Treasury securities as they 
mature. 

The Committee will continue to monitor the 
economic outlook and financial develop-
ments and will employ its policy tools as ne-
cessary to promote economic recovery and 
price stability.  

¹  The Open Market Desk will issue a tech-
nical note shortly after the statement provid-

Minutes of the Meeting of August 10, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 

ing operational details on how it will carry 
out these transactions.” 

Voting for this action:  Ben Bernanke, William C. 
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Donald L. 
Kohn, Sandra Pianalto, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Ta-
rullo, and Kevin Warsh. 

Voting against this action:  Thomas M. Hoenig. 

Mr. Hoenig dissented because he thought it was not 
appropriate to indicate that economic and financial 
conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low 
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period” 
or to reinvest principal payments from agency debt and 
agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term  
Treasury securities.  Mr. Hoenig felt that the “extended 
period” expectation could limit the Committee’s flex-
ibility to begin raising rates modestly in a timely fa-
shion, and he believed that the recovery, which had 
entered its second year and was expected to continue at 
a moderate pace, did not require support from addi-
tional accommodation in monetary policy.  Mr. Hoenig 

was also concerned that these accommodative policy 
positions could result in the buildup of future financial 
imbalances and increase the risks to longer-run ma-
croeconomic and financial stability. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, September 21, 2010.  The 
meeting adjourned at 1:35 p.m. on August 10, 2010. 

Notation Vote 

By notation vote completed on July 13, 2010, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on June 22–23, 2010. 

 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
William B. English 

Secretary 

 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




