









































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 27-28, 2010


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
April 27–28, 2010

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 27, 2010, 
at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 28, 
2010, at 9:00 a.m.   
 
PRESENT:  

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
James Bullard 
Elizabeth Duke 
Thomas M. Hoenig 
Donald L. Kohn 
Sandra Pianalto 
Eric Rosengren 
Daniel K. Tarullo  
Kevin Warsh 
 
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Narayana 

Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee 

 
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. 

Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis-
co, respectively 

 
Helen E. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 

Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Nathan Sheets, Economist  
David J. Stockton, Economist 
 
Alan D. Barkema, Thomas A. Connors, William B. 

English, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon 
Potter, Lawrence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, 
Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, 
Associate Economists 

 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count 

 
Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office 

of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank 

Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Robert deV. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 

Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, 
Office of the Staff Director for Management, 
Board of Governors 

 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
William Nelson, Senior Associate Director, Divi-

sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Nellie Liang, David Reifschneider, and William 
Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Seth B. Carpenter, Associate Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Christopher J. Erceg, Deputy Associate Director, 

Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors; Egon Zakrajšek, Deputy Associate 
Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors 

 
Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-

fice of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 

David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economist, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



Kurt F. Lewis, Economist, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-

fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Kimberley E. Braun, Records Project Manager, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors 

 
Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors 

 
Esther L. George, First Vice President, Federal Re-

serve Bank of Kansas City 
 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and John C. 

Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

 
David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Daniel G. Sullivan, 

and John A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, 
Chicago, and Richmond, respectively 

 
Warren Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
 

 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and 
foreign financial markets during the period since the 
Committee met on March 16, 2010.  The Manager also 
reported on System open market operations in Trea-
sury securities and in agency debt and agency mort-
gage-backed securities (MBS) during the intermeeting 
period.  By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified 
those transactions.  There were no open market opera-
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account 
over the intermeeting period. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee decided to extend 
the reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrangements with the 
Bank of Canada and the Banco de Mexico for an addi-
tional year, beginning in mid-December 2010; these 
arrangements are associated with the Federal Reserve’s 
participation in the North American Framework 

Agreement of 1994.  The arrangement with the Bank of 
Canada is in the amount of $2 billion equivalent, and 
the arrangement with the Banco de Mexico is in the 
amount of $3 billion equivalent.  The vote to renew the 
System’s participation in these swap arrangements was 
taken at this meeting because of a provision in the ar-
rangements that requires each party to provide six 
months’ prior notice of an intention to terminate its 
participation. 

The staff also briefed the Committee on recent 
progress in the development of reserve draining tools.  
The Desk was preparing to conduct small-scale reverse 
repurchase operations to ensure its ability to use agency 
MBS collateral.  It also continued to work toward ex-
pansion of the set of counterparties for reverse repur-
chase operations.  The staff noted that the Board had 
recently approved changes to Regulation D that would 
be necessary for the establishment of a term deposit 
facility. 

The staff next gave a presentation on potential longer-
run strategies for managing the SOMA.  At previous 
meetings, Committee participants had expressed sup-
port for steps to reduce the size of the Federal Re-
serve’s balance sheet over time and return the composi-
tion of the SOMA to only Treasury securities.  The 
staff discussed the potential portfolio paths and mac-
roeconomic consequences of a number of different 
strategies for accomplishing these objectives.  To date, 
the Desk had been reinvesting the proceeds of all ma-
turing Treasury securities in newly issued Treasury se-
curities, but it had not been reinvesting principal and 
interest payments on maturing agency debt and agency 
MBS, nor had it been selling securities.  One strategy 
considered in the staff presentation was a continuation 
of the current practice, which would normalize the bal-
ance sheet very gradually.  In addition, the staff pre-
sented information on a number of other strategies that 
included sales of SOMA holdings of agency debt and 
MBS and under which the proceeds of maturing Trea-
sury securities would not be reinvested; these strategies 
differed by the date and circumstances under which 
sales would be initiated, by the average pace of sales, 
and by the degree to which the timing and pace of such 
sales would be adjusted in response to financial and 
economic developments. 

Meeting participants agreed broadly on key objectives 
of a longer-run strategy for asset sales and redemptions.  
The strategy should be consistent with the achievement 
of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employ-
ment and price stability.  In addition, the strategy 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



should normalize the size and composition of the bal-
ance sheet over time.  Reducing the size of the balance 
sheet would decrease the associated reserve balances to 
amounts consistent with more normal operations of 
money markets and monetary policy.  Returning the 
portfolio to its historical composition of essentially all 
Treasury securities would minimize the extent to which 
the Federal Reserve portfolio might be affecting the 
allocation of credit among private borrowers and sec-
tors of the economy. 

Most participants expressed a preference for strategies 
that would eventually entail sales of agency debt and 
MBS in order to return the size and composition of the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to a more normal con-
figuration more quickly than would be accomplished by 
simply letting MBS and agency securities run off.  They 
agreed that sales of agency debt and MBS should be 
implemented in accordance with a framework commu-
nicated in advance and be conducted at a gradual pace 
that potentially could be adjusted in response to 
changes in economic and financial conditions. 

Participants expressed a range of views on some of the 
details of a strategy for asset sales.  Most participants 
favored deferring asset sales for some time.  A majority 
preferred beginning asset sales some time after the first 
increase in the Federal Open Market Committee’s 
(FOMC) target for short-term interest rates.  Such an 
approach would postpone any asset sales until the eco-
nomic recovery was well established and would main-
tain short-term interest rates as the Committee’s key 
monetary policy tool.  Other participants favored a 
strategy in which the Committee would soon announce 
a general schedule for future asset sales, with a date for 
the initiation of sales that would not necessarily be 
linked to the increase in the Committee’s interest rate 
target.  A few preferred to begin sales relatively soon.  
Earlier sales would normalize the size and composition 
of the balance sheet sooner and would unwind at least 
part of the unconventional policy stimulus put in place 
during the crisis before conventional policy firming got 
under way.  Some participants saw advantages to vary-
ing the FOMC’s holdings of longer-term assets system-
atically in response to economic and financial devel-
opments.  However, others thought that a pre-
announced pace of sales that was unlikely to vary much 
would provide a high degree of certainty about sales, 
helping to limit disruptions in financial markets. 

The views of participants also differed to some extent 
regarding the appropriate pace of asset sales.  Most 
preferred that the agency debt and MBS held in the 

portfolio be sold at a gradual pace that would complete 
the sales about five years after they began.  One possi-
bility would be for the pace to be relatively slow initially 
but to increase over time, allowing markets to adjust 
gradually.  A couple of participants thought faster sales, 
conducted over about three years, would be appropri-
ate and felt that such a pace would not put undue strain 
on financial markets.  In their view, a relatively brisk 
pace of sales would reduce the chance that the elevated 
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the as-
sociated high level of reserve balances could raise infla-
tion expectations and inflation beyond levels consistent 
with price stability or could generate excessive growth 
of credit when the economy and banking system recov-
er more fully. 

Participants saw both advantages and disadvantages to 
not rolling over Treasury securities as they mature.  On 
the one hand, redeeming Treasury securities would 
contribute to a more expeditious normalization of the 
size of the balance sheet and the quantity of reserves.  
On the other hand, such redemptions could put up-
ward pressure on interest rates and would tend to work 
against the objective of returning the SOMA to an all-
Treasuries composition. 

No decisions about the Committee’s longer-run strate-
gy for asset sales and redemptions were made at this 
meeting.  For the time being, participants agreed that 
the Desk should continue the interim approach of al-
lowing all maturing agency debt and all prepayments of 
agency MBS to be redeemed without replacement while 
rolling over all maturing Treasury securities.  Partici-
pants agreed to give further consideration to their long-
er-run strategy at a later date. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the April 27–28 meeting 
suggested that, on balance, the economic recovery was 
proceeding at a moderate pace and that the deteriora-
tion in the labor market was likely coming to an end.  
Consumer spending continued to post solid gains in 
the first three months of the year, and business invest-
ment in equipment and software appeared to have in-
creased significantly further in the first quarter.  In ad-
dition, growth of manufacturing output remained brisk, 
and gains became more broadly based across industries.  
However, residential construction, while having edged 
up, was still depressed, construction of nonresidential 
buildings remained on a steep downward trajectory, 
and state and local governments continued to retrench.  
Consumer price inflation remained low. 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



The labor market showed signs of a nascent recovery in 
recent months.  Private nonfarm payroll employment 
increased over the first quarter of 2010—the first quar-
terly increase since the onset of the recession.  The av-
erage workweek also rose last quarter and data from the 
household survey pointed to a firming in labor market 
conditions.  The unemployment rate held steady at 9.7 
percent throughout the first quarter, and the labor 
force participation rate increased over the past few 
months following sharp declines over the second half 
of last year.  The number of new job losers as a percen-
tage of household employment continued to drop, and 
the fraction of workers on part-time schedules for eco-
nomic reasons moved down since the end of last year.  
Nonetheless, finding a job remained very difficult, and 
the average duration of unemployment spells increased 
further.  

Industrial production continued to expand at a brisk 
pace during the first quarter.  Recent production gains 
remained broadly based across industries, as both for-
eign demand and a mild restocking of inventories con-
tributed positively to output growth.  Capacity utiliza-
tion stood significantly above the trough recorded last 
June but was still well below its long-run average.  Light 
motor vehicle production stepped up in March, and 
assemblies in the first quarter were above their fourth-
quarter average as automakers cautiously began to re-
build dealers’ inventories.  Production in high-tech in-
dustries increased solidly, and available indicators 
pointed toward further expansion in this sector in the 
near term.  On balance, indicators of near-term manu-
facturing activity remained quite positive. 

Consumer spending continued to rise at a solid pace 
through March, with recent gains pronounced for most 
non-auto goods and food services.  Despite signs of 
improvement recently, the determinants of spending 
remained subdued.  While wages and salaries picked up 
early this year, real disposable income was flat in Feb-
ruary after a slight decline in January; housing wealth 
was still well below its level prior to the crisis.  Fur-
thermore, although banks indicated a somewhat greater 
willingness to lend to consumers in recent months, 
terms and standards on consumer loans remained re-
strictive.  Additionally, consumer sentiment dropped 
back in early April and was little changed, on net, since 
the beginning of the year. 

Starts of new single-family homes edged up, on net, 
over February and March, but much of this increase 
likely reflected delayed projects getting under way as 
weather conditions returned to normal.  Home sales 

strengthened noticeably, as sales of new single-family 
homes jumped and sales of existing single-family 
homes rose as well.  However, both new home sales 
and existing home sales were likely boosted, at least in 
part, by the anticipated expiration of the homebuyer tax 
credit.  Interest rates for conforming 30-year fixed-rate 
mortgages changed little in recent months and re-
mained at levels that were very low by historical stan-
dards. 

Real spending on equipment and software continued to 
rebound in the first quarter.  Investment in high-tech 
equipment and transportation advanced further, and 
real spending for equipment other than high-tech and 
transportation appeared to turn up sharply after falling 
for more than a year, suggesting that the recovery in 
equipment and software investment became more 
broadly based.  The recovery in equipment and soft-
ware spending was consistent with the strengthening in 
many indicators of business activity.  In contrast, the 
nonresidential construction sector continued to con-
tract.  Real outlays on structures outside drilling and 
mining fell steeply last year, and recent data on nominal 
expenditures through February suggested a further de-
cline in the first quarter.  The weakness was widespread 
across categories and likely reflected elevated vacancy 
rates, low levels of property prices, and difficulties in 
obtaining financing for new projects.  Real spending on 
drilling and mining structures picked up strongly over 
the second half of last year in response to the rebound 
in oil and natural gas prices. 

Available data suggested that the pace of inventory li-
quidation moderated further in the first quarter after 
slowing sharply in the fourth quarter of last year.  In-
ventories appeared to approach comfortable levels rela-
tive to sales in the aggregate, although inventory posi-
tions across industries varied.  Months’ supply re-
mained elevated for equipment, materials, and, to a 
lesser degree, construction supplies.  By contrast, in-
ventories of consumer goods, business supplies, and 
high-tech goods appeared low relative to demand. 

Consumer price inflation was low in recent months; 
both headline and core personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) prices were estimated to have risen slightly 
in March after remaining unchanged in February.  On a 
12-month change basis, core PCE prices slowed over 
the year ending in March, with deceleration widespread 
across categories of expenditures.  In contrast, the cor-
responding change in the headline index moved up 
noticeably, as energy prices rebounded.  Survey meas-
ures of long-term inflation expectations were fairly sta-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ble in recent months at levels slightly lower than those 
posted a year ago.  Meanwhile, measures of inflation 
compensation based on Treasury inflation-protected 
securities (TIPS) edged up slightly.  Cost pressures 
from rising commodity prices showed through to pric-
es at early stages of processing, and the producer price 
index for core intermediate materials continued to rise 
rapidly through March.  However, measures of labor 
costs decelerated sharply last year, as compensation per 
hour in the nonfarm business sector increased only 
slightly over the four quarters of 2009. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened in Febru-
ary, as a rise in nominal imports outpaced a small in-
crease in exports.  Increased exports of industrial sup-
plies, capital goods, and automotive products were 
partly offset by declines in agricultural goods and con-
sumer goods.  The February rise in imports reversed a 
similarly sized decrease in January.  Imports of oil ac-
counted for more than one-third of the January decline, 
reflecting lower volumes, but they accounted for only 
about one-tenth of the February increase, as volumes 
rebounded but prices fell.  Imports of capital goods 
rose as strong computer imports more than offset fall-
ing aircraft purchases, and imports of industrial sup-
plies and consumer goods also moved up. 

Recent indicators in the advanced foreign economies 
suggested a continued divergence in the pace of recov-
ery, with a strong performance in Canada, a moderate 
expansion in Japan, and a more subdued rebound in 
Europe.  Fiscal strains in Greece intensified during the 
intermeeting period, and in mid-April, euro-area mem-
ber states announced a plan to provide financing aid to 
Greece in coordination with the International Monetary 
Fund.  However, at the time of the April FOMC meet-
ing, no official agreement had been reached concerning 
the scale, composition, and implementation of such an 
aid package.  Economic activity in emerging markets 
continued to expand robustly in the first quarter.  De-
spite the strength of exports, merchandise trade bal-
ances declined for some countries where strong domes-
tic demand caused imports to outpace exports.  In Chi-
na, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a 
higher-than-expected annual rate in the first quarter as 
the economic recovery remained broad based, with 
industrial production, investment, and domestic de-
mand continuing to grow briskly.  In Latin America, 
indicators suggested that economic activity in Mexico 
and Brazil expanded further in the first quarter.  For-
eign inflation was boosted by increases in the prices of 
oil and other commodities, but core inflation generally 
remained subdued. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The decision by the FOMC at the March meeting to 
keep the target range for the federal funds rate un-
changed and to retain the “extended period” language 
in the statement was largely anticipated by market par-
ticipants.  However, some market participants report-
edly interpreted the retention of the “extended period” 
language as pointing to a longer period of low rates 
than previously expected, and Eurodollar futures rates 
temporarily declined a bit in response. 

On balance over the intermeeting period, the expected 
path of policy edged down slightly.  Yields on 2-year 
and 10-year nominal Treasury securities posted small 
mixed changes amid some volatility that reportedly re-
flected evolving views about the U.S. fiscal outlook, 
prospects for U.S. economic growth, and the fiscal sit-
uation in peripheral European countries.  Inflation 
compensation—the difference between nominal Trea-
sury yields and yields on TIPS—rose some over the 
period, but survey measures of longer-term inflation 
expectations were about unchanged. 

Overall, conditions in short-term funding markets re-
mained generally stable during the intermeeting period.  
Spreads between London interbank offered rates (Li-
bor) and overnight index swap (OIS) rates were about 
unchanged at levels near those that prevailed in late 
2007, although they began to edge up in the final days 
of the intermeeting period.  Spreads in the commercial 
paper market were little changed.  Equity indexes rose, 
on balance, over the intermeeting period, with bank 
shares outperforming the broader market.  Stock prices 
were supported by somewhat better-than-expected ma-
croeconomic data and a favorable response by inves-
tors to the initial batch of first-quarter earnings reports, 
especially those of banking institutions.  Option-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index generally de-
clined over the period but jumped at end of April on 
renewed concerns regarding the fiscal situation in 
Greece.  The gap between the staff’s estimate of the 
expected real equity return over the next 10 years for 
S&P 500 firms and the real 10-year Treasury yield—a 
rough measure of the equity risk premium—remained 
well above its average over the past decade.  Yields on 
investment-grade corporate bonds edged down, leaving 
their spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury securi-
ties a bit lower, at levels around those that prevailed in 
late 2007.  Consistent with more-favorable investor 
sentiment toward risky assets, yields and spreads on 
speculative-grade corporate bonds declined, and sec-
ondary market prices of syndicated leveraged loans rose 
further. 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



Overall, net debt financing by nonfinancial firms was 
positive in March.  Issuance of nonfinancial bonds 
surged, and net issuance of commercial paper re-
bounded appreciably.  Net equity issuance by nonfi-
nancial firms was negative again in the first quarter as 
the solid pace of gross public issuance was more than 
offset by equity retirements from both cash-financed 
mergers and share repurchases.  Financial firms issued 
a significant volume of debt securities in the first quar-
ter and also raised a moderate amount of gross funds in 
the equity market, a pattern that appeared to continue 
in the first half of April.  Credit quality in the commer-
cial real estate sector continued to deteriorate as the 
delinquency rate for securitized commercial mortgages 
increased again in March.  The decline in outstanding 
commercial mortgage debt in the fourth quarter of last 
year was the largest on record.  Nonetheless, indexes of 
prices for credit default swaps on commercial mort-
gage-backed securities ticked up noticeably over the 
period, in line with the overall reduction in financial 
market risk premiums. 

The conclusion of purchases under the Federal Re-
serve’s agency MBS program had only a modest market 
effect.  Over the intermeeting period, spreads on agen-
cy MBS retraced much of the increase seen around the 
time of the program’s conclusion, ending the period 
roughly unchanged.  The factors contributing to the 
recent narrowing of MBS and mortgage spreads in-
cluded the low level of mortgage originations, which 
damped the supply of new MBS, and Fannie Mae’s and 
Freddie Mac’s increased purchases of mortgages 
through their buyouts of delinquent loans.  Consumer 
credit continued to trend lower in recent months, 
pushed down by a steep decline in revolving credit.  
Spreads on high-quality credit card and auto loan asset-
backed securities (ABS) edged down over the period, 
with little upward pressure evident from the end of the 
portion of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Fa-
cility supporting ABS.  Nonetheless, fewer ABS were 
issued in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter, 
reflecting continued weakness in loan originations.  
Delinquency rates on consumer loans edged down fur-
ther in February but remained very elevated.  Spreads 
of interest rates on credit cards over yields on two-year 
Treasury securities continued to drift upward, while 
interest rates on new auto loans at dealerships and their 
spreads over yields on five-year Treasury securities ex-
tended their previous decline. 

After adjusting to remove the effects of banks’ adop-
tion of Financial Accounting Standards 166 and 167, 
bank credit contracted again in March, as both loans 

and securities holdings declined.2  The contraction in 
commercial and industrial loans remained pronounced.  
The drop in commercial real estate loans persisted, re-
flecting weak fundamentals that limited originations as 
well as charge-offs of existing loans.  Residential real 
estate loans also decreased further in March, as did cre-
dit card loans and other consumer loans. 

M2 fell in March, reflecting a slowing in the expansion 
of liquid deposits along with a further contraction in 
small time deposits and a steep runoff in retail money 
market mutual funds.  Currency grew at a moderate 
pace, likely as a result of continued demand for U.S. 
banknotes from abroad coupled with solid domestic 
demand.  The monetary base contracted as the effect 
on reserves of purchases under the Federal Reserve’s 
large-scale asset purchase programs was more than off-
set by a further contraction in credit outstanding under 
liquidity and credit facilities and an increase in the 
Treasury’s balances at the Federal Reserve. 

Until the intensification of the Greek crisis near the 
end of the intermeeting period, equity indexes were 
higher in nearly all countries, and emerging-market risk 
spreads had generally declined.  These moves appeared 
to reflect growing confidence that the global recovery 
was gaining momentum, particularly in emerging mar-
ket economies.  However, sovereign debt spreads in 
Greece, Portugal, and other peripheral European coun-
tries widened in the days leading up to the April FOMC 
meeting, as investor anxiety about the fiscal situation in 
those countries increased.  Downgrades to the credit 
ratings of Greece and Portugal weighed on investor 
sentiment, and global markets retraced some of their 
earlier gains. 

Over the intermeeting period, the Bank of Japan 
doubled the size of its three-month fixed-rate funds 
facility, the Bank of Canada dropped its conditional 
commitment to keeping rates steady through the first 
                                                 
2 The new accounting standards make it more difficult for 
U.S. banks to hold assets off balance sheet.  Banks adopted 
the standards in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quar-
ter of 2010.  The cumulative effects of the resulting asset 
consolidation were incorporated in the bank credit data pub-
lished on the Federal Reserve’s H.8 Statistical Release “As-
sets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United 
States” as of March 31, 2010.  While all major loan categories 
were affected to some degree by banks’ adoption of Finan-
cial Accounting Standards 166 and 167, the largest effect was 
on credit card loans on commercial bank balance sheets; 
banks also consolidated significant amounts of other con-
sumer loans, commercial and industrial loans, and residential 
real estate loans. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



half of the year, and the Reserve Bank of Australia 
raised its policy rate. The trade-weighted value of the 
dollar changed little, on net; gains against the euro and 
yen were offset by declines against many emerging 
market currencies. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
The economic forecast prepared by the staff for the 
April FOMC meeting was similar to that developed for 
the March meeting.  The staff continued to project that 
the accommodative stance of monetary policy, together 
with a further attenuation of financial stress, the waning 
of adverse effects of earlier declines in wealth, and im-
proving household and business confidence, would 
support a moderate recovery in economic activity and a 
gradual decline in the unemployment rate over the next 
two years.  The staff forecast for both real GDP 
growth and the unemployment rate through the end of 
2011 was roughly in line with previous projections. 

Recent data on core consumer prices led the staff to 
mark down slightly its forecast for core PCE inflation.  
The staff continued to anticipate that downward pres-
sure on inflation from the substantial amount of pro-
jected resource slack would be tempered by stable infla-
tion expectations.  With energy price increases expected 
to slow next year, total PCE inflation was seen as likely 
to fall back in line with core inflation by the end of 
2011, as in previous projections. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting 
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve 
Banks—provided projections of economic growth, the 
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for 
each year from 2010 through 2012 and over a longer 
horizon.  Longer-run projections represent each partic-
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable 
would be expected to converge over time under appro-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further 
shocks.  Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over 
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum 
to these minutes. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, meeting participants agreed that the incoming 
data and information received from business contacts 
indicated that economic activity continued to streng-
then and the labor market was beginning to improve.  
Although some of the recent data on economic activity 
had been better than anticipated, most participants saw 

the incoming information as broadly in line with their 
earlier projections for moderate growth; accordingly, 
their views on the economic outlook had not changed 
appreciably.  Participants expected the economic re-
covery to continue, but, consistent with experience fol-
lowing previous financial crises, most anticipated that 
the pickup in output would be rather slow relative to 
past recoveries from deep recessions.  A moderate pace 
of expansion, in turn, would imply only a modest im-
provement in the labor market this year, with the un-
employment rate declining gradually.  Most participants 
again projected that the economy would grow some-
what faster in 2011 and 2012, generating a more pro-
nounced decline in the unemployment rate.  In light of 
stable longer-term inflation expectations and the likely 
continuation of substantial resource slack, policymakers 
anticipated that both overall and core inflation would 
remain subdued through 2012, with measured inflation 
somewhat below rates that policymakers considered to 
be consistent over the longer run with the Federal Re-
serve’s dual mandate. 

Participants expected that economic growth would 
continue:  Recent data pointed to significant gains in 
retail sales, business spending on equipment and soft-
ware had picked up substantially, and reports from 
business contacts and regional surveys indicated that 
production was increasing briskly in many sectors.  Par-
ticipants agreed that the growth in real GDP appeared 
to reflect a strengthening of private final demand and 
not just fiscal stimulus and a slower pace of inventory 
decumulation; this welcome development lessened pol-
icymakers’ concerns about the economy’s ability to 
maintain a self-sustaining recovery without government 
support.  Businesses appeared to be gaining confidence 
in the economic recovery, and narrowing credit spreads 
in private debt markets were allowing low policy rates 
to be reflected more fully in the cost of capital.  At the 
same time, rising stock prices and the apparent stabili-
zation of house prices were helping to repair household 
balance sheets.  As a result, consumers and firms were 
beginning to satisfy demands for durable goods and 
capital equipment that had been postponed during the 
economic downturn.  Many participants noted that 
employment had increased in recent months, and that 
they expected a further firming of labor market condi-
tions going forward. A stronger labor market could 
continue to boost consumer and business confidence 
and so contribute to further gains in spending. 

Although these developments were positive, partici-
pants noted several factors that likely would continue 
to restrain expansion in economic activity and posed 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



some downside risks.  The recent increase in consumer 
spending appeared to be supported importantly by 
pent-up demands and possibly by other temporary fac-
tors, such as unusually large income tax refunds.  With 
the personal saving rate having dropped back to a rela-
tively low level, it seemed unlikely that consumer 
spending would be the major factor driving growth as 
the recovery progressed. Moreover, the recovery in the 
housing market appeared to have stalled in recent 
months despite various forms of government support.  
Although residential real estate values seemed to be 
stabilizing and in some areas had reportedly moved 
higher, housing sales and starts had leveled off in re-
cent months at depressed levels.  Some participants saw 
the possibility of elevated foreclosures adding to the 
already very large inventory of vacant homes as posing 
a downside risk to home prices, thereby limiting the 
extent of the pickup in residential investment for a 
while. 

In the business sector, prospects for nonresidential 
construction outside the energy sector remained weak.  
Commercial real estate activity continued to fall in most 
parts of the country as a result of deteriorating funda-
mentals, including declining occupancy and rental rates 
and tight credit conditions.  However, a number of 
participants noted that investment in equipment and 
software had been strengthening, and they relayed 
anecdotal information from their business contacts that 
suggested continued growth in orders for capital 
equipment. 

Business investment was expected to be supported by 
improved conditions in financial markets.  Large firms 
with access to capital markets appeared to be having 
little difficulty in obtaining credit, and in many cases 
they also had ample retained earnings with which to 
fund their operations and investment.  However, many 
participants noted that while financial markets had im-
proved, bank lending was still contracting and credit 
remained tight for many borrowers.  Smaller firms in 
particular reportedly continued to face substantial diffi-
culty in obtaining bank loans.  Because such firms tend 
to be more dependent on commercial banks for financ-
ing, participants saw limited credit availability as a po-
tential constraint on future investment and hiring by 
small businesses, which normally are a significant 
source of employment growth in recoveries.  Some 
participants noted that many small and regional banks 
were vulnerable to deteriorating performance of com-
mercial real estate loans. 

Economic conditions abroad, especially in several 
emerging Asian economies, continued to strengthen in 
recent months, contributing to gains in U.S. exports.  
However, participants saw the escalation of fiscal 
strains in Greece and spreading concerns about other 
peripheral European countries as weighing on financial 
conditions and confidence in the euro area.  If other 
European countries responded by intensifying their 
fiscal consolidation efforts, the result would likely be 
slower growth in Europe and potentially a weaker 
global economic recovery.  Some participants ex-
pressed concern that a crisis in Greece or in some other 
peripheral European countries could have an adverse 
effect on U.S. financial markets, which could also slow 
the recovery in this country. 

Developments in labor markets were positive over the 
intermeeting period.  Nonfarm payrolls posted a mod-
est gain in March, and the upturn in private employ-
ment was widespread across industries.  Nevertheless, 
participants remained concerned about elevated unem-
ployment, including high levels of long-term unem-
ployment and permanent separations, which were seen 
as potentially leading to the loss of worker skills and 
greater needs for labor reallocation that could slow 
employment growth going forward.  Moreover, infor-
mation from business contacts generally underscored 
the degree to which firms’ reluctance to add to payrolls 
or start large capital projects reflected uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and future government policies.  
A number of participants pointed out that the econom-
ic recovery could eventually lose traction without a 
substantial pickup in job creation. 

Participants cited a wide array of evidence as indica-
tions that underlying inflation remained subdued.  The 
latest readings on core inflation—which exclude the 
relatively volatile prices of food and energy—were gen-
erally lower than they had anticipated.  One participant 
noted that core inflation had been held down in recent 
quarters by unusually slow increases in the price index 
for shelter, and that the recent behavior of core infla-
tion might be a misleading signal of the underlying in-
flation trend.  However, a number of participants 
pointed out that the recent moderation in price changes 
was widespread across many categories of spending 
and was evident in measures that exclude the most ex-
treme price movements in each period.  In addition, 
survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations 
remained fairly stable, wage growth continued to be 
restrained, and unit labor costs were still falling; reports 
from business contacts also suggested that pricing 
power remained limited.  Against this backdrop, most 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



participants anticipated that substantial resource slack 
and stable longer-term inflation expectations would 
likely keep inflation subdued for some time. 

Participants’ assessments of the risks to the inflation 
outlook were mixed.  Some participants saw the risks to 
inflation as tilted to the downside in the near term, re-
flecting the quite elevated level of economic slack and 
the possibility that inflation expectations could begin to 
decline in response to the low level of actual inflation.  
Others, however, saw the balance of risks as pointing 
to potentially higher inflation and cited pressures on 
commodity and energy prices associated with expand-
ing global economic activity as an upside inflation risk; 
some also noted the possibility that inflation expecta-
tions could rise as a result of the public’s concerns 
about the extraordinary size of the Federal Reserve’s 
balance sheet in a period of very large federal budget 
deficits.  While survey measures of longer-term infla-
tion expectations had been fairly stable, some market-
based measures of inflation expectations and inflation 
risk suggested increased concern among market partici-
pants about higher inflation.  To keep inflation expecta-
tions well anchored, all participants agreed that it was 
important for policy to be responsive to changes in the 
economic outlook and for the Federal Reserve to con-
tinue to communicate clearly its ability and intent to 
begin withdrawing monetary policy accommodation at 
the appropriate time and pace. 

Committee Policy Action 
In the members’ discussion of monetary policy for the 
period ahead, they agreed that no changes to the 
Committee’s federal funds rate target range were war-
ranted at this meeting.  On balance, the economic out-
look had changed little since the March meeting.  Even 
though the recovery appeared to be continuing and was 
expected to strengthen gradually over time, most mem-
bers projected that economic slack would continue to 
be quite elevated for some time, with inflation remain-
ing below rates that would be consistent in the longer 
run with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives.  Based 
on this outlook, members agreed that it would be ap-
propriate to maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent 
for the federal funds rate.  In addition, nearly all mem-
bers judged that it was appropriate to reiterate the ex-
pectation that economic conditions—including low 
levels of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, 
and stable inflation expectations—were likely to war-
rant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate 
for an extended period.  As at previous meetings, a few 
members noted that at the current juncture, the risks of 
an early start to policy tightening exceeded those asso-

ciated with a later start, because the scope for more 
accommodative policy was limited by the effective low-
er bound on the federal funds rate, while the Commit-
tee could be flexible in adjusting the magnitude and 
pace of tightening in response to evolving economic 
circumstances.  In light of the improved functioning of 
financial markets, Committee members agreed that it 
would be appropriate for the statement to be released 
following the meeting to indicate that the previously 
announced schedule for closing the Term Asset-Backed 
Securities Loan Facility was being maintained. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run 
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions 
in reserve markets consistent with federal 
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  
The Committee directs the Desk to engage 
in dollar roll transactions as necessary to faci-
litate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s 
agency MBS transactions.  The System Open 
Market Account Manager and the Secretary 
will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
ing developments regarding the System’s bal-
ance sheet that could affect the attainment 
over time of the Committee’s objectives of 
maximum employment and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in March sug-
gests that economic activity has continued to 
strengthen and that the labor market is be-
ginning to improve.  Growth in household 
spending has picked up recently but remains 
constrained by high unemployment, modest 
income growth, lower housing wealth, and 
tight credit.  Business spending on equip-
ment and software has risen significantly; 
however, investment in nonresidential struc-
tures is declining and employers remain re-
luctant to add to payrolls.  Housing starts 
have edged up but remain at a depressed lev-
el.  While bank lending continues to contract, 

Minutes of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



financial market conditions remain suppor-
tive of economic growth.  Although the pace 
of economic recovery is likely to be mod-
erate for a time, the Committee anticipates a 
gradual return to higher levels of resource 
utilization in a context of price stability. 

With substantial resource slack continuing to 
restrain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to 
be subdued for some time.  

The Committee will maintain the target range 
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent 
and continues to anticipate that economic 
conditions, including low rates of resource 
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and sta-
ble inflation expectations, are likely to war-
rant exceptionally low levels of the federal 
funds rate for an extended period.  The 
Committee will continue to monitor the eco-
nomic outlook and financial developments 
and will employ its policy tools as necessary 
to promote economic recovery and price 
stability. 

In light of improved functioning of financial 
markets, the Federal Reserve has closed all 
but one of the special liquidity facilities that 
it created to support markets during the cri-
sis.  The only remaining such program, the 
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, 
is scheduled to close on June 30 for loans 
backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-
backed securities; it closed on March 31 for 
loans backed by all other types of collateral.” 

Voting for this action:  Ben Bernanke, William C. 
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Donald L. 
Kohn, Sandra Pianalto, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Ta-
rullo, and Kevin Warsh. 

Voting against this action:  Thomas M. Hoenig. 

Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed it was no 
longer advisable to indicate that economic and financial 
conditions were likely to warrant “exceptionally low 
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.”  
Mr. Hoenig was concerned that communicating such 
an expectation could lead to the buildup of future fi-
nancial imbalances and increase the risks to longer-run 
macroeconomic and financial stability, while limiting 
the Committee’s flexibility to begin raising rates mod-
estly in the near term.  Mr. Hoenig believed that the 
target for the federal funds rate should be increased 
toward 1 percent this summer, and that the Committee 
could then pause to further assess the economic out-
look.  He believed this approach would leave consider-
able policy accommodation in place to foster an ex-
pected gradual decline in unemployment in the quarters 
ahead and would reduce the risk of an increase in fi-
nancial imbalances and inflation pressures in coming 
years.  It would also mitigate the need to push the poli-
cy rate to higher levels later in the expansionary phase 
of the economic cycle. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 22–23, 
2010.  The meeting adjourned at 12:50 p.m. on April 
28, 2010. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on April 5, 2010, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on March 16, 2010. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 
 

 
 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Summary of Economic Projections
 

In conjunction with the April 27–28, 2010, FOMC meet-
ing, the members of the Board of Governors and the 
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom 
participate in deliberations of the FOMC, submitted pro-
jections for output growth, unemployment, and inflation 
for the years 2010 to 2012 and over the longer run.  The 
projections were based on information available through 
the end of the meeting and on each participant’s assump-
tions about factors likely to affect economic outcomes, 
including his or her assessment of appropriate monetary 
policy.  “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the 
future path of policy that the participant deems most like-
ly to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation 
that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal 
Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and 
stable prices.  Longer-run projections represent each par-
ticipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable 
would be expected to converge over time under appro-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further 
shocks. 

FOMC participants’ forecasts for economic activity and 
inflation were broadly similar to their previous projec-
tions, which were made in conjunction with the January 
2010 FOMC meeting.  As depicted in figure 1, the eco-
nomic recovery was expected to be gradual, with real 
gross domestic product (GDP) expanding at a rate only 
moderately above the participants’ assessment of its long-
er-run sustainable growth rate and unemployment declin-
ing slowly over the next few years.  Most participants also 
anticipated that inflation would remain subdued over this 
period.  As indicated in table 1, participants generally 
made modest upward revisions to their projections for 

real GDP growth in 2010.  Beyond 2010, however, the 
contours of participants’ projections for economic activity 
and inflation were little changed.  Participants continued 
to expect the pace of the economic recovery to be re-
strained by household and business uncertainty, only gra-
dual improvement in labor market conditions, and slow 
easing of credit conditions in the banking sector.  Partici-
pants generally expected that it would take some time for 
the economy to converge fully to its longer-run path—
characterized by a sustainable rate of output growth and 
by rates of employment and inflation consistent with par-
ticipants’ interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual ob-
jectives—but only a minority anticipated that the conver-
gence process would take more than five to six years.  As 
in January, most participants judged the risks to their 
growth outlook as balanced, and most also saw balanced 
risks surrounding their inflation projections.  Participants 
in general continued to judge the uncertainty surrounding 
their projections for economic activity and inflation as 
unusually high relative to historical norms. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2010 
had a central tendency of 3.2 to 3.7 percent, a little higher 
than in January.  Readings on consumer spending and 
business outlays for equipment and software were seen as 
broadly consistent with a moderate pace of economic 
recovery.  The labor market appeared to be starting to 
improve, but job growth was expected to be modest.  
Participants pointed to a number of factors that would 
support the continued expansion of economic activity, 
including accommodative monetary policy and the im-
proved condition of financial markets and institutions.  

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, April 2010 
Percent    

Variable 
Central tendency1 Range2 

2010 2011 2012 Longer run 2010 2011 2012 Longer run 
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 3.2 to 3.7 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.7 to 4.0 3.0 to 4.6 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

January projection. . . . 2.8 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.3 to 4.0 2.7 to 4.7 3.0 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.1 to 9.5 8.1 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3 8.6 to 9.7 7.2 to 8.7 6.4 to 7.7 5.0 to 6.3 
January projection. . . . 9.5 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.2 8.6 to 10.0 7.2 to 8.8 6.1 to 7.6 4.9 to 6.3 

PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . .  1.2 to 1.5 1.1 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 0.9 to 2.4 0.7 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0 
January projection. . . . 1.4 to 1.7 1.1 to 2.0 1.3 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.2 to 2.0 1.0 to 2.4 0.8 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 0.9 to 1.2 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.6 to 2.4 0.6 to 2.2 
January projection. . . . 1.1 to 1.7 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 1.9 1.0 to 2.0 0.9 to 2.4 0.8 to 2.0 

   NOTE:  Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year 
indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and 
the price index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the 
year indicated.  Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  Longer-run projections represent each participant’s 
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. 
 The January projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 26-27, 2010. 

   1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
   2.  The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
   3.  Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



2

1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

9

10

Percent

Unemployment rate

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

1

2

3

Percent

PCE inflation

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

1

2

3

Percent

Core PCE inflation

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Several participants also noted that fiscal policy was cur-
rently providing substantial support to real activity.  
However, they expected less impetus to GDP growth 
from this factor later in the year and anticipated that bud-
getary pressures would probably continue to weigh on 
spending at the state and local levels.  Many participants 
thought that the expansion was likely to be restrained by 
firms’ caution in hiring and spending in light of the con-
siderable uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, and 
by limited access to credit by small businesses and con-
sumers. 

Looking further ahead, participants’ projections were for 
real GDP growth to pick up somewhat in 2011 and 2012; 
the projections for growth in both years had a central 
tendency of about 3½ to 4½ percent.  As in January, par-
ticipants generally expected the ongoing recovery in 
household wealth and gradual improvements in credit 
availability to bolster consumer spending.  As the recov-
ery became more firmly established, businesses were seen 
as likely to boost their outlays on equipment and software 
and to increase production in order to rebuild their inven-
tories.  Nevertheless, participants indicated several factors 
that would likely restrain the pace of expansion, including 
a higher household saving rate as households repair bal-
ance sheets, significant uncertainty on the part of house-
holds and businesses about the outlook for the economy, 
and a slow recovery in nonresidential construction.  
Moreover, although financial conditions had improved 
noticeably in recent months, ongoing strains in the com-
mercial real estate sector were expected to pose risks to 
the balance sheets of banking institutions for some time.  
Terms and standards on bank loans remained restrictive, 
and participants anticipated only a gradual easing of credit 
conditions for many households and smaller firms.  In the 
absence of further shocks, participants generally expected 
that real GDP growth would converge over time to an 
annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, the longer-run pace that 
appeared to be sustainable in view of expected trends in 
the labor force and improvements in labor productivity. 

Participants anticipated that labor market conditions 
would improve slowly over the next several years.  The 
central tendency of their projections for the average un-
employment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 was 9.1 to 
9.5 percent, only modestly below the levels of late last 
year.  In line with their outlook for moderate output 
growth, participants generally expected that the unem-
ployment rate would decline only to about 6.6 to 7.5 per-
cent by the end of 2012, remaining well above their as-
sessments of its longer-run sustainable rate.  Although 
some participants noted concerns that substantial ongo-
ing structural adjustments in product and labor markets 

would reduce the sustainable level of employment, partic-
ipants’ longer-term unemployment projections had a cen-
tral tendency of 5.0 to 5.3 percent, essentially the same as 
in January. 

Most participants revised down slightly their near-term 
projections for inflation, and participants generally antic-
ipated that inflation would remain subdued over the next 
several years.  The central tendency of their projections 
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation 
was 1.2 to 1.5 percent for 2010, 1.1 to 1.9 percent for 
2011, and 1.2 to 2.0 percent for 2012.  Many participants 
anticipated that increases in food and energy prices would 
lead headline PCE inflation to run slightly above core 
PCE inflation over the next few years.  Most expected 
that inflation would rise gradually toward their individual 
assessments of the measured rate of inflation judged to be 
most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 
 As in January, the central tendency of projections of the 
longer-run inflation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent.  A majori-
ty of participants anticipated that inflation in 2012 would 
still be below their assessments of the mandate-consistent 
inflation rate, while the remainder expected that inflation 
would be at or slightly above its longer-run value by that 
time. 

Uncertainty and Risks 
Most participants continued to see their projections of 
future economic activity and unemployment as subject to 
greater-than-average uncertainty.1  Participants generally 
perceived the risks to their projections as roughly bal-
anced, although a few indicated that they now viewed the 
risks to economic growth as tilted to the upside.  Many 
participants pointed to stronger incoming data as suggest-
ing that the economic recovery was more firmly estab-
lished than had been the case in January, but they empha-
sized that predicting macroeconomic outcomes in the 
wake of a financial crisis and a severe recession was par-
ticularly difficult.  In addition, participants cited uncer-
tainties regarding the likely persistence of both the recent 
pickup in the growth of consumer spending and rapid 
labor productivity growth and noted the risk that severe 
strains in the commercial real estate sector could continue 
to impair bank balance sheets, thus limiting credit availa-
bility and restraining growth of output and employment. 

                                                 
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the 
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consum-
er price inflation over the period from 1990 to 2009.  At the 
end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses 
the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic fore-
casts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty 
and risk attending participants’ projections.  

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



Most participants continued to see the uncertainty sur-
rounding their inflation projections as elevated.  Howev-
er, a few judged that uncertainty in the outlook for infla-
tion was about in line with typical levels, and one viewed 
the uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook as lower 
than average.  Nearly all participants judged the risks to 
the inflation outlook as roughly balanced; however, two 
saw these risks as tilted to the upside, while two regarded 
the risks as weighted to the downside.  Several partici-
pants noted that inflation expectations were well anc-
hored, likely mitigating the tendency for inflation to de-
cline in response to continued slack in resource utiliza-
tion.  Others cited the risk that expected and actual infla-
tion could increase, especially if extraordinarily accom-
modative monetary policy measures were not unwound in 
a timely fashion. 

Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the diversi-
ty of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for 
real GDP growth and the unemployment rate.  The dis-
tributions of participants’ projections for real GDP 
growth this year and next year were slightly narrower than 
the distributions of their projections in January, but the 
distribution of projections for real GDP growth in 2012 
was little changed.  As in earlier projections, the disper-
sion in participants’ forecasts for output growth appeared 
to reflect the diversity of their assessments regarding the 
current degree of underlying momentum in economic 
activity, the evolution of consumer and business senti-
ment, the likely pace of easing of bank lending standards 
and terms, and other factors.  Regarding participants’ un-
employment rate projections, the distribution for 2010 
shifted down somewhat, but the distributions of their 
unemployment rate projections for 2011 and 2012 did not 
change appreciably.  The distributions of participants’ 
estimates of the longer-run sustainable rates of output 
growth and unemployment were essentially the same as in 
January. 

Corresponding information about the diversity of partici-
pants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is provided in 
figures 2.C and 2.D.  For overall and core PCE inflation, 
the distributions of participants’ projections for 2010 
shifted a bit lower relative to the distributions in January.  
The distributions of overall and core inflation for 2011 
and 2012, however, were little changed and remained fair-
ly wide.  The dispersion in participants’ projections over 
the next few years was mainly due to differences in their 
judgments regarding the determinants of inflation, includ-
ing their estimates of prevailing resource slack and their 
assessments of the extent to which such slack affects ac-
tual and expected inflation.  In contrast, the relatively 
tight distribution of participants’ projections for longer-
run inflation illustrates their substantial agreement about 
the measured rate of inflation that is most consistent with 
the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
ployment and stable prices. 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2010 2011 2012 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . . ±1.1 ±1.7 ±1.8 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . .  ±0.5 ±1.2 ±1.5 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.1 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that were released 
in the spring by various private and government forecasters.  As described 
in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is 
about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unem-
ployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size 
of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reif-
schneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Eco-
nomic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Econom-
ics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, November).  

1.  For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that 

has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.  
Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the 
fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

2010

January projections

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

2.2-
2.3 

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

2010

January projections

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

10.0-
10.1 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

2010

January projections

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2010–12  

2010

January projections

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

April projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by the 
members of the Board of Governors and the 
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform 
discussions of monetary policy among policy-
makers and can aid public understanding of the 
basis for policy actions.  Considerable uncertain-
ty attends these projections, however.  The eco-
nomic and statistical models and relationships 
used to help produce economic forecasts are 
necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real 
world.  And the future path of the economy can 
be affected by myriad unforeseen developments 
and events.  Thus, in setting the stance of mone-
tary policy, participants consider not only what 
appears to be the most likely economic outcome 
as embodied in their projections, but also the 
range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood 
of their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those 
reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those 
prepared by Federal Reserve Board staff in ad-
vance of meetings of the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  The projection error ranges shown 
in the table illustrate the considerable uncertain-
ty associated with economic forecasts.  For ex-
ample, suppose a participant projects that real 
gross domestic product (GDP) and total con-
sumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, 
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent.  If the 
uncertainty attending those projections is similar 
 

to that experienced in the past and the risks 
around the projections are broadly balanced, the 
numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob-
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP 
would expand within a range of 1.9 to 4.1 per-
cent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the 
second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third 
year.  The corresponding 70 percent confidence 
intervals for overall inflation would be 1.1 to 2.9 
percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in 
the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the 
third year. 

Because current conditions may differ from 
those that prevailed, on average, over history, 
participants provide judgments as to whether the 
uncertainty attached to their projections of each 
variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly 
similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in 
the past as shown in table 2.  Participants also 
provide judgments as to whether the risks to 
their projections are weighted to the upside, are 
weighted to the downside, or are broadly ba-
lanced.  That is, participants judge whether each 
variable is more likely to be above or below their 
projections of the most likely outcome.  These 
judgments about the uncertainty and the risks 
attending each participant’s projections are dis-
tinct from the diversity of participants’ views 
about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast uncer-
tainty is concerned with the risks associated with 
a particular projection rather than with diver-
gences across a number of different projections. 

 
    

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of April 27-28, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9




