









































FOMC Minutes, June 22-23, 2010


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
June 22-23, 2010

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 22, 2010, 
at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 23, 
2010, at 9:00 a.m. 
 
PRESENT:  

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
James Bullard 
Elizabeth Duke 
Thomas M. Hoenig 
Donald L. Kohn 
Sandra Pianalto 
Eric Rosengren 
Daniel K. Tarullo  
Kevin Warsh 
 
Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana 

Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee 

 
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. 

Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis-
co, respectively 

 
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Thomas Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel 
Nathan Sheets, Economist  
David J. Stockton, Economist 
 
Thomas A. Connors, William B. English, Jeff 

Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon Potter, Law-
rence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and Da-
vid W. Wilcox, Associate Economists 

 
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-

count 
 

Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office 
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank 
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors 

 
Robert deV. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of 

the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 

Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, 
Office of the Staff Director for Management, 
Board of Governors 

 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Linda Robertson,² Assistant to the Board, Office 

of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Nellie Liang, David Reifschneider, and William 

Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Gover-
nors; William Nelson, Senior Associate Direc-
tor, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

 
Seth B. Carpenter, Associate Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Christopher J. Erceg, Deputy Associate Director, 

Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors; Michael G. Palumbo and Joyce K. 
Zickler, Deputy Associate Directors, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-

fice of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Assistant Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 

David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Beth Anne Wilson, Section Chief, Division of In-

ternational Finance, Board of Governors 
 
 

¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 
² Attended Wednesday’s session only. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



John C. Driscoll and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior 
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Andrea L. Kusko, Senior 
Economist, Division of Research and Statis-
tics, Board of Governors; John W. Schindler, 
Senior Economist, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-

fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records 

Management Analysts, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Patrick K. Barron and John F. Moore, First Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta 
and San Francisco, respectively 

 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and John C. 

Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

 
David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Arthur Rolnick, and 

Mark E. Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, 
Minneapolis, and Cleveland, respectively 

 
Daniel Aaronson, Todd E. Clark, and Andreas L. 

Hornstein, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and Rich-
mond, respectively 

 
Joshua L. Frost, Assistant Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York 
 
 

 
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and 
foreign financial markets during the period since the 
Committee met on April 27–28, 2010.  He also briefed 
the Committee on the System’s progress in developing 
tools for managing the supply of reserves, including 
reverse repurchase agreements and the Term Deposit 
Facility.  In preparation for possible future reserve 
draining operations, in June the Federal Reserve con-
ducted the first of several small-value auctions to test 
the Term Deposit Facility.  In addition, the Manager 

reported on System open market operations during the 
intermeeting period.  By unanimous vote, the Commit-
tee ratified those transactions.  There were no open 
market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
tem’s account over the intermeeting period. 

In his presentation to the Committee, the Manager 
noted that “fails to deliver” in the mortgage-backed 
securities (MBS) market had reached very high levels in 
recent months.  Under these conditions, dealers had 
experienced difficulty in arranging delivery of a small 
amount—including about $9 billion of securities with 
5.5 percent coupons issued by Fannie Mae—of the 
$1.25 trillion of MBS that the Desk at the Federal Re-
serve Bank of New York had purchased between Janu-
ary 2009 and March 2010.  The Desk had postponed 
settlement of some of these transactions through the 
use of dollar rolls.  The Manager discussed alternative 
methods of settling the outstanding transactions and 
recommended that the Committee authorize the Desk 
to engage in coupon swap transactions to facilitate the 
settlement of these purchases.  The Manager noted that 
a coupon swap is a common transaction in the market 
for MBS in which the two counterparties exchange se-
curities at market prices.  By engaging in a coupon 
swap, the Federal Reserve would effectively sell the 
scarce securities that it had not yet received and pur-
chase instead securities that are more readily available 
in the market.  After discussing various approaches, 
meeting participants agreed that coupon swaps were an 
appropriate method to achieve settlement of outstand-
ing transactions. 

As background for the Committee’s continuing consid-
eration of its portfolio management policies, the Man-
ager gave a presentation on alternative strategies for 
reinvesting the proceeds from maturing Treasury secur-
ities.  Under current practice, the Desk reinvests the 
proceeds of maturing Treasury coupon securities in 
new Treasury securities that are issued on the date the 
older securities mature, allocating the investments 
across the new securities in proportion to the issuance 
amounts.  The Manager presented two alternatives to 
the status quo.  First, the Committee could consider 
halting all reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing 
securities.  Such a strategy would shrink the size of the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and reduce the quantity 
of reserve balances in the banking system gradually 
over time.  Second, the Committee could reinvest the 
proceeds of maturing securities only in new issues of 
Treasury securities with relatively short maturities—
bills only, or bills as well as coupon issues with terms of 
three years or less.  This strategy would maintain the 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet but would 
reduce somewhat the average maturity of the portfolio 
and increase its liquidity.  One participant favored halt-
ing all reinvestment, and many saw benefits to even-
tually adopting an approach of reinvesting in bills and 
shorter-term coupon issues to shift the maturity com-
position of the portfolio toward the structure that had 
prevailed prior to the financial crisis.  However, the 
Committee made no change to its reinvestment policy 
at this meeting. 

Continuing a discussion from previous meetings, par-
ticipants again addressed issues regarding asset sales.  
Participants continued to agree that gradual sales of 
MBS should be undertaken, at some point, to speed the 
return to a Treasury-securities-only portfolio.  A few 
participants supported beginning such sales fairly soon; 
they noted that, given the evident demand in the mar-
ket for safe, longer-term assets, modest sales of MBS 
might not put much, if any, upward pressure on long-
term interest rates or be disruptive to the functioning 
of financial markets.  However, many participants still 
saw asset sales as potentially tightening financial condi-
tions to some extent.  Most participants continued to 
judge it appropriate to defer asset sales for some time; 
several noted the modest weakening in the economic 
outlook since the Committee’s last meeting as an addi-
tional reason to do so.  A majority of participants con-
tinued to anticipate that asset sales would start after the 
Committee had begun to firm policy by increasing 
short-term interest rates; such an approach would 
postpone asset sales until the economic recovery was 
well established and maintain short-term interest rates 
as the Committee’s key monetary policy tool.  A few 
participants suggested selling MBS and using the 
proceeds to purchase Treasury securities of comparable 
duration, arguing that doing so would hasten the move 
toward a Treasury-securities-only portfolio without 
tightening financial conditions.  Participants agreed that 
it would be important to maintain flexibility regarding 
the appropriate timing and pace of asset sales, given the 
uncertainties associated with the unprecedented size 
and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
and its effects on financial conditions.  Overall, partici-
pants emphasized that any decision to engage in asset 
sales would need to be communicated well in advance 
of the initiation of such transactions, and that sales 
should be conducted at a gradual pace and potentially 
be adjusted in response to developments in economic 
and financial conditions. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed at the June 22–23 meeting 
suggested that the economic recovery was proceeding 
at a moderate pace in the second quarter.  Businesses 
continued to increase employment and lengthen work-
weeks in April and May, but the unemployment rate 
remained elevated.  Industrial production registered 
strong and widespread gains, and business investment 
in equipment and software rose rapidly.  Consumer 
spending appeared to have moved up further in April 
and May.  However, housing starts dropped in May, 
and nonresidential construction remained depressed.  
Falling energy prices held down headline consumer 
prices in April and May while core consumer prices 
edged up. 

Labor demand continued to firm in recent months.  
While the change in total nonfarm payroll employment 
in May was boosted significantly by the hiring of tem-
porary workers for the decennial census, private em-
ployment posted only a small increase.  This increase, 
however, followed sizable gains in March and April, 
and the average workweek of all private-sector em-
ployees increased over the March-to-May period.  As a 
result, aggregate hours worked by employees on private 
nonfarm payrolls rose substantially through May.  The 
unemployment rate moved up in April but dropped 
back in May to 9.7 percent, its first-quarter average.  
The labor force participation rate was, on average, 
higher in recent months than in the first quarter, as 
rising employment was accompanied by an increasing 
number of jobseekers.  Although the number of work-
ers who were employed part time for economic reasons 
leveled off in recent months, the proportion of unem-
ployed workers who were jobless for more than 26 
weeks continued to move up.  Initial claims for unem-
ployment insurance were little changed over the inter-
meeting period, remaining at a still-elevated level. 

Industrial production rose at a robust rate in April and 
May, with production increases broadly based across 
industries.  Firming domestic demand, rising exports, 
and business inventory restocking appeared to have 
provided upward impetus to factory production.  In 
April and May, production in high-technology indus-
tries again rose strongly, with substantial gains in the 
output of semiconductors and further solid increases in 
the production of computers and communications 
equipment.  The production of other types of business 
equipment continued to rebound, and the output of 
construction supplies advanced further.  Production of 
light motor vehicles turned up in May; nonetheless, 
dealers’ inventories remained lean.  Capacity utilization 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



in manufacturing rose in May to a rate noticeably above 
the low reached in mid-2009, but it was still substantial-
ly below its longer-run average. 

The rise in consumer spending slowed in recent 
months after a brisk increase in the first quarter.  Al-
though sales of light motor vehicles continued to trend 
higher, nominal sales of non-auto consumer goods and 
food services were little changed in April and May.  
The moderation in spending appeared, on balance, to 
be aligning the pace of consumption with recent trends 
in income, wealth, and consumer sentiment.  Real dis-
posable personal income moved up at a solid rate in 
March and April, reflecting increases in employment 
and hours worked as well as slightly higher real wages, 
but home values declined in recent months and equity 
prices moved down since the April meeting.  Measures 
of consumer sentiment improved in May and early June 
but were still at relatively low levels. 

The anticipated expiration of the homebuyer tax credit 
appeared to have pulled home sales forward, boosting 
their level in recent months.  Sales of existing single-
family homes rose strongly in April, and, although they 
moved down in May, these sales were still above their 
level earlier in the year.  Purchases of new single-family 
homes also jumped in April, but then fell steeply in 
May.  On net, the upswing in the volume of real estate 
transactions in recent months was likely to boost the 
brokers’ commissions component of residential in-
vestment in the second quarter.  However, starts of 
new single-family homes, which had trended higher in 
the first four months of the year, declined sharply in 
May.  In addition, the number of permits for new 
homes, which tends to lead starts, fell for a second 
month in May.  House prices declined somewhat in 
recent months, reversing some of the modest increases 
that occurred in the spring and summer of 2009.  After 
changing little on net during the preceding year, interest 
rates for 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages 
moved lower in May and June. 

Real spending on equipment and software increased 
further early in the second quarter.  Business outlays 
for computing equipment and software continued to 
rise at a brisk pace through April, and shipments of 
aircraft to domestic carriers rebounded.  Orders and 
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding 
transportation and high-tech equipment stayed on a 
noticeable uptrend, on net, in March and April, with 
the increases broadly based by type of equipment.  The 
recovery in equipment and software spending was con-
sistent with the relatively strong gains in production in 

recent months, improved financial conditions over the 
first part of the year, and the positive readings from 
surveys on business conditions and earnings reports for 
producers of capital goods.  Business outlays for non-
residential construction appeared to be contracting fur-
ther, on balance, in March and April, although the rate 
of decline seemed to be moderating.  Outlays for new 
power plants and for manufacturing facilities firmed, 
and investment in drilling and mining structures con-
tinued to rise strongly.  However, spending on office 
and commercial structures was still falling steeply 
through April, with the weakness likely related to high 
vacancy rates, falling property prices, and the light vo-
lume of sales. 

Businesses appeared to have begun to restock their 
inventories.  Real nonfarm inventory investment turned 
positive in the first quarter, and data for April pointed 
to further modest accumulation.  Ratios of inventories 
to sales for most industries looked to be within com-
fortable ranges. 

Consumer price inflation remained low in April and 
May.  The core consumer price index rose only slightly 
over the period, and the year-over-year change in the 
index was lower than earlier this year.  Core goods 
prices continued to decline, on net, and prices of non-
energy services remained soft.  The headline consumer 
price index edged down in both months, as the drop in 
the price of crude oil since April led consumer energy 
prices to retrace a portion of the run-up that occurred 
during the nine months ending in January.  At earlier 
stages of processing, producer prices of core interme-
diate materials rose moderately in May after five 
months of large increases.  Inflation compensation 
based on Treasury inflation-protected securities de-
creased recently in response to low readings on infla-
tion and falling oil prices.  Survey measures of both 
short- and long-term inflation expectations remained 
relatively stable. 

Unit labor costs continued to be restrained by weak-
ness in hourly compensation and further gains in prod-
uctivity.  Revised estimates of labor compensation indi-
cated that hourly compensation in the nonfarm busi-
ness sector was about flat, on net, during the fourth 
quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010.  The em-
ployment cost index showed a moderate rise over the 
period, boosted by a sizable increase in benefit costs in 
the first quarter.  The year-over-year increase in average 
hourly earnings of all employees was also moderate 
through May.  Output per hour in the nonfarm busi-

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



ness sector, which rose rapidly in 2009, posted a more 
moderate but still-solid gain in the first quarter of 2010. 

The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in 
April, as nominal exports fell a bit more than nominal 
imports.  The April declines in both exports and im-
ports followed robust increases in March.  The April 
fall in exports reflected declines in exports of consumer 
goods, primarily due to a drop in pharmaceuticals, and 
in agricultural goods.  Exports of industrial supplies 
moved up while exports of capital goods were flat after 
increasing strongly in March.  Imports in April were 
pulled down by lower imports of consumer goods, 
which more than offset sharply higher imports of capi-
tal goods, particularly computing equipment.  Imports 
of automotive products and non-oil industrial supplies 
declined slightly, and imports of petroleum products 
were flat following a large increase in March. 

Incoming data suggested that economic activity abroad 
continued to expand at a strong pace in the first half of 
the year.  Among the advanced foreign economies, 
growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) in the 
first quarter was particularly strong in Canada and Ja-
pan, and recent indicators for those countries pointed 
to continued solid increases in the second quarter.  In 
contrast, the rise in economic activity in the euro area 
was subdued, as favorable readings for the manufactur-
ing sector were counterbalanced by weakness in do-
mestic demand.  Since the time of the April meeting of 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), con-
cerns about the fiscal situation of several euro-area 
countries intensified sharply.  In response, European 
authorities announced a number of policy measures, 
including acceleration of fiscal consolidation plans in 
some countries, finalization of an International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF) and European Union (EU) assistance 
package for Greece, and the introduction of a broader 
€500 billion financial assistance program that could be 
complemented by bilateral IMF lending.  The Euro-
pean Central Bank (ECB) also announced further 
measures to improve liquidity conditions in impaired 
markets, including a program to purchase sovereign 
and private debt. 

Economic activity in emerging market economies con-
tinued to expand briskly in the first half of this year.  
Growth of economic activity was particularly robust in 
emerging Asia, driven in part by strong increases in 
industrial production and exports associated with solid 
gains in final demand as well as the turn in the invento-
ry cycle.  The rise of real GDP in Latin America ap-
peared to have stalled in the first quarter, but this de-

velopment reflected a contraction in Mexico that more-
favorable monthly indicators suggested should prove 
temporary.  In contrast, the increase in Brazilian real 
GDP was very strong.  Consumer price inflation in the 
foreign economies in aggregate was buoyed by higher 
food and energy prices in the first quarter, while core 
inflation generally remained subdued.  More recent in-
formation suggested some moderation in foreign infla-
tion in the second quarter. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
The FOMC’s decision at its April meeting to maintain 
the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds 
rate and the wording of the accompanying statement 
were largely in line with expectations and prompted 
little market reaction.  Economic data releases were 
mixed, on balance, over the intermeeting period, but 
market participants were especially attentive to incom-
ing information on the labor market—most notably, 
the private payroll figures in the employment report for 
May, which were considerably weaker than investors 
expected.  Those data, combined with heightened con-
cerns about the global economic outlook stemming in 
part from Europe’s sovereign debt problems, contri-
buted to a downward revision in the expected path of 
policy implied by money market futures rates. 

In the market for Treasury coupon securities, 2- and 
10-year nominal yields fell considerably over the inter-
meeting period.  Market participants pointed to flight-
to-quality flows and greater concern about the econom-
ic outlook as factors boosting the demand for Treasury 
securities.  The drop in Treasury yields was accompa-
nied by a small widening of swap spreads. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets deteriorated 
somewhat, particularly for European financial institu-
tions.  Spreads of the term London interbank offered 
rate, or Libor, over rates on overnight index swaps wid-
ened noticeably, with the availability of funding at ma-
turities longer than one week reportedly quite limited.  
Market participants also reduced holdings of commer-
cial paper sponsored by entities thought to have expo-
sures to peripheral European financial institutions and 
governments.  Even so, spreads of high-grade unse-
cured financial commercial paper to nonfinancial 
commercial paper widened only modestly over the in-
termeeting period.  In secured funding markets, spreads 
on asset-backed commercial paper also widened mod-
estly, while rates on repurchase agreements involving 
Treasury and agency collateral changed little.  In the 
inaugural Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on 
Dealer Financing Terms, which was conducted by the 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



Federal Reserve between May 24 and June 4, dealers 
generally reported that the terms on which they pro-
vided credit remained tight relative to those at the end 
of 2006.  However, they noted some loosening of 
terms for both securities financing and over-the-
counter derivatives transactions, on net, over the pre-
vious three months for certain classes of clients—
including hedge funds, institutional investors, and non-
financial corporations—and intensified efforts by those 
clients to negotiate more-favorable terms.  At the same 
time, they reported a pickup in demand for financing 
across several collateral types over the past three 
months. 

Broad U.S. stock price indexes fell over the intermeet-
ing period, in part reflecting deepening concerns about 
the European fiscal situation and its potential for ad-
verse spillovers to global economic growth.  Option-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index spiked in mid-
May, to more than double its value at the time of the 
April FOMC meeting, but largely reversed its run-up by 
the time of the June meeting.  The spread between the 
staff’s estimate of the expected real return on equities 
over the next 10 years and an estimate of the expected 
real return on a 10-year Treasury note—a measure of 
the equity risk premium—increased from its already 
elevated level. 

Investors’ attitudes toward financial institutions deteri-
orated somewhat, as the equity of financial firms un-
derperformed the broader market amid uncertainty 
about the implications of developments in Europe and 
the potential effects of financial regulatory reform.  
Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate 
bonds moved higher over the intermeeting period, and 
high-yield bond mutual funds recorded substantial net 
outflows.  Spreads on corporate bonds widened, al-
though they remained within the range prevailing since 
last summer.  Secondary-market bid prices on syndi-
cated leveraged loans fell, while bid-asked spreads in 
that market widened. 

Net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations in-
creased in April and May relative to its pace in the first 
quarter.  Gross bond issuance by investment-grade 
nonfinancial corporations in the United States re-
mained solid, on average, over those two months; non-
financial commercial paper outstanding increased as 
well.  High-yield corporate bond issuance in the United 
States briefly paused in May, reflecting the market’s 
pullback from risky assets, although speculative-grade 
U.S. firms continued to issue bonds abroad and a few 
placed issues domestically in the first half of June.  

Gross equity issuance fell a bit, on net, in April and 
May, likely due in part to recent declines in equity pric-
es and elevated market volatility.  Measures of the cred-
it quality of nonfinancial firms generally continued to 
improve, and first-quarter profits for firms in the S&P 
500 jumped substantially, primarily reflecting an upturn 
in financial sector profits from quite depressed levels.  
The outlook in commercial real estate markets stayed 
weak; prices of commercial properties fell a bit further 
in the first quarter, and the volume of commercial 
property sales remained light.  The delinquency rate for 
securitized commercial mortgages continued to climb 
in May, and indexes of prices of credit default swaps on 
commercial mortgages declined, on net, over the in-
termeeting period. 

Consumer credit contracted again in recent months, as 
revolving credit continued on a steep downtrend.  Is-
suance of consumer credit asset-backed securities 
(ABS) increased in May, although the pace was still well 
below that observed before the onset of the financial 
crisis.  Credit card ABS issuance remained subdued, 
partly reflecting regulatory changes that made financing 
credit card receivables via securitization less desirable.  
In primary markets, spreads of credit card interest rates 
over those on Treasury securities remained extremely 
high in April, while interest rate spreads on auto loans 
stayed near their average level of the past decade.  Con-
sumer credit quality improved further, with delinquency 
rates on credit cards and auto loans moving down a bit 
in April. 

Bank credit declined, on average, in April and May at 
about the same pace as in the first quarter.  Commer-
cial and industrial loans, after dropping rapidly in April, 
decreased at a slower pace in May.  While commercial 
real estate and home equity loans fell at a slightly faster 
rate than in recent quarters, the contraction in closed-
end residential loans abated, partly because of a re-
duced pace of sales to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  
Consumer loans declined again, on average, in April 
and May.  The amount of Treasury and agency securi-
ties held by large domestic banks and foreign-related 
institutions declined in May, contributing to a sizable 
drop in banks’ securities holdings. 

On a seasonally adjusted basis, M2 contracted in April 
but surged in May, with much of the month-to-month 
variation apparently associated with the effects of fed-
eral tax payments and refunds.  Averaging across the 
two months, M2 expanded moderately after having 
been about unchanged in the first quarter; liquid depos-
its accounted for most of the net change. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



The threat to global economic growth and financial 
stability posed by the fiscal situation in some European 
nations sparked widespread flight-to-quality flows over 
most of the intermeeting period.  This retreat led to a 
broad appreciation of the dollar as well as declines in 
equity prices abroad and in yields on benchmark sover-
eign bonds.  However, investor sentiment improved 
near the end of the period, leading to a partial reversal 
in some of these movements, despite Moody’s down-
grade of Greece to below-investment-grade status in 
mid-June.  On net, the dollar ended the intermeeting 
period up, most headline equity indexes fell, and 
benchmark government bond yields declined.  Strains 
in euro-area bank funding markets reemerged during 
the period.  In response, the ECB announced some 
changes to its liquidity operations that would provide 
greater market access to term funding in euros.3  Diffi-
culties also appeared in corporate debt markets as both 
nonfinancial and financial corporate debt issuance 
dropped substantially in May.  In addition, pressures in 
dollar funding markets reappeared for foreign financial 
institutions, especially those thought to have significant 
exposure to Greece and other peripheral euro-area 
countries.  To help contain these pressures and to pre-
vent their spread to other institutions and regions, the 
Federal Reserve reestablished dollar liquidity swap ar-
rangements with the ECB, the Bank of England, the 
Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, and the Swiss Na-
tional Bank. 

Yields on the sovereign obligations of peripheral Euro-
pean countries declined noticeably following a May 10 
announcement of a framework established by the EU 
for providing financial aid to euro-area governments 
and of the ECB’s intention to purchase euro-area sov-
ereign debt.  However, yields remained high even after 
these announcements and moved up subsequently, 
notwithstanding the ECB’s purchases of government 
debt.  Amid a weakening outlook for economic growth 
in Europe, central banks in several emerging European 
economies began to decrease policy rates.  By contrast, 
brighter economic prospects in Canada and China 
prompted the Bank of Canada to raise its target for the 
overnight rate to 50 basis points at its June meeting and 
Chinese authorities to raise banks’ reserve requirement 
further in May.  In addition, the People’s Bank of Chi-
na announced late in the period that it would allow the 
renminbi to move more flexibly, and the currency ap-
                                                 
3 The ECB reinstituted a six-month lending operation and 
switched its three-month lending operations from fixed-
quantity auctions to full-allotment offerings at a fixed rate of 
1 percent. 

preciated slightly immediately following the announce-
ment. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the economic forecast prepared for the June FOMC 
meeting, the staff continued to anticipate a moderate 
recovery in economic activity through 2011, supported 
by accommodative monetary policy, an attenuation of 
financial stress, and strengthening consumer and busi-
ness confidence.  While the recent data on production 
and spending were broadly in line with the staff’s ex-
pectations, the pace of the expansion over the next year 
and a half was expected to be somewhat slower than 
previously predicted.  The intensifying concerns among 
investors about the implications of the fiscal difficulties 
faced by some European countries contributed to an 
increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and 
a drop in equity prices, which seemed likely to damp 
somewhat the expansion of domestic demand.  The 
implications of these less-favorable factors for U.S. 
economic activity appeared likely to be only partly off-
set by lower interest rates on Treasury securities, other 
highly rated securities, and mortgages, as well as by a 
lower price for crude oil.  The staff still expected that 
the pace of economic activity through 2011 would be 
sufficient to reduce the existing margins of economic 
slack, although the anticipated decline in the unem-
ployment rate was somewhat slower than in the pre-
vious projection. 

The staff’s forecasts for headline and core inflation 
were also reduced slightly.  The changes were a re-
sponse to the lower prices of oil and other commodi-
ties, the appreciation of the dollar, and the greater 
amount of economic slack in the forecast.  Despite 
these developments, inflation expectations had re-
mained stable, likely limiting movements in inflation.  
On balance, core inflation was expected to continue at 
a subdued rate over the projection period.  As in earlier 
forecasts, headline inflation was projected to move into 
line with the core rate by 2011. 

Participants’ Views of Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting 
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve 
Banks—provided projections of economic growth, the 
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for 
each year from 2010 through 2012 and over a longer 
horizon.  Longer-run projections represent each partic-
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable 
would be expected to converge over time under appro-

Minutes of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



priate monetary policy and in the absence of further 
shocks.  Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over 
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum 
to these minutes. 

In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, meeting participants generally saw the incoming 
data and information received from business contacts 
as consistent with a continued, moderate recovery in 
economic activity.  Participants noted that the labor 
market was improving gradually, household spending 
was increasing, and business spending on equipment 
and software had risen significantly.  With private final 
demand having strengthened, inventory adjustments 
and fiscal stimulus were no longer the main factors 
supporting economic expansion.  In light of stable in-
flation expectations and incoming data indicating low 
rates of inflation, policymakers continued to anticipate 
that both overall and core inflation would remain sub-
dued through 2012.  However, financial markets were 
generally seen as recently having become less suppor-
tive of economic growth, largely reflecting international 
spillovers from European fiscal strains.  In part as a 
result of the change in financial conditions, most par-
ticipants revised down slightly their outlook for eco-
nomic growth, and about one-half of the participants 
judged the balance of risks to growth as having moved 
to the downside.  Most participants continued to see 
the risks to inflation as balanced.  A number of partici-
pants expressed the view that, over the next several 
years, both employment and inflation would likely be 
below levels they consider to be consistent with their 
dual mandate, but they anticipated that, with appropri-
ate monetary policy, both would rise over time to levels 
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s objectives. 

Financial markets had become somewhat less suppor-
tive of economic growth since the April meeting, with 
the developments in Europe cited as a leading cause of 
greater global financial market tensions.  Risk spreads 
for many corporate borrowers had widened noticeably, 
equity prices had fallen appreciably, and the dollar had 
risen in value against a broad basket of other curren-
cies.  Participants saw these changes as likely to weigh 
to some degree on household and business spending 
over coming quarters.  Participants also noted ongoing 
difficulties in financing commercial real estate.  None-
theless, reports suggested that more-creditworthy busi-
ness borrowers were still able to obtain funding in the 
open markets on fairly attractive terms, and a couple of 
participants noted that credit from the banking sector, 
which had been contracting for some time, was show-

ing some tentative signs of stabilizing.  Moreover, sev-
eral participants observed that the decline in yields on 
Treasury securities resulting from the global flight to 
quality was positive for the domestic economy; in par-
ticular, the associated decline in mortgage rates was 
seen as potentially helpful in supporting the housing 
sector. 

Supporting the view of a continued recovery, incoming 
data and anecdotal reports pointed to strength in a 
number of business sectors, particularly manufacturing 
and transportation.  Policymakers noted that firms’ 
investment in equipment and software had advanced 
rapidly of late, and they anticipated that such spending 
would continue to rise, though perhaps at a somewhat 
slower pace.  Business contacts suggested that invest-
ment spending had been supported by the replacement 
and upgrading of existing capital, making up for some 
spending that had been postponed in the downturn, 
and this component of investment demand was seen as 
unlikely to remain robust.  In addition, inventory ac-
cumulation, which had been a significant contributor to 
recent gains in production, appeared likely to provide 
less impetus to growth in coming quarters.  Participants 
also noted that several uncertainties, including those 
related to legislative changes and to developments in 
global financial markets, were generating a heightened 
level of caution that could lead some firms to delay 
hiring and planned investment outlays. 

Participants commented that household spending con-
tinued to advance, with notable increases in auto sales 
and expenditures on other durable goods.  Going for-
ward, consumption spending was expected to continue 
to post moderate gains, with the effects of income 
growth and improved confidence as the economy re-
covers more than offsetting the effects of lower stock 
prices and housing wealth.  However, continued labor 
market weakness could weigh on consumer sentiment, 
and households were still repairing their balance sheets; 
both factors could restrain consumer spending going 
forward.  Although readings from the housing sector 
had been strong through mid-spring, participants noted 
that the strength likely reflected the effects of the tem-
porary tax credits for homebuyers.  Indeed, data for the 
most recent month suggested that, with the expiration 
of those provisions, home sales and starts had stepped 
down noticeably and could remain weak in the near 
term; with lower demand and a continuing supply of 
foreclosed houses coming to market, participants 
judged that house prices were likely to remain flat or 
decline somewhat further in the near term. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Meeting participants interpreted the data on the labor 
market as consistent with their outlook for gradual re-
covery.  Employers were adding hours to the workweek 
and hiring temporary workers, suggesting a pickup in 
labor demand; however, the most recent data on em-
ployment had been disappointing, and new claims for 
unemployment insurance remained elevated.  Report-
edly, employers were still cautious about adding to pay-
rolls, given uncertainties about the outlook for the 
economy and government policies.  Participants ex-
pected the pace of hiring to remain low for some time.  
Indeed, the unemployment rate was generally expected 
to remain noticeably above its long-run sustainable lev-
el for several years, and participants expressed concern 
about the extended duration of unemployment spells 
for a large number of workers.  Participants also noted 
a risk that continued rapid growth in productivity, 
though clearly beneficial in the longer term, could in 
the near term act to moderate growth in the demand 
for labor and thus slow the pace at which the unem-
ployment rate normalizes. 

A broad set of indicators suggested that underlying in-
flation remained subdued and was, on net, trending 
lower.  The latest readings on core inflation—which 
excludes the relatively volatile prices of food and ener-
gy—had slowed, and other measures of the underlying 
trajectory of inflation, such as median and trimmed-
mean measures, also had moved down this year.  Crude 
oil prices declined somewhat over the intermeeting pe-
riod, a factor that was likely to damp headline inflation 
at the consumer level in coming months.  Other com-
modity prices were moderating, and nominal wages 
appeared to be rising only slowly.  Some participants 
indicated that they viewed the substantial slack in labor 
and resource markets as likely to reduce inflation.  The 
financial strains in Europe had led to an increase in the 
foreign exchange value of the dollar, and the resulting 
downward pressure on import prices also was expected 
to weigh on consumer prices for a time.  However, 
inflation expectations were seen by most participants as 
well anchored, which would tend to curb any tendency 
for actual inflation to decline.  On balance, meeting 
participants revised down modestly their outlook for 
inflation over the next couple of years; they generally 
expected inflation to be quite low in the near term and 
to trend slightly higher over time. 

Some participants judged the risks to the outlook for 
inflation as tilted to the downside, particularly in the 
near term, in light of the large amount of resource slack 
already prevailing in the economy, the significant 
downside risks to the outlook for real activity, and the 

possibility that inflation expectations could begin to 
decline in response to low actual inflation.  A few par-
ticipants cited some risk of deflation.  Other partici-
pants, however, thought that inflation was unlikely to 
fall appreciably further given the stability of inflation 
expectations in recent years and very accommodative 
monetary policy.  Over the medium term, participants 
saw both upside and downside risks to inflation.  Sev-
eral participants noted that a continuation of lower-
than-expected inflation and high unemployment could 
eventually lead to a downward movement in inflation 
expectations that would reinforce disinflationary pres-
sures.  By contrast, a few participants noted the possi-
bility that a potentially unsustainable fiscal position and 
the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could 
boost inflation expectations and actual inflation over 
time. 

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to 
maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the fed-
eral funds rate.  The economic outlook had softened 
somewhat and a number of members saw the risks to 
the outlook as having shifted to the downside.  None-
theless, all saw the economic expansion as likely to be 
strong enough to continue raising resource utilization, 
albeit more slowly than they had previously anticipated.  
In addition, they saw inflation as likely to stabilize near 
recent low readings in coming quarters and then gradu-
ally rise toward more desirable levels.  In sum, the 
changes to the outlook were viewed as relatively mod-
est and as not warranting policy accommodation 
beyond that already in place.  However, members 
noted that in addition to continuing to develop and test 
instruments to exit from the period of unusually ac-
commodative monetary policy, the Committee would 
need to consider whether further policy stimulus might 
become appropriate if the outlook were to worsen ap-
preciably.  Given the slightly softer cast of recent data 
and the shift to less accommodative financial condi-
tions, members agreed that some changes to the state-
ment’s characterization of the economic and financial 
situation were necessary.  Nearly all members judged 
that it was appropriate to reiterate the expectation that 
economic conditions—including low levels of resource 
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation 
expectations—were likely to warrant exceptionally low 
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  
One member, however, believed that continuing to 
communicate an expectation in the Committee’s state-
ment that the federal funds rate would remain at an 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



exceptionally low level for an extended period would 
create conditions that could lead to macroeconomic 
and financial imbalances. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance 
with the following domestic policy directive: 

“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks 
monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable 
growth in output.  To further its long-run 
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions 
in reserve markets consistent with federal 
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  
The Committee directs the Desk to engage 
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions 
as necessary to facilitate settlement of the 
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.  
The System Open Market Account Manager 
and the Secretary will keep the Committee 
informed of ongoing developments regard-
ing the System’s balance sheet that could af-
fect the attainment over time of the Commit-
tee’s objectives of maximum employment 
and price stability.” 

The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal 
Open Market Committee met in April sug-
gests that the economic recovery is proceed-
ing and that the labor market is improving 
gradually.  Household spending is increasing 
but remains constrained by high unemploy-
ment, modest income growth, lower housing 
wealth, and tight credit.  Business spending 
on equipment and software has risen signifi-
cantly; however, investment in nonresidential 
structures continues to be weak and employ-
ers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.  
Housing starts remain at a depressed level.  
Financial conditions have become less sup-
portive of economic growth on balance, 
largely reflecting developments abroad.  
Bank lending has continued to contract in 
recent months.  Nonetheless, the Committee 
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels 
of resource utilization in a context of price 
stability, although the pace of economic re-
covery is likely to be moderate for a time. 

Prices of energy and other commodities have 
declined somewhat in recent months, and 
underlying inflation has trended lower.  With 
substantial resource slack continuing to re-
strain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to 
be subdued for some time. 

The Committee will maintain the target 
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ 
percent and continues to anticipate that eco-
nomic conditions, including low rates of re-
source utilization, subdued inflation trends, 
and stable inflation expectations, are likely to 
warrant exceptionally low levels of the feder-
al funds rate for an extended period. 

The Committee will continue to monitor the 
economic outlook and financial develop-
ments and will employ its policy tools as ne-
cessary to promote economic recovery and 
price stability.” 

Voting for this action:  Ben Bernanke, William C. 
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Donald L. 
Kohn, Sandra Pianalto, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Ta-
rullo, and Kevin Warsh. 

Voting against this action:  Thomas M. Hoenig. 

Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed that, as the 
economy completed its first year of modest recovery, it 
was no longer advisable to indicate that economic and 
financial conditions were likely to warrant “exceptional-
ly low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended 
period.”  Although risks to the forecast remained, Mr. 
Hoenig was concerned that communicating such an 
expectation would limit the Committee’s flexibility to 
begin raising rates modestly in a timely fashion and 
could result in a buildup of future financial imbalances 
and increase the risks to longer-run macroeconomic 
and financial stability. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee selected William B. 
English to serve as Secretary and Economist, and 
James A. Clouse to serve as Associate Economist, ef-
fective July 23, 2010, until the selection of their succes-
sors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the 
Committee in 2011. 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday, August 10, 2010.  The 
meeting adjourned at 12:10 p.m. on June 23, 2010. 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



Conference Call 
On May 9, 2010, the Committee met by conference call 
to discuss developments in global financial markets and 
possible policy responses.  Over the previous several 
months, market concerns about the ability of Greece 
and some other euro-area countries to contain their 
sizable budget deficits and finance their debt had in-
creased.  By early May, financial strains had intensified, 
reflecting investors’ uncertainty about whether fiscally 
stronger euro-area governments would provide finan-
cial support to the weakest members, the extent of the 
drag on euro-area economies that could result from 
efforts at fiscal consolidation, and the degree of expo-
sure of major European banks and financial institutions 
to vulnerable countries.  Conditions in short-term 
funding markets in Europe had also deteriorated, and 
global financial markets more generally had been vola-
tile and less supportive of economic growth.    

The Chairman indicated that European authorities were 
considering a number of measures to promote fiscal 
sustainability and to provide increased liquidity and 
support to money markets and markets for European 
sovereign debt.  In connection with the possible im-
plementation of these measures, some major central 
banks had requested that dollar liquidity swap lines 
with the Federal Reserve be reestablished.  These swap 
lines would enhance the ability of these central banks 
to provide support for dollar funding markets in their 
jurisdictions.  The terms and conditions of the swap 
lines would generally be similar to those in place prior 
to their expiration earlier in the year. 

The Committee discussed considerations surrounding 
the possible reestablishment of dollar liquidity swap 
lines.  Participants agreed that such arrangements could 
be helpful in limiting the strains in dollar funding mar-
kets and the adverse implications of recent develop-
ments for the U.S. economy.  Participants observed 
that, in current circumstances, the dollar swap lines 
should be made available to a smaller number of major 
foreign central banks than previously.  In order to 
promote the transparency of these arrangements, par-
ticipants agreed that it would be appropriate for the 
Federal Reserve to publish the swap contracts and to 
release on a weekly basis the amounts of draws under 
the swap lines by central bank counterparty.  It was 
recognized that the Committee would need to consider 
the implications of swap lines for bank reserves and 
overall management of the Federal Reserve’s balance 
sheet.  Participants noted the importance of appropri-
ate consultation with U.S. government officials and 

emphasized that a reestablishment of the lines should 
be contingent on strong and effective actions by au-
thorities in Europe to address fiscal sustainability and 
support financial markets. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted unanimously to approve the following resolution: 

“The Committee authorizes the Chairman to 
agree to establish swap lines with the Euro-
pean Central Bank, the Bank of England, the 
Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and 
the Bank of Canada, as discussed by the 
Committee today.” 

Secretary’s note:  Later on May 9, 2010, the 
Federal Reserve, in coordination with the 
Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the 
European Central Bank (ECB), and the 
Swiss National Bank, announced that U.S. 
dollar liquidity swap facilities had been rees-
tablished with those central banks.  The ar-
rangements with the Bank of England, the 
ECB, and the Swiss National Bank provide 
these central banks with the capacity to con-
duct tenders of U.S. dollars in their local 
markets at fixed rates for full allotment, simi-
lar to arrangements that had been in place 
previously.  The arrangement with the Bank 
of Canada would support drawings of up to 
$30 billion, as was the case previously.  On 
May 10, the Federal Reserve and the Bank of 
Japan (BOJ) announced that a temporary 
U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangement had 
been established that would provide the BOJ 
with the capacity to conduct tenders of U.S. 
dollars at fixed rates for full allotment. 

Notation Vote 

By notation vote completed on May 17, 2010, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
FOMC meeting held on April 27–28, 2010. 

 

 

 

 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary 

Minutes of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11



Summary of Economic Projections
 

In conjunction with the June 22–23, 2010, FOMC 
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of 
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub-
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, 
and inflation for the years 2010 to 2012 and over the 
longer run.  The projections were based on information 
available through the end of the meeting and on each 
participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect 
economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy.  “Appropriate monetary 
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the 
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for 
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or 
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.  
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s 
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be 
expected to converge over time under appropriate 
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. 

FOMC participants’ forecasts for economic activity and 
inflation suggested that they expected the recovery to 
continue and inflation to remain subdued, but with, on 
balance, slightly weaker real activity and a bit lower in-
flation than in the projections they made in conjunction 
with the April 2010 FOMC meeting.  As depicted in 
figure 1, the economic recovery was anticipated to be 
gradual, with real gross domestic product (GDP) ex-
panding at a pace only moderately above the partici-

pants’ assessment of its longer-run sustainable growth 
rate and the unemployment rate slowly trending lower 
over the next few years.  Most participants also antic-
ipated that inflation would remain relatively low over 
the forecast period.  As indicated in table 1, participants 
generally made modest downward revisions to their 
projections for real GDP growth for the years 2010 to 
2012, as well as modest upward revisions to their pro-
jections for the unemployment rate for the same pe-
riod.  Participants also revised down a little their pro-
jections for inflation over the forecast period.  Several 
participants noted that these revisions were largely the 
result of the incoming economic data and the antic-
ipated effects of developments abroad on U.S. financial 
markets and the economy.  Overall, participants con-
tinued to expect the pace of the economic recovery to 
be held back by a number of factors, including house-
hold and business uncertainty, persistent weakness in 
real estate markets, only gradual improvement in labor 
market conditions, waning fiscal stimulus, and slow 
easing of credit conditions in the banking sector.  Par-
ticipants generally anticipated that, in light of the se-
verity of the economic downturn, it would take some 
time for the economy to converge fully to its longer-
run path as characterized by sustainable rates of output 
growth, unemployment, and inflation consistent with 
participants’ interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s 
dual objectives; most expected the convergence process 
to take no more than five to six years.  About one-half 

Table 1.   Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, June 2010 
Percent    

Variable 
Central tendency1 Range2 

2010 2011 2012 Longer run 2010 2011 2012 Longer run 
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 3.0 to 3.5 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.8 2.9 to 4.5 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

April projection. . . . . . 3.2 to 3.7 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.7 to 4.0 3.0 to 4.6 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0 

Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.2 to 9.5 8.3 to 8.7 7.1 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3 9.0 to 9.9 7.6 to 8.9 6.8 to 7.9 5.0 to 6.3 
April projection. . . . . .  9.1 to 9.5 8.1 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3 8.6 to 9.7 7.2 to 8.7 6.4 to 7.7 5.0 to 6.3 

PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . .  1.0 to 1.1 1.1 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 0.9 to 1.8 0.8 to 2.4 0.5 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0 
April projection. . . . . . 1.2 to 1.5 1.1 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 0.9 to 2.4 0.7 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0 

Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 0.8 to 1.0 0.9 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 2.4 0.4 to 2.2 
April projection. . . . . . 0.9 to 1.2 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.6 to 2.4 0.6 to 2.2 

   NOTE:  Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of 
the year indicated.  PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy.  Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in 
the fourth quarter of the year indicated.  Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.  Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the 
absence of further shocks to the economy.  The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 
27–28, 2010. 

   1.  The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
   2.  The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 
   3.  Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected. 

                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1



2

1

+
_0

1

2

3

4

5

Percent

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

Change in real GDP

Range of projections

Actual

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

Central tendency of projections

5

6

7

8

9

10

Percent

Unemployment rate

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

1

2

3

Percent

PCE inflation

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run

1

2

3

Percent

Core PCE inflation

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



of the participants now judged the risks to the growth 
outlook to be tilted to the downside, while most con-
tinued to see balanced risks surrounding their inflation 
projections.  Participants generally continued to judge 
the uncertainty surrounding their projections for both 
economic activity and inflation to be unusually high 
relative to historical norms. 

The Outlook 
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2010 
had a central tendency of 3.0 to 3.5 percent, slightly 
lower than in April.  Participants noted that the eco-
nomic recovery was proceeding.  Consumer spending 
was increasing, supported by rising disposable income 
as labor markets gradually improved.  Business outlays 
on equipment and software were also rising, driven by 
replacement spending, the low cost of capital, and in-
creased production.  Participants pointed to a number 
of factors that would provide ongoing support to eco-
nomic activity, including accommodative monetary 
policy and still generally supportive conditions in finan-
cial markets.  Fiscal policy was also seen as currently 
contributing to economic growth, although participants 
expected that the effects of fiscal stimulus would di-
minish going forward and also anticipated that budget-
ary pressures would continue to weigh on spending at 
the state and local levels.  Participants noted that finan-
cial conditions had tightened somewhat because of de-
velopments abroad.  The effects of a stronger dollar, a 
lower stock market, and wider corporate credit spreads 
were expected to be offset only partially by lower oil 
and commodity prices and a decline in Treasury yields.  
Many participants anticipated that the economic expan-
sion would be held back by firms’ caution in hiring and 
spending in light of the considerable uncertainty re-
garding the economic outlook, by households’ focus on 
repairing balance sheets weakened by equity and house 
price declines, and by tight credit conditions for small 
businesses and households. 

Looking further ahead, the central tendencies of partic-
ipants’ projections for real GDP growth were 3.5 to 4.2 
percent in 2011 and 3.5 to 4.5 percent in 2012.  Partici-
pants generally expected a rebound in spending on 
housing, consumer durables, and business capital 
equipment as household income and balance sheets 
strengthen, credit becomes more widely available, and 
the recovery is seen by households and firms as more 
firmly established.  Nevertheless, participants cited sev-
eral factors that could restrain the pace of expansion 
over the next two years, including a rising household 
saving rate as households seek to make further progress 
in repairing balance sheets, persistent uncertainty on 

the part of households and businesses about the 
strength of the recovery, spillovers from fiscal strains 
abroad to U.S. financial markets and the U.S. economy, 
and continued weakness in residential construction.  
Moreover, despite improvements in the condition of 
banking institutions, strains in the commercial real es-
tate sector were seen as posing risks to the balance 
sheets of such institutions for some time.  Terms and 
standards on bank loans continued to be restrictive, 
and participants anticipated only a gradual loosening of 
credit conditions for many households and smaller 
firms.  In the absence of further shocks, participants 
generally expected that real GDP growth would even-
tually settle down at an annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 per-
cent, a pace that appeared to be sustainable in view of 
expected long-run trends in the labor force and labor 
productivity. 

Participants anticipated that labor market conditions 
would improve slowly over the next several years.  The 
central tendency of their projections for the average 
unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 was 
9.2 to 9.5 percent.  Consistent with their expectations 
of a gradual economic recovery, participants generally 
anticipated that the unemployment rate would decline 
to 7.1 to 7.5 percent by the end of 2012, remaining well 
above their assessments of its longer-run sustainable 
rate.  Although a few participants were concerned 
about a possible decrease in the sustainable level of 
employment resulting from ongoing structural adjust-
ments in product and labor markets, participants’ long-
er-term unemployment projections had a central ten-
dency of 5.0 to 5.3 percent, the same as in April. 

Participants noted that prices of energy and other 
commodities declined somewhat in recent months, and 
underlying inflation trended lower.  They generally ex-
pected inflation to remain subdued over the next sever-
al years.  Indeed, most of the participants marked down 
a bit their projections for inflation over the forecast 
period:  The central tendency of their projections for 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation 
was 1.0 to 1.1 percent for 2010, 1.1 to 1.6 percent for 
2011, and 1.0 to 1.7 percent for 2012, generally about 
¼ percentage point lower than in April.  The central 
tendencies of participants’ projections for core PCE 
inflation followed a broadly similar path, although 
headline PCE inflation was expected to run slightly 
above core PCE inflation over the forecast period, re-
flecting somewhat more rapid increases in food and 
energy prices.  Most participants anticipated that, with 
appropriate monetary policy, inflation would rise grad-
ually toward the inflation rate that they individually 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



consider most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s 
dual mandate for maximum employment and stable 
prices.  The central tendency of participants’ projec-
tions of the longer-run, mandate-consistent inflation 
rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent, unchanged from April.  A 
majority of participants anticipated that inflation in 
2011 and 2012 would continue to be below their as-
sessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate. 

Uncertainty and Risks 
Most participants judged that their projections of fu-
ture economic activity and unemployment continued to 
be subject to greater-than-average uncertainty, while a 
few viewed the uncertainty surrounding their outlook 
for growth and unemployment as in line with typical 
levels.1  About one-half of the participants saw the risks 
to their growth outlook as tilted to the downside; in 
contrast, in April a large majority of participants saw 
the risks to growth as balanced.  In the current survey, 
a substantial number of participants also viewed the 
risks to unemployment as tilted to the upside.  The re-
maining participants saw the risks to the projections for 
economic growth and unemployment as roughly bal-
anced.  Participants pointed to developments abroad 
and their possible ramifications for U.S. financial mar-
kets and the U.S. economy as suggesting somewhat 
greater uncertainty about the path of economic growth.  
In addition, some participants cited the unusual rise in 
the unemployment rate last year, which was associated 
with rapid growth in labor productivity, as contributing 
to increased uncertainty regarding the outlook for em-
ployment and economic activity.  Participants who 
judged that the risks to their growth outlook were tilted 
to the downside pointed to recent developments 
abroad and the risk of further contagion, together with 
the potential for an increase in risk aversion among 
investors, as important factors contributing to their 
assessment.  Participants noted that problems in the 
commercial real estate market and the effects of finan-
cial regulatory reform could lead to greater constraints 
on credit availability, thereby restraining growth of out-
put and employment.  However, some participants 
viewed the downside risks to the growth outlook as 
roughly balanced by upside risks; they saw the possibili-
ty that monetary policy might remain accommodative 

                                                 
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the 
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1990 to 2009.  At 
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” 
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in 
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess 
the uncertainty and risk attending participants’ projections. 

for too long as one reason that growth could prove 
stronger than expected. 

As in April, most participants continued to see the un-
certainty surrounding their inflation projections as 
above average.  Still, a few judged that uncertainty in 
the outlook for inflation was about in line with or lower 
than typical levels.  Most participants judged the risks 
to the inflation outlook as roughly balanced.  As factors 
accounting for elevated uncertainty regarding the out-
look for inflation, participants pointed to the extraordi-
nary degree of monetary policy accommodation, the 
uncertain timing of the exit from accommodation, and 
the unusually large gap between expected inflation, as 
measured by surveys of households and businesses, and 
current inflation.  Participants noted that, despite the 
downward trend in underlying inflation in recent 
months, inflation expectations continued to be well 
anchored.  Nonetheless, the possibility that inflation 
expectations might start to decline in response to per-
sistently low levels of actual inflation and the potential 
effects of continued weakness of the economy on price 
trends were seen by a few participants as posing some 
downside risks to the inflation outlook. 

Diversity of Views 
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
versity of participants’ views regarding the likely out-
comes for real GDP growth and the unemployment 
rate.  The distribution of participants’ projections for 
real GDP growth this year was slightly narrower than 
the distribution in April, but the distributions for real 
GDP growth in 2011 and 2012 were about unchanged.  
As in earlier projections, the dispersion in forecasts for 

Table 2.   Average historical projection error ranges  
Percentage points 

Variable 2010 2011 2012 
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . .  ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.8 

Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . .  ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.5 

Total consumer prices2 . . . . .  ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.1 
NOTE:  Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root 

mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that were 
released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.  
As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump-
tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for 
real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied 
by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further infor-
mation is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the 
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting 
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).  

1.  For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. 
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure 

that has been most widely used in government and private economic 
forecasts.  Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous 
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



output growth appeared to reflect the diversity of their 
assessments regarding the current degree of underlying 
momentum in economic activity, the evolution of con-
sumer and business sentiment, the degree of support to 
economic growth provided by financial markets, the 
effects of monetary policy accommodation, and other 
factors.  Regarding participants’ projections for the un-
employment rate, the distributions shifted somewhat 
higher for the years 2010 to 2012.  The distributions of 
their estimates of the longer-run sustainable rates of 
output growth and unemployment were little changed 
from April. 

Corresponding information about the diversity of par-
ticipants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is pro-
vided in figures 2.C and 2.D.  The distributions of pro-
jections for overall and core PCE inflation for 2010 

shifted lower relative to the distributions in April, and 
the distributions were noticeably more tightly concen-
trated.  The distributions of overall and core inflation 
for 2011 and 2012, however, were generally little 
changed and remained fairly wide.  The dispersion in 
participants’ projections over the next few years was 
mainly due to differences in their judgments regarding 
the determinants of inflation, including their estimates 
of prevailing resource slack and their assessments of 
the extent to which such slack affects actual and ex-
pected inflation.  In contrast, the relatively tight distri-
bution of participants’ projections for longer-run infla-
tion illustrates their substantial agreement about the 
measured rate of inflation that is most consistent with 
the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
ployment and stable prices. 
  

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

2010

April projections

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

2.4-
2.5 

2.6-
2.7 

2.8-
2.9 

3.0-
3.1 

3.2-
3.3 

3.4-
3.5 

3.6-
3.7 

3.8-
3.9 

4.0-
4.1 

4.2-
4.3 

4.4-
4.5 

4.6-
4.7 

4.8-
4.9 

5.0-
5.1 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

2010

April projections

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

5.0-
5.1 

5.2-
5.3 

5.4-
5.5 

5.6-
5.7 

5.8-
5.9 

6.0-
6.1 

6.2-
6.3 

6.4-
6.5 

6.6-
6.7 

6.8-
6.9 

7.0-
7.1 

7.2-
7.3 

7.4-
7.5 

7.6-
7.7 

7.8-
7.9 

8.0-
8.1 

8.2-
8.3 

8.4-
8.5 

8.6-
8.7 

8.8-
8.9 

9.0-
9.1 

9.2-
9.3 

9.4-
9.5 

9.6-
9.7 

9.8-
9.9 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–12 and over the longer run  

2010

April projections

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Longer run

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee



2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2010–12  

2010

April projections

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

June projections

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2011

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of participants

2012

0.3-
0.4 

0.5-
0.6 

0.7-
0.8 

0.9-
1.0 

1.1-
1.2 

1.3-
1.4 

1.5-
1.6 

1.7-
1.8 

1.9-
2.0 

2.1-
2.2 

2.3-
2.4 

Percent range

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 

Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 22-23, 2010                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9



 

    

 

 
Forecast Uncertainty 

  

 

The economic projections provided by 
the members of the Board of Governors and 
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
inform discussions of monetary policy among 
policymakers and can aid public understand-
ing of the basis for policy actions.  Consider-
able uncertainty attends these projections, 
however.  The economic and statistical models 
and relationships used to help produce eco-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de-
scriptions of the real world.  And the future 
path of the economy can be affected by myr-
iad unforeseen developments and events.  
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, 
participants consider not only what appears to 
be the most likely economic outcome as em-
bodied in their projections, but also the range 
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of 
their occurring, and the potential costs to the 
economy should they occur. 

Table 2 summarizes the average historical 
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including 
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports 
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board 
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  The projection 
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the 
considerable uncertainty associated with eco-
nomic forecasts.  For example, suppose a par-
ticipant projects that real gross domestic 
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will 
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively,     
3 percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty   
attending those  projections  is  similar to  that 
 

experienced in the past and the risks around 
the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP 
would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0 per-
cent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in 
the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the 
third year.  The corresponding 70 percent con-
fidence intervals for overall inflation would be 
1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 
percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 per-
cent in the third year. 

Because current conditions may differ 
from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
tory, participants provide judgments as to 
whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
jections of each variable is greater than, smaller 
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of 
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in 
table 2.  Participants also provide judgments as 
to whether the risks to their projections are 
weighted to the upside, are weighted to the 
downside, or are broadly balanced.  That is, 
participants judge whether each variable is 
more likely to be above or below their projec-
tions of the most likely outcome.  These judg-
ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
tending each participant’s projections are dis-
tinct from the diversity of participants’ views 
about the most likely outcomes.  Forecast un-
certainty is concerned with the risks associated 
with a particular projection rather than with 
divergences across a number of different pro-
jections. 

 
    

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                             _Federal Open Market Committee




