



























































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 31-November 1, 2017


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
October 31–November 1, 2017

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 31, 2017, at 
1:30 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, November 1, 
2017, at 9:00 a.m.1 

PRESENT: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 
Charles L. Evans  
Patrick Harker 
Robert S. Kaplan 
Neel Kashkari 
Jerome H. Powell 
Randal K. Quarles 

 
Raphael W. Bostic, Loretta J. Mester, Mark L. Mullinix, 

and John C. Williams, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

 
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

 
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 
 
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Daniel G. 

Sullivan, William Wascher, Beth Anne Wilson, and 
Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists 

 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 

                                                 
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 
2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations. 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 
 
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve 

Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of 
Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division 
of Supervision and Regulation, Board of 
Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of 
Financial Stability, Board of Governors 

 
Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; 
Rochelle M. Edge and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy 
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

 
Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, 

Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
John M. Roberts, Special Adviser to the Board, Office 

of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division 

of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Antulio N. Bomfim and Ellen E. Meade, Senior 

Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

 
Shaghil Ahmed and Joseph W. Gruber, Associate 

Directors, Division of International Finance, Board 
of Governors; David López-Salido, Associate 
Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

 
Stephanie R. Aaronson, Burcu Duygan-Bump, and 

Glenn Follette, Assistant Directors, Division of 

_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 1



 

 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; 
Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division 
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office 

of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Youngsuk Yook, Principal Economist, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Senior Economist, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
James Narron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Philadelphia 
 
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Mary Daly, Jeff Fuhrer, 

Ellis W. Tallman, and Christopher J. Waller, 
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Atlanta, Richmond, San Francisco, Boston, 
Cleveland, and St. Louis, respectively 

 
Marc Giannoni and Paolo A. Pesenti, Senior Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
New York, respectively 

 
Sarah K. Bell, Satyajit Chatterjee, and Jonathan L. 

Willis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York, Philadelphia, and Kansas City, 
respectively 

 
Selection of Committee Officer 
By unanimous vote, the Committee selected James A. 
Clouse to serve as secretary, effective on November 26, 
2017.  This selection is effective until the selection of a 
successor at the Committee’s first regularly scheduled 
meeting in 2018. 

Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
ket Operations  
The manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets since the September FOMC meet-

                                                 
3 Attended Tuesday session only. 

ing.  Broad equity price indexes extended earlier in-
creases, yields on longer-term Treasury securities rose, 
yield spreads on corporate bonds declined, and the for-
eign exchange value of the dollar increased.  Money mar-
ket interest rates suggested that market participants did 
not anticipate a change in the Committee’s target range 
for the federal funds rate at this meeting but saw a high 
probability of a 25 basis point increase at the Commit-
tee’s December meeting.   

The deputy manager followed with a briefing on money 
market developments and open market operations.  
Over the intermeeting period, federal funds continued 
to trade near the center of the FOMC’s target range ex-
cept on quarter-end.  Implementation of the Commit-
tee’s balance sheet normalization program, which began 
in October, had proceeded smoothly so far.  Take-up at 
the System’s overnight reverse repurchase agreement fa-
cility averaged slightly more than in the previous period.  
A rebalancing of the SOMA’s holdings of euro reserves, 
which reflected instructions provided by the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee in September, was completed 
in October.   

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open 
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet-
ing period.  There were no intervention operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the 
intermeeting period. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed for the October 31– 
November 1 meeting indicated that labor market condi-
tions generally continued to strengthen and that real 
gross domestic product (GDP) expanded at a solid pace 
in the third quarter despite hurricane-related disruptions.  
Although the effects of the recent hurricanes led to a re-
ported decline in payroll employment in September, the 
unemployment rate decreased further.  Retail gasoline 
prices jumped in the aftermath of the hurricanes, but to-
tal consumer price inflation, as measured by the 
12-month percentage change in the price index for per-
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 
2 percent in September and was lower than early in the 
year.  Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation ex-
pectations were little changed on balance. 

Total nonfarm payroll employment was reported to have 
decreased in September, consistent with a substantial in-
crease in the number of people who reported themselves 
as being absent from work due to bad weather and with 
payroll declines in the hurricane-affected states of Texas 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



 

 

and Florida.  However, the national unemployment rate 
moved down to 4.2 percent in September, and the labor 
force participation rate rose.  The unemployment rates 
for African Americans, for Hispanics, and for whites 
were lower in September than around the start of the 
year, while the rate for Asians was roughly flat this year; 
the unemployment rates for each of these groups were 
close to the levels seen just before the most recent reces-
sion.  The overall share of workers employed part time 
for economic reasons edged down in September, and the 
rates of private-sector job openings and quits were un-
changed in August.  The four-week moving average of 
initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits 
moved back down to a low level by late October after 
rising in September following the hurricanes.  Recent 
readings showed a modest pickup in growth of labor 
compensation.  The employment cost index for private 
workers increased 2½ percent over the 12 months end-
ing in September, a little faster than in the 12-month pe-
riod ending a year earlier.  Increases in average hourly 
earnings for all employees stepped up to a rate of almost 
3 percent over the 12 months ending in September; 
however, a portion of that acceleration possibly reflected 
a hurricane-related reduction in the number of lower-
wage workers reported as having been paid during the 
reference week in September. 

Total industrial production (IP) increased somewhat in 
September, reflecting output gains in manufacturing, in 
mining, and in utilities; the effects of the hurricanes ap-
peared to hold IP down less in September than in Au-
gust.  Automakers’ schedules indicated that light motor 
vehicle assemblies would increase in the fourth quarter.  
Broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as 
the new orders indexes from national and regional man-
ufacturing surveys, pointed to an expansion in factory 
output in the near term. 

Real PCE growth slowed in the third quarter, likely re-
flecting in part temporary effects of the hurricanes.  Re-
cent readings on key factors that influence consumer 
spending—including gains in real disposable personal 
income and households’ net worth—remained support-
ive of solid increases in real PCE in the near term.  Con-
sumer sentiment in October, as measured by the Univer-
sity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, was at its high-
est level since before the most recent recession.  

Real residential investment declined further in the third 
quarter.  Starts of both new single-family homes and 
multifamily units moved down in September.  However, 
building permit issuance for new single-family homes—
which tends to be a good indicator of the underlying 

trend in construction of such homes—edged up in Sep-
tember.  Sales of new homes increased notably over the 
two months ending in September, although sales of ex-
isting homes decreased somewhat over that period. 

Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
tellectual property continued to rise at a brisk pace in the 
third quarter.  Nominal orders and shipments of nonde-
fense capital goods excluding aircraft rose further over 
the two months ending in September, and readings on 
business sentiment remained upbeat.  In contrast, real 
investment spending for nonresidential structures de-
clined in the third quarter, as a further increase in the 
drilling and mining sector was more than offset by a de-
cline in other sectors, particularly manufacturing.    

Total real government purchases were about flat in the 
third quarter.  Real federal purchases rose somewhat, 
mostly reflecting increased defense expenditures.  In 
contrast, real purchases by state and local governments 
declined a little, as construction spending by these gov-
ernments fell.  

The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in 
August, as exports rose and imports fell.  Export growth 
was driven by higher exports of capital goods and con-
sumer goods, while the import decline was led by lower 
imports of industrial supplies and capital goods.  Ad-
vance estimates for September suggested that goods im-
ports grew more than exports, pointing to a widening of 
the monthly trade deficit.  Despite this widening, net ex-
ports were reported to have contributed positively to 
real GDP growth for the third quarter as a whole. 

Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE 
price index, increased a bit more than 1½ percent over 
the 12 months ending in September.  Core PCE price 
inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and 
energy prices, was about 1¼ percent over that same pe-
riod.  Retail gasoline prices moved up sharply following 
the hurricanes and put upward pressure on total PCE 
prices in August and September; gasoline prices subse-
quently moved down somewhat through late October.  
The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2¼ percent over 
the 12 months ending in September, while core CPI in-
flation was 1¾ percent.  Recent readings on survey-
based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—
including those from the Michigan survey, the Blue Chip 
Economic Indicators, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary 
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little 
changed on balance. 

Foreign economic activity continued to expand at a solid 
pace.  Incoming data suggested that in most advanced 

Minutes of the Meeting of October 31–November 1, 2017_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



 

 

foreign economies (AFEs), economic growth slowed in 
the third quarter but remained firm.  Economic activity 
in the emerging market economies (EMEs) also contin-
ued to grow briskly for the most part, especially in Asia.  
The Mexican economy, however, contracted in the third 
quarter, in part because hurricanes and earthquakes dis-
rupted economic activity.  Headline inflation in the 
AFEs generally remained subdued, but U.K. inflation 
stayed above the Bank of England’s 2 percent target.  
Low inflation persisted in most EMEs as well, although 
rising food prices continued to put upward pressure on 
inflation in Mexico.  

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
Movements in domestic financial asset prices over the 
intermeeting period reflected FOMC communications 
that were read as slightly less accommodative than ex-
pected, economic data releases that were generally better 
than anticipated, and market perceptions that U.S. tax 
reform was becoming more likely.  On net, Treasury 
yields increased modestly, U.S. equity prices moved up, 
and the dollar appreciated.  There was no discernible re-
action in financial markets to the widely anticipated an-
nouncement of the FOMC’s change to its balance sheet 
policy.  Meanwhile, domestic financing conditions gen-
erally remained accommodative.  Corporate bond 
spreads narrowed modestly, and corporations continued 
to tap credit markets at a solid pace.  Credit also re-
mained readily available to households, except for 
higher-risk borrowers in some markets.   

FOMC communications over the intermeeting period 
were reportedly viewed by investors as slightly less ac-
commodative than expected.  The Committee’s deci-
sions at the September FOMC meeting to leave the tar-
get range for the federal funds rate unchanged and to 
announce the start of its balance sheet normalization 
program in October had been widely anticipated by the 
public.  However, market participants noted that the me-
dians of projections for the federal funds rate in the Sep-
tember Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) were 
unchanged, whereas some investors had expected slight 
downward revisions.  In addition, market commentaries 
observed that, despite low inflation readings in recent 
months, the characterization of the inflation outlook in 
the September policy statement was little changed and 
the SEP showed only modest downward revisions to 
FOMC participants’ near-term inflation projections.  
Communications by FOMC participants were also seen 
as reinforcing expectations for continued gradual re-
moval of policy accommodation.  The probability of an 
increase in the target range for the federal funds rate oc-
curring at the October–November meeting, as implied 

by quotes on federal funds futures contracts, remained 
essentially zero; the probability of an increase at the De-
cember meeting rose to about 85 percent by the end of 
the intermeeting period.  Levels of the federal funds rate 
at the end of 2018 and 2019 implied by overnight index 
swap rates moved up moderately.  

The nominal Treasury yield curve shifted up and flat-
tened somewhat over the intermeeting period.  Yields 
increased following the September FOMC meeting and 
in response to news regarding proposals for tax reform.  
They also rose, on net, following domestic economic 
data releases, which generally came in above investors’ 
expectations.  Option-adjusted spreads on current- 
coupon mortgage-backed securities (MBS) over Treas-
ury yields were little changed.  The FOMC’s September 
announcement that it would begin implementing in Oc-
tober its plan for normalizing the Federal Reserve’s bal-
ance sheet was widely anticipated and appeared to have 
had little effect on either Treasury yields or MBS 
spreads.  Near-term measures of option-implied volatil-
ity on 10-year swap rates remained near historically low 
levels.  Measures of inflation compensation based on 
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities declined some-
what following the slightly lower-than-expected Septem-
ber CPI data but were little changed on net.   

Broad equity price indexes rose notably, reportedly re-
flecting in part investors’ perceptions that tax reform 
was becoming more likely.  One-month-ahead option-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—
remained near historically low levels.  Spreads of yields 
on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate 
bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities 
narrowed modestly. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta-
ble over the intermeeting period.  The effective federal 
funds rate held steady, and rates and volumes in other 
unsecured and secured overnight and term funding mar-
kets continued to be stable aside from quarter-end.  At 
the end of September, changes in money market rates 
and volumes were short lived and in line with previous 
quarter-ends. 

Financing conditions for large nonfinancial firms re-
mained accommodative.  In September, the pace of 
gross equity issuance was about in line with that ob-
served in recent months, gross issuance of corporate 
bonds dipped somewhat but stayed high by historical 
standards, and originations of institutional leveraged 
loans that raised new funds were robust.  The credit per-
formance of bonds issued by, and loans extended to, 
nonfinancial corporations also remained strong over the 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



 

 

intermeeting period.  Meanwhile, growth of banks’ com-
mercial and industrial (C&I) loans continued to be slug-
gish, although it picked up a bit in the third quarter.  Re-
sponses to the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion 
Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) suggested 
that lackluster demand among banks’ business custom-
ers was a key factor in this subdued growth.  The survey 
also reported a notable increase in the share of banks 
that narrowed loan spreads for C&I loans over the pre-
vious three months, with many respondents citing more 
aggressive competition from other bank or nonbank 
lenders as an important reason for doing so.  

Financing flows for commercial real estate (CRE) were 
more robust in the commercial mortgage-backed securi-
ties (CMBS) market than from banks in the third quarter.  
Issuance of CMBS continued to be robust and in line 
with last year’s pace.  Spreads on lower-rated CMBS over 
Treasury securities widened slightly over the intermeet-
ing period but remained near the lower end of the range 
seen since the financial crisis.  Delinquency rates on 
loans in CMBS pools continued to decline in September.  
Meanwhile, CRE loan growth at banks slowed, especially 
for nonfarm nonresidential loans.  In the October 
SLOOS, banks reported that demand for CRE loans 
weakened, on net, over the third quarter and that lending 
standards continued to be somewhat tight.  

Credit conditions in the residential mortgage market 
stayed accommodative in the third quarter for most bor-
rowers.  However, credit standards continued to be tight 
for borrowers with low credit scores or hard-to- 
document incomes.  The October SLOOS suggested 
that the recent slowdown in mortgage originations for 
home purchases was partly attributable to weaker de-
mand. 

Consumer credit continued to expand at a moderate 
pace in the third quarter.  However, the October 
SLOOS indicated that banks continued to tighten their 
credit policies for auto and credit card loans.  Credit bu-
reau data on loan originations and credit limits suggested 
that this tightening was most pronounced in the sub-
prime segment of the market.   

The broad index of the foreign exchange value of the 
dollar rose nearly 3 percent over the intermeeting period 
amid the rise in U.S. interest rates, market expectations 
that U.S. tax reform was becoming more likely, and for-
eign central bank actions and communications.  The Ca-
nadian dollar depreciated significantly over the period 
and Canadian yields declined as the Bank of Canada left 
its policy rate unchanged and comments by the bank’s 
governor were interpreted as more accommodative than 

expected.  The euro also depreciated, despite the Euro-
pean Central Bank’s (ECB’s) announcement of a step-
down in asset purchases next year, reflecting slight de-
clines in investors’ expectations for ECB policy rates and 
in German long-term sovereign yields.  EME currencies 
generally depreciated as well, most notably the Turkish 
lira and the Mexican peso, the latter of which was held 
down in part by uncertainty about negotiations on the 
North American Free Trade Agreement.  Most foreign 
equity indexes increased.  In Japan, equity indexes rose 
notably in advance of parliamentary elections that re-
sulted in a strong victory for Prime Minister Abe’s ruling 
coalition, a development seen by market participants as 
signaling a continuation of stimulative economic poli-
cies.   

The staff provided its latest report on vulnerabilities of 
the U.S. financial system.  The staff continued to judge 
that the overall vulnerabilities were moderate:  Asset val-
uation pressures across markets were judged to have in-
creased slightly, on balance, since the previous assess-
ment in July and to have remained elevated; leverage in 
the nonfinancial sector stayed moderate; and, in the fi-
nancial sector, leverage and vulnerabilities from maturity 
and liquidity transformation continued to be low.  In ad-
dition, the staff assessed overall vulnerabilities to foreign 
financial stability as moderate.  The staff highlighted spe-
cific vulnerabilities in some foreign economies, includ-
ing—depending on the country—still-weak banks, 
heavy indebtedness in the corporate or household sector 
or both, rising property prices, overhangs of sovereign 
debt, and significant susceptibility to various political de-
velopments. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for 
this FOMC meeting was broadly similar to the previous 
forecast.  Real GDP was expected to rise at a solid pace 
in the fourth quarter of this year, boosted in part by a 
rebound in spending and production after the negative 
effects of the hurricanes in the third quarter.  Payroll em-
ployment was also expected to rebound during the 
fourth quarter.  Beyond 2017, the forecast for real GDP 
growth was essentially unrevised.  In particular, the staff 
continued to project that real GDP would expand at a 
modestly faster pace than potential output through 2019.  
The unemployment rate was projected to decline gradu-
ally over the next couple of years and to continue run-
ning below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural 
rate over this period.  

The staff’s forecast for total PCE price inflation was lit-
tle changed for 2017, as a somewhat higher forecast for 

Minutes of the Meeting of October 31–November 1, 2017_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 5



 

 

consumer energy prices was mostly offset by a slightly 
lower forecast for core PCE prices.  Although total PCE 
price inflation was forecast to be about the same in 2017 
as it was last year, core PCE price inflation was antici-
pated to be a little lower than in 2016, and consumer 
food and energy price inflation was expected to be a little 
higher.  Total PCE price inflation was projected to pick 
up in 2018, as most of the softness in core PCE price 
inflation this year was expected to be transitory.  How-
ever, the staff’s forecasts for core inflation and, thus, for 
total inflation were revised down slightly for next year, 
reflecting the judgment that a bit of the unexplained 
weakness in core inflation this year may carry over into 
next year.  Beyond 2018, the inflation forecast was un-
changed from the previous projection.  The staff contin-
ued to project that inflation would reach the Commit-
tee’s 2 percent objective in 2019. 

The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections 
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years.  On 
the one hand, many indicators of uncertainty about the 
macroeconomic outlook continued to be subdued; on 
the other hand, considerable uncertainty remained about 
a number of federal government policies.  The staff saw 
the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the 
unemployment rate as balanced.  The risks to the pro-
jection for inflation also were seen as balanced.  Down-
side risks included the possibilities that longer-term in-
flation expectations may have edged lower or that the 
run of soft readings on core inflation this year could 
prove to be more persistent than the staff expected.  
These downside risks were seen as essentially counter-
balanced by the upside risk that inflation could increase 
more than expected in an economy that was projected 
to move further above its longer-run potential. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and the 
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information 
received since the FOMC met in September indicated 
that the labor market had continued to strengthen and 
that economic activity had been rising at a solid rate de-
spite hurricane-related disruptions.  Although the hurri-
canes depressed payroll employment in September, the 
unemployment rate, which was less affected by the 
storms, declined further.  Household spending had been 
expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in business 
fixed investment had picked up in recent quarters.  Gas-
oline prices rose in the aftermath of the hurricanes, 
boosting overall inflation in September; however, infla-
tion for items other than food and energy remained soft.  

On a 12-month basis, both inflation measures had de-
clined this year and were running below 2 percent.   
Market-based measures of inflation compensation re-
mained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in-
flation expectations were little changed, on balance. 

Participants acknowledged that hurricane-related disrup-
tions and rebuilding would continue to affect economic 
activity in the near term, and they noted that, in October, 
wildfires in California had displaced many households.  
Past experience, however, suggested that the economic 
effects of the hurricanes and other natural disasters 
would be mostly temporary and unlikely to materially al-
ter the course of the national economy over the medium 
term.  Participants saw the incoming information on 
spending and the labor market as consistent with con-
tinued above-trend economic growth and a further 
strengthening in labor market conditions, although the 
hurricanes, in particular, made it more difficult than 
usual to interpret some of this information.  They con-
tinued to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the 
stance of monetary policy, economic activity would ex-
pand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions 
would strengthen somewhat further.  Inflation on a 
12-month basis was expected to remain somewhat be-
low 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the 
Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term.  
Near-term risks to the economic outlook appeared to be 
roughly balanced, but participants agreed that it would 
be important to continue to monitor inflation develop-
ments closely. 

Participants expected solid growth in consumer spend-
ing in the near term, supported by ongoing strength in 
the labor market, improved household balance sheets, 
and a high level of consumer sentiment.  Robust gains in 
consumer spending in September were viewed as con-
sistent with that outlook.  Light motor vehicle sales had 
rebounded in September, and District contacts generally 
expected sales to remain strong in the near term, boosted 
in part by demand to replace vehicles destroyed by the 
hurricanes.   

Reports on business spending from District contacts 
were generally upbeat.  Participants anticipated apprecia-
ble increases in business fixed investment.  Improved 
demand from abroad, rising business profits, and the 
substitution of capital for labor in response to tightening 
labor markets were viewed as factors supporting growth 
in investment.  Several participants reported that busi-
ness contacts appeared to be more confident about the 
economic outlook and thus more inclined to undertake 
capital expansion plans.  In that context, it was noted 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



 

 

that the expansion in business fixed investment could be 
given additional impetus if legislation involving tax re-
ductions was enacted; a few participants judged that the 
prospects for significant tax cuts had risen recently.  
Some firms, especially those operating in industries in 
which technological advances were spurring competi-
tion, were reportedly planning to expand capacity 
through mergers and acquisitions rather than through in-
vestment in new plant and equipment. 

Reports from District contacts about both manufactur-
ing and services were generally positive.  District con-
tacts in regions affected by the hurricanes reported that 
the disruptions to production and sales were mostly 
short lived, including in the energy sector where drilling 
and refining outages were temporary.  However, some 
homebuilders were reporting shortages of certain build-
ing materials in the aftermath of the hurricanes.  Farm 
incomes in some regions were said to remain under 
downward pressure because of declining crop and live-
stock prices. 

Participants judged that increases in nonfarm payroll 
employment, apart from the temporary effects of the 
hurricanes, remained well above the pace likely to be sus-
tainable in the longer run and that labor market condi-
tions had strengthened further in recent months.  
Changes in payrolls, as measured by the establishment 
survey, had been temporarily depressed by the storms in 
September but were expected to bounce back in later 
months.  Data from the household survey, which gener-
ally were viewed as not materially affected by the hurri-
canes, indicated that the unemployment rate ticked 
down to 4.2 percent in September, falling further below 
participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level.  
Participants also cited other indicators suggesting that la-
bor market conditions continued to strengthen, includ-
ing increases in the labor force participation rates of 
both prime-age and all individuals.  Reports from some 
Districts pointed to difficulty attracting and retaining la-
bor, but anecdotal information from other Districts sug-
gested that workers with the requisite skills remained 
reasonably available.  Many participants judged that the 
economy was operating at or above full employment and 
anticipated that the labor market would tighten some-
what further in the near term, as GDP was expected to 
grow at a pace exceeding that of potential output.   

Participants discussed wage developments in light of the 
continued strengthening in labor market conditions.  A 
few participants interpreted recent data on aggregate 
wage and labor compensation as indicating some firming 
in wage growth; a few others, however, judged wage 

growth to have been little changed over the past year.  
Overall, wage increases were generally seen as modest.  
A couple of participants expressed the view that, when 
the rate of labor productivity growth was taken into ac-
count, the pace of recent wage gains was consistent with 
an economy operating near full employment.  Reports 
from District contacts indicated that some businesses 
facing tight labor markets found it more effective to ex-
pand their workforces by using a variety of nonpecuniary 
means, including offering greater job flexibility and 
training, rather than by increasing wages.  Other District 
contacts, however, reported some increased wage pres-
sure as a result of tightening labor market conditions.  

Gasoline prices rose in the aftermath of the hurricanes, 
boosting overall inflation in September.  Still, on a 
12-month basis, PCE price inflation in September, at 
1.6 percent, remained below the Committee’s longer-
run objective; core PCE price inflation, which excludes 
consumer food and energy prices, was only 1.3 percent.  
Many participants judged that much of the recent soft-
ness in core inflation reflected temporary or idiosyn-
cratic factors and that inflation would begin to rise once 
the influence of these factors began to wane.  Most par-
ticipants continued to think that the cyclical pressures 
associated with a tightening labor market were likely to 
show through to higher inflation over the medium term. 

With core inflation readings continuing to surprise on 
the downside, however, many participants observed that 
there was some likelihood that inflation might remain 
below 2 percent for longer than they currently expected, 
and they discussed possible reasons for the recent short-
fall.  Several participants pointed to a diminished respon-
siveness of inflation to resource utilization, to the possi-
bility that the degree of labor market tightness was less 
than currently estimated, or to lags in the response of 
inflation to greater resource utilization as plausible ex-
planations for the continued soft readings on inflation.  
A few noted that secular influences, such as the effect of 
technological innovation in disrupting existing business 
models, were likely offsetting cyclical upward pressure 
on inflation and contributing to below-target inflation.   

In discussing the implications of these developments, 
several participants expressed concern that the persis-
tently weak inflation data could lead to a decline in 
longer-term inflation expectations or may have done so 
already; they pointed to low market-based measures of 
inflation compensation, declines in some survey 
measures of inflation expectations, or evidence from sta-
tistical models suggesting that the underlying trend in in-

Minutes of the Meeting of October 31–November 1, 2017_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 7



 

 

flation had fallen in recent years.  In addition, the possi-
bility was raised that monetary policy actions or commu-
nications over the past couple of years, while inflation 
was below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, may 
have contributed to a decline in longer-run inflation ex-
pectations below a level consistent with that objective.  
Some other participants, however, noted that measures 
of inflation expectations had remained stable this year 
despite the low readings on inflation and judged that this 
stability should support the return of inflation to the 
Committee’s objective. 

In their comments regarding financial markets, partici-
pants generally judged that financial conditions re-
mained accommodative despite the recent increases in 
the exchange value of the dollar and Treasury yields.  In 
light of elevated asset valuations and low financial mar-
ket volatility, several participants expressed concerns 
about a potential buildup of financial imbalances.  They 
worried that a sharp reversal in asset prices could have 
damaging effects on the economy.  It was noted, how-
ever, that elevated asset prices could be partly explained 
by a low neutral rate of interest.  It was also observed 
that regulatory changes had contributed to an apprecia-
ble strengthening of capital and liquidity positions in the 
financial sector over recent years, increasing the  
resilience of the financial system to potential reversals in 
valuations. 

A few participants mentioned the limited reaction in fi-
nancial markets to the announcement and initial imple-
mentation of the Committee’s plan for gradually reduc-
ing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings.  It was 
noted that, consistent with that limited response, market 
participants had characterized the Committee’s commu-
nications regarding the balance sheet normalization pro-
gram as clear and effective. 

In their discussion of monetary policy, all participants 
thought that it would be appropriate to maintain the cur-
rent target range for the federal funds rate at this meet-
ing.  Nearly all participants reaffirmed the view that a 
gradual approach to increasing the target range was likely 
to promote the Committee’s objectives of maximum 
employment and price stability.  Participants com-
mented on several factors that informed their assess-
ments of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate.  
Several participants noted that the neutral level of the 
federal funds rate appeared to be quite low by historical 
standards.  Most saw the outlook for economic activity 
and the labor market as little changed since the Septem-
ber meeting, and participants expected increasing tight-

ness in the labor market to put only gradual upward pres-
sure on inflation.  Still, with an accommodative stance of 
policy, most participants continued to anticipate that in-
flation would stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per-
cent objective over the medium term.   

Many participants observed, however, that continued 
low readings on inflation, which had occurred even as 
the labor market tightened, might reflect not only tran-
sitory factors, but also the influence of developments 
that could prove more persistent.  A number of these 
participants were worried that a decline in longer-term 
inflation expectations would make it more challenging 
for the Committee to promote a return of inflation to 
2 percent over the medium term.  These participants’ 
concerns were sharpened by the apparently weak re-
sponsiveness of inflation to resource utilization and the 
low level of the neutral interest rate, and such consider-
ations suggested that the removal of policy accommoda-
tion should be quite gradual.  In contrast, some other 
participants were concerned about upside risks to infla-
tion in an environment in which the economy had 
reached full employment and the labor market was pro-
jected to tighten further, or about still very accommoda-
tive financial conditions.  They cautioned that waiting 
too long to remove accommodation, or removing ac-
commodation too slowly, could result in a substantial 
overshoot of the maximum sustainable level of employ-
ment that would likely be costly to reverse or could lead 
to increased risks to financial stability.  A few of these 
participants emphasized that the lags in the response of 
inflation to tightening resource utilization implied that 
there could be increasing upside risks to inflation as the 
labor market tightened further.  

Participants agreed that they would continue to monitor 
closely and assess incoming data before making any fur-
ther adjustment to the target range for the federal funds 
rate.  Consistent with their expectation that a gradual re-
moval of monetary policy accommodation would be ap-
propriate, many participants thought that another in-
crease in the target range for the federal funds rate was 
likely to be warranted in the near term if incoming infor-
mation left the medium-term outlook broadly un-
changed.  Several participants indicated that their deci-
sion about whether to increase the target range in the 
near term would depend importantly on whether the up-
coming economic data boosted their confidence that in-
flation was headed toward the Committee’s objective.  A 
few other participants thought that additional policy 
firming should be deferred until incoming information 
confirmed that inflation was clearly on a path toward the 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



 

 

Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective.  A few par-
ticipants cautioned that further increases in the target 
range for the federal funds rate while inflation remained 
persistently below 2 percent could unduly depress infla-
tion expectations or lead the public to question the Com-
mittee’s commitment to its longer-run inflation objec-
tive.   

In view of the persistent shortfall of inflation from the 
Committee’s 2 percent objective and questions about 
whether longer-term inflation expectations were con-
sistent with achievement of that objective, a couple of 
participants discussed the possibility that potential alter-
native frameworks for the conduct of monetary policy 
could be helpful in fulfilling the Committee’s statutory 
mandate.  One question, for example, was whether a 
framework that generally sought to keep the price level 
close to a gradually rising path—rather than the current 
approach in which the Committee does not seek to make 
up for past deviations of inflation from the 2 percent 
goal—might be more effective in fostering the Commit-
tee’s objectives if the neutral level of the federal funds 
rate remains low.    

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, members judged that information received since 
the Committee met in September indicated that the la-
bor market had continued to strengthen and that eco-
nomic activity had been rising at a solid rate despite hur-
ricane-related disruptions.  Although the hurricanes de-
pressed payroll employment in September, the unem-
ployment rate declined further.  Household spending 
had been expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in 
business fixed investment had picked up in recent quar-
ters.  Gasoline prices rose in the aftermath of the hurri-
canes, boosting overall inflation in September; however, 
inflation for items other than food and energy remained 
soft.  On a 12-month basis, both inflation measures had 
declined this year and were running below 2 percent.  
Market-based measures of inflation compensation re-
mained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in-
flation expectations were little changed, on balance. 

Members acknowledged that hurricane-related disrup-
tions and rebuilding would continue to affect economic 
activity, employment, and inflation in the near term.  
They noted, however, that past experience suggested 
that the storm-related disruptions were unlikely to mate-
rially alter the course of the national economy over the 
medium term.  Consequently, the Committee continued 
to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of 
monetary policy, economic activity would expand at a 

moderate pace, and labor market conditions would 
strengthen somewhat further.  Inflation on a 12-month 
basis was expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent 
in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee’s 
2 percent objective over the medium term.  Members 
saw the near-term risks to the economic outlook as 
roughly balanced, but, in light of their concern about the 
ongoing softness in inflation, they agreed to continue to 
monitor inflation developments closely. 

After assessing current conditions and the outlook for 
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1 to 1¼ percent.  They noted that the 
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, 
thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor 
market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent in-
flation. 

Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate 
would depend on their assessments of realized and ex-
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s 
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
flation.  They noted that their assessments would take 
into account a wide range of information, including 
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla-
tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings 
on financial and international developments.  Members 
reaffirmed their expectation that economic conditions 
would evolve in a manner that would warrant gradual 
increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal 
funds rate was likely to remain, for some time, below 
levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run.  
Nonetheless, they reiterated that the actual path of the 
federal funds rate would depend on the economic out-
look as informed by incoming data.  In particular, mem-
bers noted that they would carefully monitor actual and 
expected inflation developments relative to the Commit-
tee’s symmetric inflation goal.  Some members ex-
pressed concerns about the outlook for inflation expec-
tations and inflation; they emphasized that, in consider-
ing the timing of further adjustments in the federal funds 
rate, they would be evaluating incoming information to 
assess the likelihood that recent low readings on inflation 
were transitory and that inflation was on a trajectory 
consistent with achieving the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
jective over the medium term.  Several other members, 
however, were reasonably confident that the economy 
and inflation would evolve in coming months such that 
an additional firming would likely be appropriate in the 
near term. 

Minutes of the Meeting of October 31–November 1, 2017_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 9



 

 

With the balance sheet normalization program under 
way and with the balance sheet not anticipated to be 
used to adjust the stance of monetary policy in response 
to incoming information in the years ahead, members 
generally agreed that the statement following this meet-
ing needed to contain only a brief reference to the pro-
gram and that subsequent statements might not need to 
mention the program.  Balance sheet normalization was 
expected to proceed gradually, following the plan de-
scribed in the Addendum to the Policy Normalization 
Principles and Plans that the Committee released in 
June.  

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the 
following domestic policy directive, to be released at 
2:00 p.m.: 

“Effective November 2, 2017, the Federal 
Open Market Committee directs the Desk to 
undertake open market operations as necessary 
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target 
range of 1 to 1¼ percent, including overnight 
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re-
purchase operations with maturities of more 
than one day when necessary to accommodate 
weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven-
tions) at an offering rate of 1.00 percent, in 
amounts limited only by the value of Treasury 
securities held outright in the System Open 
Market Account that are available for such op-
erations and by a per-counterparty limit of 
$30 billion per day. 

The Committee directs the Desk to continue 
rolling over at auction the amount of principal 
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings 
of Treasury securities maturing during each cal-
endar month that exceeds $6 billion, and to 
continue reinvesting in agency mortgage-
backed securities the amount of principal pay-
ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu-
rities received during each calendar month that 
exceeds $4 billion.  Small deviations from these 
amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. 

The Committee also directs the Desk to engage 
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as 
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal 
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities 
transactions.” 

The vote also encompassed approval of the statement 
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal Open 
Market Committee met in September indicates 
that the labor market has continued to 
strengthen and that economic activity has been 
rising at a solid rate despite hurricane-related 
disruptions.  Although the hurricanes caused a 
drop in payroll employment in September, the 
unemployment rate declined further.  House-
hold spending has been expanding at a moder-
ate rate, and growth in business fixed invest-
ment has picked up in recent quarters.  Gasoline 
prices rose in the aftermath of the hurricanes, 
boosting overall inflation in September; how-
ever, inflation for items other than food and en-
ergy remained soft.  On a 12-month basis, both 
inflation measures have declined this year and 
are running below 2 percent.  Market-based 
measures of inflation compensation remain low; 
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation 
expectations are little changed, on balance. 

Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment 
and price stability.  Hurricane-related disrup-
tions and rebuilding will continue to affect eco-
nomic activity, employment, and inflation in the 
near term, but past experience suggests that the 
storms are unlikely to materially alter the course 
of the national economy over the medium term.  
Consequently, the Committee continues to ex-
pect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance 
of monetary policy, economic activity will ex-
pand at a moderate pace, and labor market con-
ditions will strengthen somewhat further.  Infla-
tion on a 12-month basis is expected to remain 
somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but 
to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent 
objective over the medium term.  Near-term 
risks to the economic outlook appear roughly 
balanced, but the Committee is monitoring in-
flation developments closely. 

In view of realized and expected labor market 
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
cided to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1 to 1¼ percent.  The stance of 
monetary policy remains accommodative, 
thereby supporting some further strengthening 
in labor market conditions and a sustained re-
turn to 2 percent inflation. 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



 

 

In determining the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal 
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized 
and expected economic conditions relative to its 
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
cent inflation.  This assessment will take into ac-
count a wide range of information, including 
measures of labor market conditions, indicators 
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, 
and readings on financial and international de-
velopments.  The Committee will carefully 
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.  
The Committee expects that economic condi-
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant 
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the 
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some 
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in 
the longer run.  However, the actual path of the 
federal funds rate will depend on the economic 
outlook as informed by incoming data. 

The balance sheet normalization program initi-
ated in October 2017 is proceeding.” 

Voting for this action:  Janet L. Yellen, William C. 
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, 

Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Jerome H. Powell, and 
Randal K. Quarles. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the 
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the 
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in-
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un-
changed at 1¼ percent and voted unanimously to ap-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount 
rate) at the existing level of 1¾ percent.4 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 12–
13, 2017.  The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on No-
vember 1, 2017. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on October 10, 2017, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
Committee meeting held on September 19–20, 2017. 

 
 
 

_____________________________ 
Brian F. Madigan 

Secretary
 

                                                 
4 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval 
of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and 

seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing 
such rates. 

Minutes of the Meeting of October 31–November 1, 2017_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 11




