

























































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 30–31, 2018


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
January 30–31, 2018 

A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 30, 2018, at 
10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 31, 
2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 

PRESENT: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Lael Brainard 
Loretta J. Mester 
Jerome H. Powell 
Randal K. Quarles 
John C. Williams 

James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, 
Michael Strine, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 

David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, 
Mary Daly, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, 
Argia M. Sbordone, Ellis W. Tallman, William 
Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate 
Economists 

1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 
2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations. 

Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 
Board of Governors 

Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve 
Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of 
Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of 
Financial Stability, Board of Governors 

Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maryann F. 
Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision 
and Regulation, Board of Governors 

David Reifschneider and John M. Roberts, Special 
Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 
Board Members, Board of Governors 

Joseph W. Gruber, Senior Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of Governors; 
Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Antulio N. Bomfim, Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. 
Meyer, Edward Nelson, and Joyce K. Zickler, 
Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior 
Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

William F. Bassett, Associate Director, Division of 
Financial Stability, Board of Governors 

_ Page 1



Andrew Figura, Assistant Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jason 
Wu, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office 

of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Dana L. Burnett and Michele Cavallo, Section Chiefs, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Andrea Ajello, Kurt F. Lewis, and Bernd Schlusche, 

Principal Economists, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors; Ekaterina Peneva and 
Daniel J. Vine, Principal Economists, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Camille Bryan, Lead Financial Analyst, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Chicago 
 
Jeff Fuhrer and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and 
Chicago, respectively 

 
Todd E. Clark,3 Evan F. Koenig, Keith Sill, and Mark 

L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, Philadelphia, 
and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Carlos Garriga and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presidents, 

Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Kansas 
City, respectively 

 
Annual Organizational Matters4 
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad-
vices of the election of the following members and alter-
nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
for a term beginning January 30, 2018, had been received 
and that these individuals had executed their oaths of of-
fice. 

                                                 
3 Attended Tuesday session only. 

The elected members and alternate members were as fol-
lows: 

William C. Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, with Michael Strine, First Vice Pres-
ident of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as al-
ternate 

Thomas I. Barkin, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond, with Eric Rosengren, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate 

Loretta J. Mester, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate 

Raphael W. Bostic, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta, with James Bullard, President of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate 

John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco, with Esther L. George, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate 

By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Janet L. 
Yellen to serve as Chairman through February 2, 2018, 
and Jerome H. Powell to serve as Chairman, effective 
February 3, 2018, until the selection of his successor at 
the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee 
in 2019. 

By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com-
mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their 
successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the 
Committee in 2019: 

William C. Dudley  Vice Chairman 
James A. Clouse  Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke  Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore  Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith  Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide  General Counsel 
Michael Held Deputy General Counsel 
Richard M. Ashton  Assistant General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin  Economist 
Thomas Laubach  Economist 
David W. Wilcox  Economist  
 
David Altig 
Kartik B. Athreya 

4 Committee organizational documents are available at 
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authoriza-
tions.htm. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee

http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authorizations.htm
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authorizations.htm


Thomas A. Connors 
Mary Daly 
David E. Lebow 
Trevor A. Reeve 
Argia M. Sbordone 
Ellis W. Tallman 
William Wascher 
Beth Anne Wilson Associate Economists 

By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York was selected to execute transactions for the System 
Open Market Account (SOMA). 

By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Simon Pot-
ter and Lorie K. Logan to serve at the pleasure of the 
Committee as manager and deputy manager of the 
SOMA, respectively, on the understanding that these se-
lections were subject to their being satisfactory to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 

Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was re-
ceived that the manager and deputy manager se-
lections indicated above were satisfactory to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 

By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic 
Open Market Operations was approved with revisions 
to incorporate transactions of securities lending into the 
existing operational readiness testing provision and to 
improve the document’s readability.  The Guidelines for 
the Conduct of System Open Market Operations in  
Federal-Agency Issues remained suspended. 

 
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN 
MARKET OPERATIONS 
(As amended effective January 30, 2018) 
 
OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS  
 
1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com-
mittee”) authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank 
selected by the Committee to execute open market trans-
actions (the “Selected Bank”), to the extent necessary to 
carry out the most recent domestic policy directive 
adopted  by the Committee: 

A. To buy or sell in the open market securities that 
are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to prin-
cipal and interest by, the United States, and securities 
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to 
principal and interest by, any agency of the United 
States, that are eligible for purchase or sale under Sec-

tion 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (“Eligible Secu-
rities”) for the System Open Market Account 
(“SOMA”): 

i. As an outright operation with securities dealers 
and foreign and international accounts maintained 
at the Selected Bank: on a same-day or deferred de-
livery basis (including such transactions as are com-
monly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) 
at market prices; or 
ii. As a temporary operation: on a same-day or 
deferred delivery basis, to purchase such Eligible Se-
curities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo 
transactions”) or to sell such Eligible Securities sub-
ject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo 
transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, 
at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the 
Committee, are determined by competitive bidding, 
after applying reasonable limitations on the volume 
of agreements with individual counterparties; 

B. To allow Eligible Securities in the SOMA to ma-
ture without replacement;  
C. To exchange, at market prices, in connection 
with a Treasury auction, maturing Eligible Securities in 
the SOMA with the Treasury, in the case of Eligible 
Securities that are direct obligations of the United 
States or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and 
interest by the United States; and 
D. To exchange, at market prices, maturing Eligible 
Securities in the SOMA with an agency of the United 
States, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct 
obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed 
as to principal and interest by that agency. 

 
SECURITIES LENDING 
 
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, the Committee authorizes the Se-
lected Bank to operate a program to lend Eligible Secu-
rities held in the SOMA to dealers on an overnight basis 
(except that the Selected Bank may lend Eligible Securi-
ties for longer than an overnight term to accommodate 
weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). 

A. Such securities lending must be: 
i. At rates determined by competitive bidding; 
ii. At a minimum lending fee consistent with the 
objectives of the program; 
iii. Subject to reasonable limitations on the total 
amount of a specific issue of Eligible Securities that 
may be auctioned; and 
iv. Subject to reasonable limitations on the 
amount of Eligible Securities that each borrower 
may borrow. 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



B. The Selected Bank may: 
i. Reject bids that, as determined in its sole dis-
cretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a 
single issue;  
ii. Accept Treasury securities or cash as collateral 
for any loan of securities authorized in this para-
graph 2; and 
iii. Accept agency securities as collateral only for a 
loan of agency securities authorized in this para-
graph 2. 
 

OPERATIONAL READINESS TESTING 
 

3. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to 
undertake transactions of the type described in para-
graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of test-
ing operational readiness, subject to the following limi-
tations: 

A. All transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 
shall be conducted with prior notice to the Commit-
tee; 
B. The aggregate par value of the transactions au-
thorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type de-
scribed in paragraph 1.A.i shall not exceed $5 billion 
per calendar year; and 
C. The outstanding amount of the transactions de-
scribed in paragraphs 1.A.ii and 2 shall not exceed 
$5 billion at any given time. 

 
TRANSACTIONS WITH CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS 
 
4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 
market operations, while assisting in the provision of 
short-term investments or other authorized services for 
foreign central bank and international accounts main-
tained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Ac-
counts”) and accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve 
Bank as fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to sec-
tion 15 of the Federal Reserve Act (together with the 
Foreign Accounts, the “Customer Accounts”), the Com-
mittee authorizes the following when undertaken on 
terms comparable to those available in the open market:  

A. The Selected Bank, for the SOMA, to undertake 
reverse repo transactions in Eligible Securities held in 
the SOMA with the Customer Accounts for a term of 
65 business days or less; and 
B. Any Federal Reserve Bank that maintains Cus-
tomer Accounts, for any such Customer Account, 
when appropriate and subject to all other necessary 
authorization and approvals, to:  

i. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi-
ties with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo 

transaction in such Eligible Securities with the Cus-
tomer Accounts; and  
ii. Undertake intra-day repo transactions in Eligi-
ble Securities with Foreign Accounts. 

Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts un-
der the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a 
service fee when appropriate.  Transactions undertaken 
with Customer Accounts are also subject to the authori-
zation or approval of other entities, including the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and, when 
involving accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve 
Bank as fiscal agent of the United States, the United 
States Department of the Treasury. 
 
ADDITIONAL MATTERS 
 
5. The Committee authorizes the Chairman of the 
Committee, in fostering the Committee’s objectives dur-
ing any period between meetings of the Committee, to 
instruct the Selected Bank to act on behalf of the Com-
mittee to: 

A. Adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances 
the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that 
may result in material changes in the composition and 
size of the assets in the SOMA; or  
B. Undertake transactions with respect to Eligible 
Securities in order to appropriately address temporary 
disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature 
in U.S. dollar funding markets. 

Any such adjustment described in subparagraph A of 
this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the 
Committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of 
policy at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s 
long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and 
price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, 
and monetary developments since the most recent meet-
ing of the Committee.  The Chairman, whenever feasi-
ble, will consult with the Committee before making any 
instruction under this paragraph 5. 
 
The Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without 
revision the Authorization for Foreign Currency Opera-
tions and the Foreign Currency Directive as shown be-
low. 
 
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY 
OPERATIONS 
(As reaffirmed effective January 30, 2018) 

IN GENERAL 

1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com-
mittee”) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank selected by 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to execute open 
market transactions for the System Open Market Ac-
count as provided in this Authorization, to the extent 
necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of 
the Committee: 

A. To purchase and sell foreign currencies (also 
known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the 
open market, including with the United States Treas-
ury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank 
for International Settlements, and with other entities 
in the open market.  This authorization to purchase 
and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and 
sales through standalone spot or forward transactions 
and through foreign exchange swap transactions.  For 
purposes of this Authorization, foreign exchange 
swap transactions are:  swap transactions with the 
United States Treasury (also known as warehousing 
transactions), swap transactions with other central 
banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap 
transactions with other central banks under standing 
dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap ar-
rangements, and swap transactions with other entities 
in the open market. 
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding for-
ward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign curren-
cies. 

2. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken 
pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise 
authorized by the Committee, be conducted:   

A. In a manner consistent with the obligations re-
garding exchange arrangements under Article IV of 
the Articles of Agreement of the International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF).1 
B. In close and continuous cooperation and consul-
tation, as appropriate, with the United States Treasury.  
C. In consultation, as appropriate, with foreign 
monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and inter-
national monetary institutions. 
D. At prevailing market rates. 

 
STANDALONE SPOT AND FORWARD  
TRANSACTIONS 
 
3. For any operation that involves standalone spot or 
forward transactions in foreign currencies:  

A. Approval of such operation is required as fol-
lows: 

i. The Committee must direct the Selected Bank 
in advance to execute the operation if it would result 
in the overall volume of standalone spot and for-
ward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined 
in paragraph 3.C of this Authorization, exceeding 

$5 billion since the close of the most recent regular 
meeting of the Committee. The Foreign Currency 
Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”) must direct 
the Selected Bank in advance to execute the opera-
tion if the Subcommittee believes that consultation 
with the Committee is not feasible in the time avail-
able.  
ii. The Committee authorizes the Subcommittee 
to direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the 
operation if it would result in the overall volume of 
standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign 
currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Au-
thorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close 
of the most recent regular meeting of the Commit-
tee.   

B. Such an operation also shall be:   
i. Generally directed at countering disorderly 
market conditions; or 
ii. Undertaken to adjust System balances in light 
of probable future needs for currencies; or 
iii. Conducted for such other purposes as may be 
determined by the Committee. 

C. For purposes of this Authorization, the overall 
volume of standalone spot and forward transactions 
in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregard-
ing signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign cur-
rencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the 
transaction. 

 
WAREHOUSING 
 
4. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank, with 
the prior approval of the Subcommittee and at the re-
quest of the United States Treasury, to conduct swap 
transactions with the United States Exchange Stabiliza-
tion Fund established by section 10 of the Gold Reserve 
Act of 1934 under agreements in which the Selected 
Bank purchases foreign currencies from the Exchange 
Stabilization Fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund 
repurchases the foreign currencies from the Selected 
Bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known 
as warehousing).  
 
RECIPROCAL CURRENCY ARRANGEMENTS, 
AND STANDING DOLLAR AND FOREIGN 
CURRENCY LIQUIDITY SWAPS 
 
5. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to 
maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established 
under the North American Framework Agreement, 
standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and stand-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 5



ing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as pro-
vided in this Authorization and to the extent necessary 
to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Com-
mittee.   

A. For reciprocal currency arrangements all draw-
ings must be approved in advance by the Committee 
(or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee be-
lieves that consultation with the Committee is not fea-
sible in the time available). 
B. For standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements 
all drawings must be approved in advance by the 
Chairman.  The Chairman may approve a schedule of 
potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, 
System Open Market Account, the authority to ap-
prove individual drawings that occur according to the 
schedule approved by the Chairman.   
C. For standing foreign currency liquidity swap ar-
rangements all drawings must be approved in advance 
by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the 
Subcommittee believes that consultation with the 
Committee is not feasible in the time available). 
D. Operations involving standing dollar liquidity 
swap arrangements and standing foreign currency li-
quidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed 
at countering strains in financial markets in the United 
States or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could 
emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic 
and financial conditions in the United States. 
E. For reciprocal currency arrangements, standing 
dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing for-
eign currency liquidity swap arrangements: 

i. All arrangements are subject to annual review 
and approval by the Committee; 
ii.  Any new arrangements must be approved by 
the Committee; and 
iii. Any changes in the terms of existing arrange-
ments must be approved in advance by the Chair-
man.  The Chairman shall keep the Committee in-
formed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall 
be consistent with principles discussed with and 
guidance provided by the Committee. 

 
OTHER OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN  
CURRENCIES 
 
6. Any other operations in foreign currencies for 
which governance is not otherwise specified in this Au-
thorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions 
with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized 
and directed in advance by the Committee. 
 

FOREIGN CURRENCY HOLDINGS 
 
7. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to 
hold foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac-
count in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, 
the Bank for International Settlements, and such other 
foreign institutions as approved by the Board of Gover-
nors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, to the extent 
necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of 
the Committee. 

A. The Selected Bank shall manage all holdings of 
foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac-
count:   

i. Primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to ena-
ble the Selected Bank to conduct foreign currency 
operations as directed by the Committee; 
ii. Secondarily, to maintain a high degree of 
safety; 
iii. Subject to paragraphs 7.A.i and 7.A.ii, to pro-
vide the highest rate of return possible in each cur-
rency; and 
iv. To achieve such other objectives as may be au-
thorized by the Committee. 

B. The Selected Bank may manage such foreign cur-
rency holdings by:  

i. Purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign 
government or agency thereof (“Permitted Foreign 
Securities”) through outright purchases and sales; 
ii. Purchasing Permitted Foreign Securities under 
agreements for repurchase of such Permitted For-
eign Securities and selling such securities under 
agreements for the resale of such securities; and 
iii. Managing balances in various time and other 
deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by 
the Board of Governors under Regulation N.  

C. The Subcommittee, in consultation with the 
Committee, may provide additional instructions to the 
Selected Bank regarding holdings of foreign curren-
cies. 

 
ADDITIONAL MATTERS 
 
8. The Committee authorizes the Chairman:   

A. With the prior approval of the Committee, to en-
ter into any needed agreement or understanding with 
the Secretary of the United States Treasury about the 
division of responsibility for foreign currency opera-
tions between the System and the United States Treas-
ury; 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



B. To advise the Secretary of the United States 
Treasury concerning System foreign currency opera-
tions, and to consult with the Secretary on policy mat-
ters relating to foreign currency operations;  
C. To designate Federal Reserve System persons au-
thorized to communicate with the United States 
Treasury concerning System Open Market Account 
foreign currency operations; and 
D. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re-
ports and information to the National Advisory Coun-
cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 

9. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to 
undertake transactions of the type described in this Au-
thorization, and foreign exchange and investment 
transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to 
undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing 
operational readiness.  The aggregate amount of such 
transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar 
year.  These transactions shall be conducted with prior 
notice to the Committee.  
10. All Federal Reserve banks shall participate in the 
foreign currency operations for System Open Market 
Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the 
Board of Governors’ Statement of Procedure with Re-
spect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks 
dated January 1, 1944. 
11. Any authority of the Subcommittee pursuant to 
this Authorization may be exercised by the Chairman if 
the Chairman believes that consultation with the Sub-
committee is not feasible in the time available. The 
Chairman shall promptly report to the Subcommittee 
any action approved by the Chairman pursuant to this 
paragraph. 
12. The Committee authorizes the Chairman, in excep-
tional circumstances where it would not be feasible to 
convene the Committee, to foster the Committee’s ob-
jectives by instructing the Selected Bank to engage in 
foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized 
pursuant to this Authorization.  Any such action shall be 
made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and 
decisions regarding foreign currency operations.  The 
Chairman, whenever feasible, will consult with the Com-
mittee before making any instruction under this para-
graph. 
__________________________ 

 
1 In general, as specified in Article IV, each member of 
the IMF undertakes to collaborate with the IMF and 
other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements 
and to promote a stable system of exchange rates.  These 
obligations include seeking to direct the member’s eco-

nomic and financial policies toward the objective of fos-
tering orderly economic growth with reasonable price 
stability.  These obligations also include avoiding manip-
ulating exchange rates or the international monetary sys-
tem in such a way that would impede effective balance 
of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive 
advantage over other members. 
 
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE 
(As reaffirmed effective January 30, 2018) 
 
1. The Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank 
selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to ex-
ecute open market transactions, for the System Open 
Market Account, in accordance with the provisions of 
the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (the 
“Authorization”) and subject to the limits in this Di-
rective. 
2. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to exe-
cute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the 
United States Treasury and if approved by the Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”), subject 
to the limitation that the outstanding balance of United 
States dollars provided to the United States Treasury as 
a result of these transactions not at any time exceed 
$5 billion. 
3. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to main-
tain, for the System Open Market Account:  

A. Reciprocal currency arrangements with the fol-
lowing foreign central banks: 
 
Foreign central bank Maximum amount 
    (millions of dollars 
    or equivalent) 
 
Bank of Canada  2,000 
Bank of Mexico  3,000 
 
B. Standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with 
the following foreign central banks: 
 
Bank of Canada 
Bank of England 
Bank of Japan 
European Central Bank 
Swiss National Bank 
 
C. Standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrange-
ments with the following foreign central banks: 
 
Bank of Canada 
Bank of England 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 7



Bank of Japan 
European Central Bank 
Swiss National Bank 

 
4. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to hold 
and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in ac-
cordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the Au-
thorization. 
5. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to report 
to the Committee, at each regular meeting of the Com-
mittee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to para-
graphs 1 and 6 of the Authorization.  The Selected Bank 
is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the Com-
mittee regarding the management of the foreign cur-
rency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Authori-
zation. 
6. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to con-
duct testing of transactions for the purpose of opera-
tional readiness in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph 9 of the Authorization. 
By unanimous vote, the Committee revised its Program 
for Security of FOMC Information with a set of tech-
nical changes to update references to other documents. 
 
In the Committee’s annual reconsideration of the State-
ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat-
egy, participants agreed that only a minor revision was 
required at this meeting, which was to update the refer-
ence to the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of 
the longer-run normal rate of unemployment from 
4.8 percent to 4.6 percent.  All participants supported 
the statement with the revision, and the Committee 
voted unanimously to approve the updated statement. 
 
STATEMENT ON LONGER-RUN GOALS AND 
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY 
(As amended effective January 30, 2018) 
 

The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is 
firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from 
the Congress of promoting maximum employment, sta-
ble prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.  The 
Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy deci-
sions to the public as clearly as possible.  Such clarity 
facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households 
and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncer-
tainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, 
and enhances transparency and accountability, which are 
essential in a democratic society.  

Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates 
fluctuate over time in response to economic and finan-
cial disturbances.  Moreover, monetary policy actions 

tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag.  
Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its 
longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its as-
sessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the 
financial system that could impede the attainment of the 
Committee’s goals.  

The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily de-
termined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee 
has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation.  
The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at 
the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change 
in the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures, is most consistent over the longer run with the 
Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate.  The Committee 
would be concerned if inflation were running persis-
tently above or below this objective.  Communicating 
this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps 
keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, 
thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term 
interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to 
promote maximum employment in the face of signifi-
cant economic disturbances.  The maximum level of em-
ployment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors 
that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor mar-
ket.  These factors may change over time and may not 
be directly measurable.  Consequently, it would not be 
appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; ra-
ther, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed 
by assessments of the maximum level of employment, 
recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncer-
tain and subject to revision.  The Committee considers a 
wide range of indicators in making these assessments.  
Information about Committee participants’ estimates of 
the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unem-
ployment is published four times per year in the 
FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections.  For ex-
ample, in the most recent projections, the median of 
FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal 
rate of unemployment was 4.6 percent.  

In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to 
mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal 
and deviations of employment from the Committee’s as-
sessments of its maximum level.  These objectives are 
generally complementary.  However, under circum-
stances in which the Committee judges that the objec-
tives are not complementary, it follows a balanced ap-
proach in promoting them, taking into account the mag-
nitude of the deviations and the potentially different 
time horizons over which employment and inflation are 
projected to return to levels judged consistent with its 
mandate. 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles 
and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual or-
ganizational meeting each January. 
 
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
ket Operations 
The manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) provided a summary of developments in do-
mestic and global financial markets over the intermeet-
ing period.   Financial conditions eased further over re-
cent weeks with market participants pointing to increas-
ing appetites for risk and perceptions of diminished 
downside risks as factors buoying market sentiment.  In 
this environment, yields on safe assets such as U.S. 
Treasury securities moved up some while corporate risk 
spreads narrowed and equity prices recorded further sig-
nificant gains.  Breakeven measures of inflation compen-
sation derived from Treasury Inflation Protected Securi-
ties (TIPS) moved up but remained low.  Survey 
measures of longer-term inflation expectations showed 
little change.  Judging from interest rate futures, the ex-
pected path of the federal funds rate shifted up over the 
period but continued to imply a gradual expected pace 
of policy firming.  The deputy manager followed with a 
discussion of recent developments in money markets 
and FOMC operations.  Year-end pressures were evi-
dent in the market for foreign exchange basis swaps, but 
conditions returned to normal early in 2018.  Yields on 
Treasury bills maturing in early March were elevated, re-
flecting investors’ concerns about the possibility that a 
failure to raise the federal debt ceiling could affect the 
timing of principal payments for these securities.  The 
Open Market Desk continued to execute reinvestment 
operations for Treasury and agency securities in the 
SOMA in accordance with the procedure specified in the 
Committee’s directive to the Desk.  The deputy manager 
also reported on the volume of overnight reverse repur-
chase agreement operations over the intermeeting pe-
riod and discussed the Desk’s plans for small-value op-
erational tests of various types of open market opera-
tions over the coming year. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open 
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet-
ing period.  There were no intervention operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the 
intermeeting period. 

Inflation Analysis and Forecasting 
The staff presented three briefings on inflation analysis 
and forecasting.  The presentations reviewed a number 
of commonly used structural and reduced-form models.  
These included structural models in which the rate of 

inflation is linked importantly to measures of resource 
slack and a measure of expected inflation relevant for 
wage and price setting—so-called Phillips curve specifi-
cations—as well as statistical models in which inflation 
is primarily determined by a time-varying inflation trend 
or longer-run inflation expectations.  The briefings 
noted several factors beyond those captured in the mod-
els that appeared to have put downward pressure on 
prices in recent years.  These included structural changes 
in price setting for some items, such as medical care, and 
the effects of idiosyncratic price shocks, such as the un-
usual drop in prices of wireless telephone services in 
2017.  The staff found little compelling evidence for the 
possible influence of other factors such as a more com-
petitive pricing environment or a change in the markup 
of prices over unit labor costs.  Overall, for the set of 
models presented, the prediction errors in recent years 
were larger than those observed during the 2001–07 pe-
riod but were consistent with historical norms and, in 
most models, did not appear to be biased. 

The staff presentations considered two key channels by 
which monetary policy influences inflation—the re-
sponse of inflation to changes in resource utilization and 
the role of inflation expectations, or trend inflation, in 
the price-setting process.  In part because inflation was 
importantly influenced by a number of short-lived fac-
tors, the effects of current and expected resource utiliza-
tion gaps on inflation were not easy to discern empiri-
cally.  Estimates of the strength of those effects had di-
minished noticeably in recent years.  The briefings high-
lighted a number of other challenges associated with es-
timating the strength and timing of the linkage between 
resource utilization and inflation, including the reliability 
of and changes over time in estimates of the natural rate 
of unemployment and potential output and the ability to 
adequately account for supply shocks.  In addition, some 
research suggested that the relationship between re-
source utilization and inflation may be nonlinear, with 
the response of inflation increasing as rates of utilization 
rise to very high levels. 

With regard to inflation expectations, two of the brief-
ings presented findings that the longer-run trend in in-
flation, absent cyclical disturbances or transitory fluctu-
ations, had been stable in recent years at a little below 
2 percent.  The briefings reported that the average fore-
casting performance of models employing either statisti-
cal estimates of inflation trends or survey-based 
measures of inflation expectations as proxies for infla-
tion expectations appeared comparable, even though 
different versions of such models could yield very differ-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 9



ent forecasts at any given point in time.  Moreover, al-
though survey-based measures of longer-run inflation 
expectations tended to move in parallel with estimated 
inflation trends, the empirical research provided no clear 
guidance on how to construct a measure of inflation ex-
pectations that would be the most useful for inflation 
forecasting.  The staff noted that although reduced-form 
models in which inflation tends to revert toward longer-
run inflation trends described the data reasonably well, 
those models offered little guidance to policymakers on 
how to conduct policy so as to achieve their desired out-
come for inflation. 

Following the staff presentations, participants discussed 
how the inflation frameworks reviewed in the briefings 
informed their views on inflation and monetary policy.  
Almost all participants who commented agreed that a 
Phillips curve–type of inflation framework remained 
useful as one of their tools for understanding inflation 
dynamics and informing their decisions on monetary 
policy.  Policymakers pointed to a number of possible 
reasons for the difficulty in estimating the link between 
resource utilization and inflation in recent years.  These 
reasons included an extended period of low and stable 
inflation in the United States and other advanced econ-
omies during which the effects of resource utilization on 
inflation became harder to identify, the shortcomings of 
commonly used measures of resource gaps, the effects 
of transitory changes in relative prices, and structural 
factors that had made business pricing more competitive 
or prices more flexible over time.  It was noted that re-
search focusing on inflation across U.S. states or metro-
politan areas continued to find a significant relationship 
between price or wage inflation and measures of re-
source gaps.  A couple of participants questioned the 
usefulness of a Phillips curve–type framework for poli-
cymaking, citing the limited ability of such frameworks 
to capture the relationship between economic activity 
and inflation. 

Participants generally agreed that inflation expectations 
played a fundamental role in understanding and forecast-
ing inflation, with stable inflation expectations providing 
an important anchor for the rate of inflation over the 
longer run.  Participants acknowledged that the causes 
of movements in short- and longer-run inflation expec-
tations, including the role of monetary policy, were im-
perfectly understood.  They commented that various 
proxies for inflation expectations—readings from 
household and business surveys or from economic fore-
casters, estimates derived from market prices, or esti-
mated trends—were imperfect measures of actual infla-
tion expectations, which are unobservable.  That said, 

participants emphasized the critical need for the FOMC 
to maintain a credible longer-run inflation objective and 
to clearly communicate the Committee’s commitment to 
achieving that objective.  Several participants indicated 
that they viewed the available evidence as suggesting that 
longer-run inflation expectations remained well an-
chored; one cited recent research finding that inflation 
expectations had become better anchored following the 
Committee’s adoption of a numerical inflation target.  
However, a few saw low levels of inflation over recent 
years as reflecting, in part, slippage in longer-run infla-
tion expectations below the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
jective.  In that regard, a number of participants noted 
the importance of continuing to emphasize that the 
Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective is symmetric.  
A couple of participants suggested that the Committee 
might consider expressing its objective as a range rather 
than a point estimate.  A few other participants sug-
gested that the FOMC could begin to examine whether 
adopting a monetary policy framework in which the 
Committee would strive to make up for past deviations 
of inflation from target might address the challenge of 
achieving and maintaining inflation expectations con-
sistent with the Committee’s inflation objective, particu-
larly in an environment in which the neutral rate of in-
terest appeared likely to remain low. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed for the January 30–31 meet-
ing indicated that labor market conditions continued to 
strengthen through December and that real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) expanded at about a 2½ percent 
pace in the fourth quarter of last year.  Growth of real 
final domestic purchases by households and businesses, 
generally a good indicator of the economy’s underlying 
momentum, was solid.  Consumer price inflation, as 
measured by the 12-month percentage change in the 
price index for personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE), remained below 2 percent in December.   
Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
tions were little changed on balance. 

Total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly in 
December, and the national unemployment rate re-
mained at 4.1 percent.  The unemployment rates for His-
panics, for Asians, and for African Americans were 
lower than earlier in the year and close to the levels seen 
just before the most recent recession.  The national labor 
force participation rate held steady in December; relative 
to the declining trend suggested by an aging population, 
this sideways movement in the participation rate repre-
sented a further strengthening in labor market condi-
tions.  The participation rate for prime-age (defined as 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



ages 25 to 54) men edged up in December, while the rate 
for prime-age women declined slightly.  The share of 
workers who were employed part time for economic rea-
sons was little changed in December and was close to its 
pre-recession level.  The rates of private-sector job 
openings and quits were little changed in November, and 
the four-week moving average of initial claims for un-
employment insurance benefits continued to be at a low 
level in mid-January.  Recent readings showed that gains 
in hourly labor compensation remained modest.  Both 
the employment cost index for private-sector workers 
and average hourly earnings for all employees rose about 
2½ percent over the 12 months ending in December. 

Total industrial production increased over the two 
months ending in December, with broad-based gains in 
manufacturing, mining, and utilities output.  Automak-
ers’ schedules indicated that assemblies of light motor 
vehicles would likely move up over the coming months.  
Broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as 
the new orders indexes from national and regional man-
ufacturing surveys, pointed to further solid increases in 
factory output in the near term. 

Real PCE increased strongly in the fourth quarter.  Re-
cent readings on key factors that influence consumer 
spending—including gains in employment, real disposa-
ble personal income, and households’ net worth—con-
tinued to be supportive of further solid growth of real 
PCE in the near term.  Consumer sentiment in early Jan-
uary, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys 
of Consumers, remained upbeat.  

Real residential investment rose briskly in the fourth 
quarter after having declined in the previous two quar-
ters.  Both starts and issuance of building permits for 
new single-family homes increased in the fourth quarter 
as a whole, and starts for multifamily units also moved 
up.  Moreover, sales of both new and existing homes 
rose in the fourth quarter. 

Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
tellectual property increased at a solid pace in the fourth 
quarter.  Recent indicators of business equipment spend-
ing—such as rising new orders of nondefense capital 
goods excluding aircraft and upbeat readings on busi-
ness sentiment from national and regional surveys—
pointed to further gains in equipment spending in the 
near term.  Firms’ real spending for nonresidential struc-
tures rose modestly in the fourth quarter, as an increase 
in outlays for drilling and mining structures was largely 
offset by a decline in expenditures for other business 
structures.  The number of crude oil and natural gas rigs 
in operation—an indicator of spending for structures in 

the drilling and mining sector—continued to edge up 
through late January. 

Total real government purchases rose modestly in the 
fourth quarter.  Increased federal government purchases 
mostly reflected a rise in defense spending, and the gains 
in purchases by state and local governments were led by 
an increase in construction spending in this sector. 

The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened fur-
ther in November after widening sharply in October.  
Exports of goods and services picked up in November, 
while imports, particularly of consumer goods, increased 
robustly.  Available data for goods trade in December 
suggested that import growth again outpaced export 
growth.  All told, real net exports were estimated to be a 
substantial drag on real GDP growth in the fourth quar-
ter. 

Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE 
price index, increased about 1¾ percent over the 
12 months ending in December.  Core PCE price infla-
tion, which excludes changes in consumer food and en-
ergy prices, was 1½ percent over that same period.  The 
consumer price index (CPI) rose around 2 percent over 
the same period, while core CPI inflation was 1¾ per-
cent.  Recent readings on survey-based measures of 
longer-run inflation expectations—including those from 
the Michigan survey and the Desk’s Survey of Primary 
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little 
changed on balance. 

Incoming data suggested that economic activity abroad 
continued to expand at a solid pace and that this expan-
sion was broad based across countries.  In the advanced 
foreign economies (AFEs), real GDP in the euro area 
and the United Kingdom expanded at a moderate pace 
in the fourth quarter.  In the emerging market economies 
(EMEs), Mexico’s economy rebounded after being held 
back by natural disasters in the third quarter.  Economic 
growth remained solid in China but cooled off a bit in 
some emerging Asian economies after a very strong 
third-quarter performance.  Inflation in both AFEs and 
EMEs picked up significantly in the fourth quarter, 
largely reflecting a boost from rising oil prices.  Inflation 
excluding food and energy prices remained well below 
central bank targets in several economies, including the 
euro area and Japan. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
Domestic financial market conditions eased considera-
bly further over the intermeeting period.  A strengthen-
ing outlook for economic growth in the United States 
and abroad, along with recently enacted tax legislation, 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 11



appeared to boost investor sentiment.  U.S. equity prices, 
Treasury yields, and market-based measures of inflation 
compensation rose, and spreads of yields on investment- 
and speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds 
over those for comparable-maturity Treasury securities 
narrowed further.  In addition, the dollar depreciated 
broadly amid strong foreign economic data and mone-
tary policy communications by some foreign central 
banks that investors reportedly viewed as less accommo-
dative than expected. 

FOMC communications over the intermeeting period 
were generally characterized by market participants as 
consistent with their expectations for continued gradual 
removal of monetary policy accommodation.  The Com-
mittee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate at the December meeting was widely ex-
pected, and the probability of an increase in the target 
range for the federal funds rate occurring at the January 
meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures 
contracts, remained essentially zero.  Over the inter-
meeting period, the futures-implied probability of policy 
firming at the March meeting rose to about 85 percent; 
respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers 
and Survey of Market Participants assigned, on average, 
similarly high odds to a rate increase at the March meet-
ing.  Levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2018 
and 2019 implied by overnight index swap rates moved 
up moderately. 

The nominal Treasury yield curve shifted up over the in-
termeeting period amid an improved outlook for domes-
tic and foreign economic growth.  Yields on both 2- and 
10-year Treasury securities moved up about 30 basis 
points.  Measures of inflation compensation based on 
TIPS fell in response to the soft reading on core inflation 
in the November CPI release but subsequently moved 
up against the backdrop of an improving global growth 
outlook, higher commodity prices, depreciation of the 
dollar, and the stronger-than-expected reading on core 
inflation in the December CPI release.  On net, inflation 
compensation moved up at both the 5-year and the 
5-to-10-year horizons, and both measures returned to 
levels seen in early 2017 before the string of generally 
weaker-than-expected inflation readings. 

Broad equity price indexes rose substantially over the in-
termeeting period, with investors pointing to a stronger 
global economic outlook and the supportive effect of 
the recently enacted tax legislation on risk sentiment.  
The VIX, an index of option-implied volatility for one-
month returns on the S&P 500 index, increased but re-

mained low by historical standards.  Spreads of both in-
vestment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields 
over comparable-maturity Treasury yields declined 
slightly and remained well below their historical aver-
ages. 

The FOMC’s decision at its December meeting to raise 
the target range for the federal funds rate was transmit-
ted smoothly to money market rates.  The effective fed-
eral funds rate held steady at a level near the middle of 
the target range except at year-end.  While borrowing 
costs moved up briefly in offshore dollar funding mar-
kets over year-end, conditions in money markets were 
reported to be orderly.  In line with recent year-end ex-
periences, rates and volumes in the federal funds and 
Eurodollar markets declined, while in secured markets, 
rates on Treasury repurchase agreements increased.  Af-
ter year-end, pressures in money markets abated quickly 
and rates and volumes returned to recent ranges. 

The broad nominal dollar index declined nearly 4 per-
cent relative to its value at the time of the December 
FOMC meeting; the decline was most pronounced 
against AFE currencies, but the dollar depreciated nota-
bly against most EME currencies as well.  EME equity 
prices registered substantial gains, in part supported by a 
significant rise in commodity prices; emerging market 
bond spreads narrowed moderately, and flows into 
EME equity and bond funds strengthened substantially. 

Market-based measures of policy expectations and 
longer-term sovereign yields moved up in most AFEs.  
The Bank of Canada raised its policy rate at its January 
meeting, largely in response to better-than-expected eco-
nomic data.  The Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, 
and the European Central Bank (ECB) left their mone-
tary policy stances unchanged, as expected.  Nonethe-
less, the ECB president’s optimistic assessment of the 
euro-area economy at the press conference following the 
January meeting was interpreted by market participants 
as a signal that monetary policy would be less accommo-
dative than expected.  Following those remarks, the euro 
appreciated notably against the dollar and core euro-area 
sovereign yields moved higher.  That said, market-based 
measures of policy expectations continued to indicate 
that investors anticipate a gradual pace of monetary pol-
icy normalization in the euro area. 

Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses and 
households remained generally accommodative over the 
intermeeting period and continued to be supportive of 
economic activity.  Respondents to the January Senior 
Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Prac-
tices (SLOOS) reported easing standards and narrowing 

Page 12                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



loan spreads for large and middle-market firms and at-
tributed this easing to more aggressive competition from 
other bank or nonbank lenders.  Net debt financing by 
investment-grade nonfinancial corporations turned neg-
ative in December, but the weakness appeared to reflect 
a softening in the demand for credit, possibly related to 
the anticipation of higher after-tax cash flows and repa-
triation of foreign earnings.  In contrast, gross issuance 
of speculative-grade bonds and institutional leveraged 
loans remained strong.  Credit market conditions for 
small businesses remained relatively accommodative de-
spite sluggish credit growth among these firms.  Credit 
conditions in municipal bond markets also remained ac-
commodative. 

In commercial real estate (CRE) markets, growth of 
loans held by banks slowed further in the fourth quarter, 
though CRE loans held by small banks and some types 
of CRE loans held by large banks—construction and 
land development loans in particular—expanded at a 
more robust pace.  Financing conditions in the commer-
cial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) market re-
mained accommodative as issuance continued at a ro-
bust pace and spreads on CMBS remained near their 
lowest levels since the financial crisis.  Credit conditions 
in the residential mortgage market remained accommo-
dative for most borrowers, though credit standards re-
mained tight for borrowers with low credit scores or 
hard-to-document incomes.  Mortgage rates increased in 
tandem with rates on longer-term Treasury securities but 
remained quite low by historical standards. 

Conditions in consumer credit markets remained largely 
supportive of economic activity.  Consumer credit in-
creased notably in November, exceeding the more mod-
erate volume of borrowing observed earlier in the year.  
Revolving credit expanded in November, while nonre-
volving credit grew robustly, mainly driven by expansion 
in student and other consumer loans.  In contrast, 
growth of auto lending slowed in recent months, con-
sistent with the weakening demand for such loans in the 
fourth quarter as reported in the January SLOOS.  For 
subprime borrowers, conditions remained tight, particu-
larly in the market for credit cards and auto loans. 

The staff provided its latest report on the potential risks 
to financial stability; the report continued to characterize 
the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system 
as moderate on balance.  This overall assessment incor-
porated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associ-
ated with asset valuation pressures continued to be ele-
vated; asset valuation pressures apparently reflected, in 
part, a broad-based appetite for risk among investors.  

The staff judged that vulnerabilities from leverage in the 
nonfinancial sector appeared to remain moderate, while 
vulnerabilities stemming from financial-sector leverage 
and from maturity and liquidity transformation contin-
ued to be viewed as low. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for 
the January FOMC meeting was stronger than the staff 
forecast at the time of the December meeting.  Real 
GDP was estimated to have risen in the fourth quarter 
of last year by somewhat more than the staff had previ-
ously expected, as gains in both household and business 
spending were larger than anticipated.  Beyond 2017, the 
forecast for real GDP growth was revised up, reflecting 
a reassessment of the recently enacted tax cuts, along 
with higher projected paths for equity prices and foreign 
economic growth and a lower assumed path for the for-
eign exchange value of the dollar.  Real GDP was pro-
jected to increase at a somewhat faster pace than poten-
tial output through 2020; the staff continued to assume 
that the recently enacted tax cuts would boost real GDP 
growth moderately over the medium term.  The unem-
ployment rate was projected to decline further over the 
next few years and to continue to run well below the 
staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this pe-
riod.  

Estimates of total and core PCE price inflation for 2017 
were in line with the staff’s previous forecast.  The pro-
jection for inflation over the medium term was revised 
up slightly, primarily reflecting tighter resource utiliza-
tion in the January forecast.  Total PCE price inflation 
in 2018 was projected to be somewhat faster than in 
2017 despite a slower projected pace of increases in con-
sumer energy prices; core PCE prices were forecast to 
rise notably faster in 2018, importantly reflecting both 
the expected waning of transitory factors that held down 
12-month measures of inflation in 2017 as well as the 
projected further tightening in resource utilization.  The 
staff projected that core inflation would reach 2 percent 
in 2019 and that total inflation would be at the Commit-
tee’s 2 percent objective in 2020. 

The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections 
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years.  On 
the one hand, many indicators of uncertainty about the 
macroeconomic outlook remained subdued; on the 
other hand, considerable uncertainty remained about a 
number of federal government policies relevant for the 
economic outlook.  The staff saw the risks to the fore-
casts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 13



as balanced.  The risks to the projection for inflation also 
were seen as balanced.  Downside risks included the pos-
sibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may 
have edged lower or that the run of soft core inflation 
readings this year could prove to be more persistent than 
the staff expected.  These downside risks were seen as 
essentially counterbalanced by the upside risk that infla-
tion could increase more than expected in an economy 
that was projected to move further above its potential. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and the 
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information 
received since the FOMC met in December indicated 
that the labor market continued to strengthen and that 
economic activity expanded at a solid rate.  Gains in em-
ployment, household spending, and business fixed in-
vestment were solid, and the unemployment rate stayed 
low.  On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and 
inflation for items other than food and energy continued 
to run below 2 percent.  Market-based measures of in-
flation compensation increased in recent months but re-
mained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in-
flation expectations were little changed, on balance. 

Participants generally saw incoming information on eco-
nomic activity and the labor market as consistent with 
continued above-trend economic growth and a further 
strengthening in labor market conditions, with the recent 
solid gains in household and business spending indicat-
ing substantial underlying economic momentum.  They 
pointed to accommodative financial conditions, the re-
cently enacted tax legislation, and an improved global 
economic outlook as factors likely to support economic 
growth over coming quarters.  Participants expected that 
with further gradual adjustments in the stance of mone-
tary policy, economic activity would expand at a moder-
ate pace and labor market conditions would remain 
strong.  Near-term risks to the economic outlook ap-
peared roughly balanced.  Inflation on a 12-month basis 
was expected to move up this year and to stabilize 
around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the 
medium term.  However, participants judged that it was 
important to continue to monitor inflation develop-
ments closely. 

Participants expected the recent solid growth in con-
sumer spending to continue, supported by further gains 
in employment and income, increased household wealth 
resulting from higher asset prices, and high levels of con-
sumer confidence.  It was noted that spending on dura-

ble goods to replace those damaged during the hurri-
canes in September may have provided a temporary 
boost to consumer spending.  In connection with solid 
growth in consumer spending, a couple of participants 
noted that the household saving rate had declined to its 
lowest level since 2005, likely driven by buoyant con-
sumer sentiment or expectations that the rise in house-
hold wealth would be sustained. 

Participants characterized their business contacts as gen-
erally upbeat about the economy; their contacts cited the 
recent tax cuts and notable improvements in the global 
economic outlook as positive factors.  Manufacturers in 
a number of Districts had responded to increased orders 
by boosting production.  Against a backdrop of higher 
energy prices and increased global demand for crude oil, 
a couple of participants revised up their forecasts for en-
ergy production in their respective Districts.  Businesses 
in a number of Districts reported plans to further in-
crease investment in coming quarters in order to expand 
capacity.  Even so, several participants expressed con-
siderable uncertainty about the degree to which changes 
to corporate taxes would support business investment 
and capacity expansion; according to these participants, 
firms may be only just beginning to determine how they 
might allocate their tax savings among investment, 
worker compensation, mergers and acquisitions, returns 
to shareholders, or other uses. 

The labor market had strengthened further in recent 
months, as indicated by continued solid payroll gains, a 
small increase in average hours worked, and a labor force 
participation rate that had held steady despite the longer-
run declining trend implied by an aging population.  
Many participants reported that labor market conditions 
were tight in their Districts, evidenced by low unemploy-
ment rates, difficulties for employers in filling open po-
sitions or retaining workers, or some signs of upward 
pressure on wages.  The unemployment rate, at 4.1 per-
cent, had remained near the lowest level seen in the past 
20 years.  It was noted that other labor market indica-
tors—such as the U-6 measure of unemployment or the 
share of involuntary part-time employment—had re-
turned to their pre-recession levels.  A few participants 
judged that while the labor market was close to full em-
ployment, some margins of slack remained; these partic-
ipants pointed to the employment-to-population ratio or 
the labor force participation rate for prime-age workers, 
which remained below pre-recession levels, as well as the 
absence to date of clear signs of a pickup in aggregate 
wage growth. 

Page 14                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



During their discussion of labor market conditions, par-
ticipants expressed a range of views about recent wage 
developments.  While some participants heard more re-
ports of wage pressures from their business contacts 
over the intermeeting period, participants generally 
noted few signs of a broad-based pickup in wage growth 
in available data.  With regard to how firms might use 
part of their tax savings to boost compensation, a few 
participants suggested that such a boost could be in the 
form of onetime bonuses or variable pay rather than a 
permanent increase in wage structures.  It was noted that 
the pace of wage gains might not increase appreciably if 
productivity growth remains low.  That said, a number 
of participants judged that the continued tightening in 
labor markets was likely to translate into faster wage in-
creases at some point. 

In their discussion of inflation developments, many par-
ticipants noted that inflation data in recent months had 
generally pointed to a gradual rise in inflation, as the 
12-month core PCE price inflation rose to 1.5 percent 
in December, up 0.2 percentage point from the low rec-
orded in the summer.  Meanwhile, total PCE price infla-
tion was 1.7 percent over the same 12-month period.  
Participants anticipated that inflation would continue to 
gradually rise as resource utilization tightened further 
and as wage pressures became more apparent; several 
expected that declines in the foreign exchange value of 
the dollar in recent months would also likely help return 
inflation to 2 percent over the medium term.  Business 
contacts in a few Districts reported that they had begun 
to have some more ability to raise prices to cover higher 
input costs.  That said, a few participants posited that the 
recently enacted corporate tax cuts might lead firms to 
cut prices in order to remain competitive or to gain mar-
ket share, which could result in a transitory drag on in-
flation. 

With regard to inflation expectations, available readings 
from surveys had been steady and TIPS-based measures 
of inflation compensation had moved up, although they 
remained low.  Many participants thought that inflation 
expectations remained well anchored and would support 
the gradual return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 per-
cent objective over the medium term.  However, a few 
other participants pointed to the record of inflation con-
sistently running below the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
jective over recent years and expressed the concern that 
longer-run inflation expectations may have slipped be-
low levels consistent with that objective. 

Many participants noted that financial conditions had 
eased significantly over the intermeeting period; these 

participants generally viewed the economic effects of the 
decline in the dollar and the rise in equity prices as more 
than offsetting the effects of the increase in nominal 
Treasury yields.  One participant reported that financial 
market contacts did not see the relatively flat slope of the 
yield curve as signaling an increased risk of recession.  A 
few others judged that it would be important to continue 
to monitor the effects of policy firming on the slope of 
the yield curve, noting the strong association between 
past yield curve inversions and recessions.   

Regulatory actions and improved risk management in re-
cent years had put the financial system in a better posi-
tion to withstand adverse shocks, such as a substantial 
decline in asset prices, than in the past.  However, amid 
elevated asset valuations and an increased use of debt by 
nonfinancial corporations, several participants cautioned 
that imbalances in financial markets may begin to 
emerge as the economy continued to operate above po-
tential.  In this environment, increased use of leverage 
by nonbank financial institutions might be difficult to 
detect in a timely manner.  It was also noted that the 
Committee should regularly reassess risks to the finan-
cial system and their implications for the economic out-
look in light of the potential for changes in regulatory 
policies over time.   

In their consideration of monetary policy, participants 
discussed the implications of recent economic and finan-
cial developments for the outlook for economic growth, 
labor market conditions, and inflation and, in turn, for 
the appropriate path of the federal funds rate.  Partici-
pants agreed that a gradual approach to raising the target 
range for the federal funds rate remained appropriate 
and reaffirmed that adjustments to the policy path would 
depend on their assessments of how the economic out-
look and risks to the outlook were evolving relative to 
the Committee’s policy objectives.  While participants 
continued to expect economic activity to expand at a 
moderate pace over the medium term, they anticipated 
that the rate of economic growth in 2018 would exceed 
their estimates of its sustainable longer-run pace and that 
labor market conditions would strengthen further.  A 
number of participants indicated that they had marked 
up their forecasts for economic growth in the near term 
relative to those made for the December meeting in light 
of the strength of recent data on economic activity in the 
United States and abroad, continued accommodative fi-
nancial conditions, and information suggesting that the 
effects of recently enacted tax changes—while still un-
certain—might be somewhat larger in the near term than 
previously thought.  Several others suggested that the 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 15



upside risks to the near-term outlook for economic ac-
tivity may have increased.  A majority of participants 
noted that a stronger outlook for economic growth 
raised the likelihood that further gradual policy firming 
would be appropriate. 

Almost all participants continued to anticipate that infla-
tion would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
jective over the medium term as economic growth re-
mained above trend and the labor market stayed strong; 
several commented that recent developments had in-
creased their confidence in the outlook for further pro-
gress toward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objec-
tive.  A couple noted that a step-up in the pace of eco-
nomic growth could tighten labor market conditions 
even more than they currently anticipated, posing risks 
to inflation and financial stability associated with sub-
stantially overshooting full employment.  However, 
some participants saw an appreciable risk that inflation 
would continue to fall short of the Committee’s objec-
tive.  These participants saw little solid evidence that the 
strength of economic activity and the labor market was 
showing through to significant wage or inflation pres-
sures.  They judged that the Committee could afford to 
be patient in deciding whether to increase the target 
range for the federal funds rate in order to support fur-
ther strengthening of the labor market and allow partic-
ipants to assess whether incoming information on infla-
tion showed that it was solidly on a track toward the 
Committee’s objective. 

Some participants also commented on the likely evolu-
tion of the neutral federal funds rate.  By most estimates, 
the neutral level of the federal funds rate had been very 
low in recent years, but it was expected to rise slowly 
over time toward its longer-run level.  However, the out-
look for the neutral rate was uncertain and would de-
pend on the interplay of a number of forces.  For exam-
ple, the neutral rate, which appeared to have fallen 
sharply during the Global Financial Crisis when financial 
headwinds had restrained demand, might move up more 
than anticipated as the global economy strengthened.  
Alternatively, the longer-run level of the neutral rate 
might remain low in the absence of fundamental shifts 
in trends in productivity, demographics, or the demand 
for safe assets. 

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, members judged that information received since 
the Committee met in December indicated that the labor 
market had continued to strengthen and that economic 

activity had been rising at a solid rate.  Gains in employ-
ment, household spending, and business fixed invest-
ment had been solid, and the unemployment rate had 
stayed low.  On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation 
and inflation for items other than food and energy had 
continued to run below 2 percent.  Market-based 
measures of inflation compensation had increased in re-
cent months but remained low; survey-based measures 
of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, 
on balance. 

Members expected that, with further gradual adjust-
ments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activ-
ity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market 
conditions would remain strong.  In their discussion of 
the economic outlook, most members viewed the recent 
data bearing on real economic activity as suggesting a 
modestly stronger near-term outlook than they had an-
ticipated at their meeting in December.  In addition, fi-
nancial conditions had remained accommodative, and 
the details of the tax legislation suggested that its effects 
on consumer and business spending—while still uncer-
tain—might be a bit greater in the near term than they 
had previously thought.  Although several saw increased 
upside risks to the near-term outlook for economic ac-
tivity, members generally continued to judge the risks to 
that outlook as remaining roughly balanced. 

Most members noted that recent information on infla-
tion along with prospects for a continued solid pace of 
economic activity provided support for the view that in-
flation on a 12-month basis would likely move up in 
2018 and stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
jective over the medium term.  However, a couple of 
members expressed concern about the outlook for infla-
tion, seeing little evidence of a meaningful improvement 
in the underlying trend in inflation, measures of inflation 
expectations, or wage growth.  Several members com-
mented that they saw both upside and downside risks to 
the inflation outlook, and members agreed to continue 
to monitor inflation developments closely. 

After assessing current conditions and the outlook for 
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
bers voted to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1¼ to 1½ percent.  They indicated that the 
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, 
thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and 
a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. 

Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate 
would depend on their assessments of realized and ex-
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s 

Page 16                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
flation.  They reiterated that this assessment would take 
into account a wide range of information, including 
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla-
tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings 
on financial and international developments.  Members 
also agreed to carefully monitor actual and expected in-
flation developments relative to the Committee’s sym-
metric inflation goal.  Members expected that economic 
conditions would evolve in a manner that would warrant 
further gradual increases in the federal funds rate.  They 
judged that a gradual approach to raising the target range 
would sustain the economic expansion and balance the 
risks to the outlook for inflation and unemployment.  
Members agreed that the strengthening in the near-term 
economic outlook increased the likelihood that a gradual 
upward trajectory of the federal funds rate would be ap-
propriate.  They therefore agreed to update the charac-
terization of their expectation for the evolution of the 
federal funds rate in the postmeeting statement to point 
to “further gradual increases” while maintaining the tar-
get range at the current meeting.  Members continued to 
anticipate that the federal funds rate would likely remain, 
for some time, below levels that were expected to prevail 
in the longer run.  Nonetheless, they again stated that the 
actual path for the federal funds rate would depend on 
the economic outlook as informed by the incoming data. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the 
following domestic policy directive, to be released at 
2:00 p.m.: 

“Effective February 1, 2018, the Federal Open 
Market Committee directs the Desk to under-
take open market operations as necessary to 
maintain the federal funds rate in a target range 
of 1¼ to 1½ percent, including overnight re-
verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur-
chase operations with maturities of more than 
one day when necessary to accommodate week-
end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at 
an offering rate of 1.25 percent, in amounts lim-
ited only by the value of Treasury securities held 
outright in the System Open Market Account 
that are available for such operations and by a 
per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. 

The Committee directs the Desk to continue 
rolling over at auction the amount of principal 
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings 

of Treasury securities maturing during each cal-
endar month that exceeds $12 billion, and to re-
invest in agency mortgage-backed securities the 
amount of principal payments from the Federal 
Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency 
mortgage-backed securities received during 
each calendar month that exceeds $8 billion.  
Small deviations from these amounts for oper-
ational reasons are acceptable. 

The Committee also directs the Desk to engage 
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as 
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal 
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities 
transactions.” 

The vote also encompassed approval of the statement 
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal Open 
Market Committee met in December indicates 
that the labor market has continued to 
strengthen and that economic activity has been 
rising at a solid rate.  Gains in employment, 
household spending, and business fixed invest-
ment have been solid, and the unemployment 
rate has stayed low.  On a 12-month basis, both 
overall inflation and inflation for items other 
than food and energy have continued to run be-
low 2 percent.  Market-based measures of infla-
tion compensation have increased in recent 
months but remain low; survey-based measures 
of longer-term inflation expectations are little 
changed, on balance. 

Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment 
and price stability.  The Committee expects that, 
with further gradual adjustments in the stance 
of monetary policy, economic activity will ex-
pand at a moderate pace and labor market con-
ditions will remain strong.  Inflation on a 
12‑month basis is expected to move up this year 
and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per-
cent objective over the medium term.  Near-
term risks to the economic outlook appear 
roughly balanced, but the Committee is moni-
toring inflation developments closely. 

In view of realized and expected labor market 
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
cided to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1¼ to 1½ percent.  The stance of 
monetary policy remains accommodative, 

Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 17



thereby supporting strong labor market condi-
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla-
tion. 

In determining the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal 
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized 
and expected economic conditions relative to its 
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
cent inflation.  This assessment will take into ac-
count a wide range of information, including 
measures of labor market conditions, indicators 
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, 
and readings on financial and international de-
velopments.  The Committee will carefully 
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.  
The Committee expects that economic condi-
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant 
further gradual increases in the federal funds 
rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for 
some time, below levels that are expected to 
prevail in the longer run.  However, the actual 
path of the federal funds rate will depend on the 
economic outlook as informed by incoming 
data.” 

Voting for this action:  Janet L. Yellen, William C. 
Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael 

Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Randal K. 
Quarles, and John C. Williams. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the 
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the 
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in-
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un-
changed at 1½ percent and voted unanimously to ap-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount 
rate) at the existing level of 2 percent.5   

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 20–21, 
2018.  The meeting adjourned at 10:50 a.m. on Janu-
ary 31, 2018. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on January 2, 2018, the 
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 
Committee meeting held on December 12–13, 2017. 

 

 

 

_____________________________ 
James A. Clouse 

Secretary
 

                                                 
5 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval 
of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and 

seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing 
such rates. 

Page 18                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee




