









































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 31–August 1, 2018


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
July 31–August 1, 2018 

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 31, 2018, at 
10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, August 1, 
2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 
 
PRESENT: 

Jerome H. Powell, Chairman 
John C. Williams, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Lael Brainard 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 

 
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, 

Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

 
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of San Francisco 
 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 
 
Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary Daly, 

David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. 
Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, 
Associate Economists 

 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 

                                                 
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 

Board of Governors 
 
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve 

Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of 
Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division 
of Supervision and Regulation, Board of 
Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of 
Financial Stability, Board of Governors 

 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, 

Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, 

Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special 

Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 

 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 

Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director, 

Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Senior 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

 
Ellen E. Meade, Edward Nelson, and Robert J. Tetlow, 

Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior 
Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 

 
John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 

2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations. 

_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 1



Luca Guerrieri, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 
Financial Stability, Board of Governors 

 
Glenn Follette and Shane M. Sherlund, Assistant 

Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, 
Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office 

of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Etienne Gagnon,4 Section Chief, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthias Paustian,4 
Section Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Hess T. Chung,4 Group Manager, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Andrea Ajello, Edward Herbst, and Bernd Schlusche,4 

Principal Economists, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 

 
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
James M. Trevino,4 Technology Analyst, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Michael Dotsey, Beverly Hirtle, and Christopher J. 

Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, New York, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

 
Anna Paulson, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Chicago 
 
Joe Peek, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of 

Boston 
 
Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, 

Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 

                                                 
3 Attended Tuesday session only. 
4 Attended through the discussion of monetary policy options 
at the effective lower bound. 

A. Lee Smith, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City 

 
Brent Meyer, Policy Advisor and Economist, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
 
Cristina Arellano, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis  
 

Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower 
Bound 
The staff provided a briefing that summarized its analy-
sis of the extent to which some of the Committee’s mon-
etary policy tools could provide adequate policy accom-
modation if, in future economic downturns, the policy 
rate were again to become constrained by the effective 
lower bound (ELB).5  The staff examined simulations 
from the staff’s FRB/US model and various other eco-
nomic models to assess the likelihood of the policy rate 
returning to the ELB and to evaluate how much addi-
tional policy accommodation could be delivered by the 
current toolkit.  This toolkit included threshold-based 
forward-guidance policies, in which the Committee 
communicates that the federal funds rate will remain at 
the ELB until either inflation or the unemployment rate 
reaches a certain threshold, and balance sheet policies, 
involving increases in the size or duration of the Federal 
Reserve’s asset holdings. 

The staff’s analysis indicated that under various policy 
rules, including those prescribing aggressive reductions 
in the federal funds rate in response to adverse economic 
shocks, there was a meaningful risk that the ELB could 
bind sometime during the next decade.  That analysis 
also implied that threshold-based forward guidance and 
balance sheet actions could provide additional accom-
modation that could help support economic activity and 
mitigate disinflationary pressures in these episodes.  In 
the model simulations, because of unanticipated shocks 
and lags in the transmission of the effects of monetary 
policy actions on economic activity and inflation, the ef-
fectiveness of monetary policy in general, including for-
ward-guidance and balance sheet policies, was limited in 
mitigating the initial downturn in the economy.  The 
staff noted that there was considerable uncertainty sur-
rounding the estimated effects of those policies on the 
economy; in addition, estimates of how frequently the 

5 In the analysis, the staff assumed that the ELB was 12.5 basis 
points, equal to the midpoint of the target range for the federal 
funds rate from December 2008 to December 2015. 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



ELB could bind in the future differed across the models 
that the staff examined. 

In the discussion that followed the staff’s briefing, par-
ticipants generally agreed that their current toolkit could 
provide significant accommodation but expressed con-
cern about the potential limits on policy effectiveness 
stemming from the ELB.  They viewed it as a matter of 
prudent planning to evaluate potential policy options in 
advance of such ELB events.  Many participants com-
mented on the monetary policy implications of the ap-
parent secular decline in neutral real interest rates.  That 
decline was viewed as likely driven by various factors, 
including slower trend growth of the labor force and 
productivity as well as increased demand for safe assets.  
In such circumstances, those participants saw monetary 
policy as having less scope than in the past to reduce the 
federal funds rate in response to negative shocks.  Ac-
cordingly, in their view, spells at the ELB could become 
more frequent and protracted than in the past, con-
sistent with the staff’s analysis.  Moreover, the secular 
decline in interest rates was a global phenomenon, and a 
couple of participants emphasized that this decline in-
creased the likelihood that the ELB could bind simulta-
neously in a number of countries.  A few other partici-
pants raised the concern that frequent or extended ELB 
episodes could result in expectations for inflation that 
were below the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec-
tive, further limiting the scope for reductions in the fed-
eral funds rate to serve as a buffer for the economy and 
increasing the likelihood of ELB episodes.  Fiscal policy 
was viewed as a potentially important tool in addressing 
a future economic downturn in which monetary policy 
was constrained by the ELB; however, countercyclical 
fiscal policy actions in the United States may be con-
strained by the high and rising level of federal govern-
ment debt.  A couple of participants saw macropruden-
tial and regulatory policies as tools that could be used to 
mitigate the risk of financial imbalances inducing an eco-
nomic downturn in which the ELB constrained the fed-
eral funds rate.   

Participants generally agreed that both forward guidance 
and balance sheet actions would be effective tools to use 
if the federal funds rate were to become constrained by 
the ELB.   In the Addendum to the Policy Normaliza-
tion Principles and Plans statement issued in June 2017, 
the Committee indicated that it would be prepared to use 
its full range of tools, including altering the size and 
composition of its balance sheet, if future economic 
conditions were to warrant a more accommodative 
monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing 

the federal funds rate.  However, participants acknowl-
edged that there may be limits to the effectiveness of 
these tools in addressing an ELB episode.  They also em-
phasized that there was considerable uncertainty about 
the economic effects of these tools.  Consistent with that 
view, a few participants noted that economic researchers 
had not yet reached a consensus about the effectiveness 
of unconventional policies.  A number of participants 
indicated that there might be significant costs associated 
with the use of unconventional policies, and that these 
costs might limit, in particular, the extent to which the 
Committee should engage in large-scale asset purchases. 

Participants discussed the prominent role that previous 
communications about forward guidance and balance 
sheet actions, in conjunction with those policy measures, 
had in shaping public expectations about the potential 
future use of these tools and in determining their effec-
tiveness.  In general, advance communications about 
these policies were seen as important in reinforcing pub-
lic understanding of the Committee’s commitment to 
achieving its dual-mandate objectives.  However, several 
participants cautioned against being too specific about 
how the Committee would deploy such tools.  In partic-
ular, it was difficult to anticipate the forces that might 
push the economy into a recession, and thus preserving 
some flexibility in responding to an economic downturn 
could be appropriate.  Moreover, although making mul-
tiyear commitments regarding asset purchases or the fu-
ture path of the federal funds rate could enhance the ef-
fectiveness of these policies, such commitments could 
unduly constrain the choices of the Committee in the 
future. 

While the Committee’s current toolkit was judged to be 
effective, participants agreed, as a matter of prudent 
planning, to discuss their policy options further and to 
broaden the discussion to include the evaluation of po-
tential alternative policy strategies for addressing the 
ELB.  Building on their discussions at previous meet-
ings, participants suggested that a number of possible al-
ternatives might be worth consideration and agreed to 
return to this topic at future meetings.  Several partici-
pants indicated that it would be desirable to hold peri-
odic and systematic reviews in which the Committee as-
sessed the strengths and weaknesses of its current mon-
etary policy framework. 

Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
ket Operations 
The manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) provided a summary of developments in do-

Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



mestic and global financial markets over the intermeet-
ing period.  Asset prices were influenced by a number of 
factors, including reports concerning trade tensions 
among the United States and its major trading partners, 
foreign monetary policy developments, and data point-
ing to strong growth momentum in the United States.  
Escalating trade tensions between China and the United 
States prompted notable market moves, particularly in 
foreign exchange markets.  News on an agreement be-
tween the United States and the European Union to con-
tinue talks to resolve their trade disputes provided some 
support for global equity prices.  The manager summa-
rized recent policy announcements by the  
European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Japan 
(BOJ).  European yields moved lower following a revi-
sion of the ECB’s forward guidance at its June meeting 
concerning asset purchases and the path of short-term 
rates.  The Japanese yield curve steepened following re-
ports that the BOJ may facilitate an increase in longer-
term interest rates.  At its July meeting, the BOJ an-
nounced a number of changes with respect to forward 
guidance on its policy outlook, including its intention to 
keep interest rates low for an extended period.  Mean-
while, expectations concerning the path of monetary 
policy in the United States were little changed over the 
intermeeting period.  Futures quotes indicated that mar-
ket participants placed high odds on a further quarter-
point firming in the federal funds rate at the September 
FOMC meeting.  Responses to the Open Market Desk’s 
Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Partic-
ipants indicated that concerns about trade tensions had 
not affected the outlook for U.S. monetary policy. 

The deputy manager followed with a discussion of 
money markets and open market operations.  Money 
market rates had moved up in line with the 20 basis point 
increase in the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate at 
the June meeting.  Over the days following the June 
FOMC meeting, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) 
moved up relative to the IOER rate, reportedly reflect-
ing some special factors in the federal funds market, in-
cluding increased demand for overnight funding by 
banks in connection with liquidity regulations and a pull-
back by Federal Home Loan Banks in their lending in 
the federal funds market.  These developments proved 
temporary, and the EFFR subsequently returned to a 
level about 4 basis points below the IOER rate.  The 
deputy manager also discussed the Desk’s plans for 
small-value purchases of agency mortgage-backed secu-
rities (MBS).  The staff projected that principal payments 
from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency MBS 
would fall below the FOMC’s monthly redemption cap 

beginning in October.  If principal payments followed 
this anticipated trajectory, the Desk planned to begin 
conducting monthly small-value purchases of agency 
MBS at that time to maintain operational readiness.  The 
deputy manager also discussed the Federal Housing Fi-
nance Agency’s Single Security Initiative, under which 
Uniform Mortgage-Backed Securities (UMBS) would be 
issued by both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac beginning 
in June 2019.  The Desk planned to develop the capabil-
ity to conduct UMBS transactions and, to more effi-
ciently manage the portfolio, convert some portion of 
the SOMA’s existing agency MBS holdings to UMBS 
where appropriate. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s 
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.  
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
riod. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed for the July 31–August 1 
meeting indicated that labor market conditions contin-
ued to strengthen in recent months and that real gross 
domestic product (GDP) rose at a strong rate in the first 
half of the year.  Consumer price inflation, as measured 
by the 12-month percentage change in the price index 
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), re-
mained near 2 percent in June.  Survey-based measures 
of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed 
on balance. 

Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a strong 
pace again in June.  The national unemployment rate 
moved up to 4.0 percent, but the labor force participa-
tion rate rose by a similar amount, leaving the employ-
ment-to-population ratio unchanged from May.  The 
three-month moving averages of the unemployment 
rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics were 
each at or below the lows achieved during the previous 
expansion.  The share of workers employed part time for 
economic reasons edged down to its lowest level since 
late 2007.  The rate of private-sector job openings ticked 
down in May but remained elevated, while the rate of 
quits moved higher; initial claims for unemployment in-
surance benefits continued to be low through mid-July. 

Recent readings showed that increases in hourly labor 
compensation stepped up modestly over the past year.  
The employment cost index for private workers in-
creased 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in June 
(compared with 2.4 percent over the same 12 months a 
year earlier), and average hourly earnings for all employ-
ees rose 2.7 percent over that period (compared with 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



2.5 percent over the same 12 months a year earlier).  
(Data on compensation per hour that reflected the com-
prehensive revision of the national income and product 
accounts by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) 
were not available at the time of the meeting.) 

Total industrial production was little changed, on net, 
from April to June despite solid increases in the output 
of the mining sector.  Over the first half of the year, 
manufacturing production rose at a modest pace.   
Automakers’ assembly schedules suggested a sizable in-
crease in light motor vehicle production in the third 
quarter, and broader indicators of manufacturing pro-
duction, such as the new orders indexes from national 
and regional manufacturing surveys, pointed to solid 
gains in factory output in the near term. 

Real PCE rose briskly in the second quarter after a mod-
est gain in the first quarter.  Light motor vehicle sales 
maintained a robust pace in June, and indicators of ve-
hicle demand were mixed but generally favorable.  More 
broadly, recent readings on key factors that influence 
consumer spending—including gains in employment, 
real disposable personal income, and households’ net 
worth—continued to be supportive of solid real PCE 
growth in the near term.  Consumer sentiment, as meas-
ured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consum-
ers, remained upbeat in June and July. 

Residential investment declined again in the second 
quarter.  Starts for new single-family homes were little 
changed, on average, in May and June, but starts of mul-
tifamily units declined on net.  The issuance of building 
permits for both types of housing was lower in the sec-
ond quarter than in the first quarter, which suggested 
that starts might move lower in coming months.  Sales 
of existing homes edged down in May and June, while 
sales of new homes moved up on balance. 

Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
tellectual property rose at a moderate pace in the second 
quarter after a strong gain in the first quarter.  Nominal 
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air-
craft rose in May and June, and forward-looking indica-
tors of business equipment spending—such as the back-
log of unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat 
readings on business sentiment from national and re-
gional surveys—continued to point to robust gains in 
equipment spending in the near term.  Real business ex-
penditures for nonresidential structures expanded at a 
solid pace again in the second quarter.  However, the 
number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—
an indicator of business spending for structures in the 

drilling and mining sector—decreased slightly in recent 
weeks. 

Total real government purchases rose at a faster rate in 
the second quarter than in the first.  Real federal defense 
and nondefense purchases both increased in the second 
quarter.  Real purchases by state and local governments 
also moved higher; state and local government payrolls 
and construction spending by those governments in-
creased in the second quarter. 

The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in 
May, as exports, led by agricultural products (particularly 
soybeans) and capital goods, increased strongly and im-
ports increased only modestly.  In June, however, ad-
vance data suggested that nominal goods exports fell and 
imports rose.  All told, the BEA estimates that net ex-
ports made a positive contribution of about  
1 percentage point to real GDP growth in the second 
quarter after a near-zero contribution in the first.   

Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE 
price index, increased 2.2 percent over the 12 months 
ending in June.  Core PCE price inflation, which ex-
cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 
1.9 percent over that same period.  The consumer price 
index (CPI) rose 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending 
in June, while core CPI inflation was 2.3 percent.  Recent 
readings on survey-based measures of longer-run infla-
tion expectations—including those from the Michigan 
survey and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and 
Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on 
balance. 

Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity 
expanded at a moderate pace in the second quarter.  
Monthly indicators pointed to a pickup in the pace of 
economic activity in most advanced foreign economies 
(AFEs) following a temporary dip in the first quarter.  
However, real GDP growth remained moderate in the 
euro area and appeared to have slowed notably in many 
emerging market economies (EMEs), especially Mexico, 
from an unusually strong start to the year.  Foreign in-
flation fell in the second quarter, largely reflecting lower 
retail energy and food price inflation.  Underlying infla-
tion pressures in most foreign economies, especially in 
some AFEs, remained subdued. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
Concerns regarding international trade policy weighed 
on market sentiment at times over the intermeeting pe-
riod, prompting notable declines in some foreign equity 
markets but leaving only a modest imprint on domestic 
asset prices on net.  Meanwhile, FOMC communications 

Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 5



were viewed by market participants as slightly less ac-
commodative than expected, and domestic economic 
data releases were seen as mixed.  On balance, market-
based measures of the expected path of the federal funds 
rate through the end of 2019 edged up slightly.  Yields 
on medium- and longer-term nominal Treasury securi-
ties were little changed.  The broad dollar index moved 
up.  Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses 
and households remained supportive of economic activ-
ity on balance. 

Although the reactions of asset prices to FOMC com-
munications during the period were generally modest, 
market participants reportedly interpreted the June 
FOMC statement and Summary of Economic Projec-
tions (SEP) as somewhat less accommodative than ex-
pected.  The probability of an increase in the target range 
for the federal funds rate occurring at the August FOMC 
meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures 
contracts, remained close to zero; the probability of an 
increase at the September FOMC meeting rose to about 
90 percent by the end of the intermeeting period.  Levels 
of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 and 2020 
implied by overnight index swap (OIS) rates edged up 
slightly on net. 

The nominal Treasury yield curve flattened somewhat 
during the intermeeting period.  Measures of inflation 
compensation derived from Treasury Inflation- 
Protected Securities were little changed on net. 

Concerns about international trade disputes led to a 
slight decline in sentiment toward some domestic risky 
assets early in the period, but sentiment was buoyed later 
by positive corporate earnings releases for the second 
quarter.  Broad U.S. equity price indexes displayed mixed 
results since the June FOMC meeting.  Option-implied 
volatility on the S&P 500 index at the one-month hori-
zon—the VIX—was little changed, on net, and re-
mained only a bit above the very low levels that prevailed 
before early February.  Over the intermeeting period, 
spreads of yields on nonfinancial corporate bonds over 
those of comparable-maturity Treasury securities were 
little changed, on net, for both investment- and specula-
tive-grade firms.  These spreads remained low by histor-
ical standards. 

Short-term funding markets functioned smoothly, and 
spreads of unsecured rates over comparable-maturity 
OIS rates continued to narrow during the intermeeting 
period.  After the June FOMC meeting, the EFFR rose 
around 20 basis points, in line with the increase in the 
IOER rate, and traded well within the target range 
throughout the period. 

The dollar appreciated against most currencies, with the 
notable exception of the Mexican peso, which appreci-
ated on some easing of investor concerns around pro-
spective economic policies of the newly elected govern-
ment.  Escalating trade tensions contributed to an unu-
sually sharp depreciation of the Chinese renminbi.  
Trade tensions also drove foreign equity prices lower, 
but there was a modest reversal late in the intermeeting 
period following an agreement between the United 
States and the European Union to hold off on tariff in-
creases pending further negotiations.  On net, equity 
prices were little changed in the AFEs, while they de-
clined in the EMEs, led largely by a steep drop in China.  
Outflows from dedicated emerging market funds 
slowed, and EME sovereign bond spreads narrowed 
slightly. 

On balance, longer-term bond yields in the AFEs de-
clined slightly over the intermeeting period.  ECB com-
munications following its June meeting were perceived 
as more accommodative than expected and led to a no-
ticeable decline in market-based measures of policy rate 
expectations.  The BOJ issued revised forward guidance 
at its July meeting indicating that it intends to maintain 
current low short- and long-term interest rates for an ex-
tended period.  Finally, the Bank of England held its pol-
icy rate steady at its June meeting, but U.K. yields de-
clined slightly amid ongoing Brexit-related concerns as 
well as lower-than-expected inflation data.  

Financing conditions for nonfinancial corporations con-
tinued to be favorable over the intermeeting period.  
Gross issuance of corporate bonds and institutional lev-
eraged loans picked up in May and stayed strong in June, 
with the rise in corporate bond issuance concentrated in 
the investment-grade segment of the market.  Mean-
while, the volume of equity issuance remained robust. 

Growth of outstanding commercial and industrial (C&I) 
loans held by banks was strong, on average, in June.  Re-
spondents to the June Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur-
vey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported that 
their institutions had eased standards and terms on C&I 
loans in the second quarter, most often citing increased 
competition from other lenders and increased ease of 
transacting in the secondary market as the reasons for 
doing so.  Although some signs of deterioration emerged 
over the intermeeting period, the credit quality of nonfi-
nancial corporations continued to be solid overall.  The 
ratio of aggregate debt to assets in this sector stayed near 
multidecade highs.  Gross issuance of municipal bonds 
in June was robust, continuing to increase from its slow 
start to the year. 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE) 
remained accommodative.  CRE loans at banks main-
tained solid growth over the past several quarters, with 
growth shared across all three major CRE loan catego-
ries.  On a weighted basis across all major CRE loan cat-
egories, respondents to the June SLOOS reported that 
standards and demand for CRE loans continued to be 
unchanged, on the whole, over the second quarter.  In-
terest rate spreads on commercial mortgage-backed se-
curities (CMBS) were little changed over the intermeet-
ing period and remained near their post-crisis lows, 
while issuance of non-agency and agency CMBS main-
tained a solid pace in the second quarter. 

Most borrowers in the residential mortgage market con-
tinued to face accommodative financing conditions.  For 
borrowers with low credit scores, credit conditions con-
tinued to ease but stayed tight overall.  Growth in home-
purchase mortgages slowed a bit, and refinancing activ-
ity continued to be muted over the past year, with both 
developments partly reflecting the rise in mortgage rates 
earlier this year.  Relative to the June FOMC meeting, 
interest rates on 30-year conforming mortgages and 
yields on agency MBS were little changed. 

Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were 
little changed so far this year, on balance, and remained 
largely supportive of growth in household spending.  
Growth in consumer credit picked up in May from the 
more moderate pace seen earlier this year.  Despite rising 
interest rates, financing rates remained low compared 
with historical levels, and recent household surveys indi-
cated that consumers’ assessments of buying conditions 
for autos and other expensive durable goods were gen-
erally positive.  Credit supply conditions also continued 
to be largely supportive of spending.  A moderate net 
fraction of July SLOOS respondents reported easing 
standards on auto loans over the previous three months 
after several quarters in which banks had reported tight-
ening standards.  However, a significant net fraction of 
banks reportedly continued to tighten standards for 
credit card accounts. 

The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to 
financial stability; the report again characterized the fi-
nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as 
moderate on balance.  This overall assessment incorpo-
rated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associated 
with asset valuation pressures continued to be elevated, 
with no major asset class exhibiting valuations below 
their historical midpoints.  Additionally, the staff judged 
vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage and ma-

turity and liquidity transformation to be low, vulnerabil-
ities from household leverage as being in the low-to-
moderate range, and vulnerabilities from leverage in the 
nonfinancial business sector as elevated. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for this FOMC 
meeting, the staff continued to project that the economy 
would expand at an above-trend pace.  Real GDP was 
forecast to increase in the second half of this year at a 
pace that was just a little slower than in the first half of 
the year.  Over the 2018–20 period, output was projected 
to rise further above the staff’s estimate of potential out-
put, and the unemployment rate was projected to decline 
further below the staff’s estimate of the longer-run nat-
ural rate.  However, with labor market conditions already 
tight, the staff continued to assume that the projected 
decline in the unemployment rate will be attenuated by 
a greater-than-usual cyclical improvement in the labor 
force participation rate.  Relative to the forecast pre-
pared for the June meeting, the projection for real GDP 
growth was revised up a little, primarily in response to 
stronger incoming data on household spending.  In ad-
dition, the staff continued to anticipate that supply con-
straints might restrain output growth somewhat in the 
medium term.  The unemployment rate was projected to 
be a little higher over the next few quarters than in the 
previous forecast, but it was essentially unrevised there-
after. 

The staff forecast for total PCE price inflation in 2018 
was revised down a little, mainly because of a slower-
than-expected increase in consumer energy prices in the 
second quarter and a downward revision to the forecast 
for energy price inflation in the second half of this year.  
The staff continued to project that total PCE inflation 
would remain near the Committee’s 2 percent objective 
over the medium term and that core PCE price inflation 
would run slightly higher than total inflation over that 
period because of a projected decline in consumer en-
ergy prices in 2019 and 2020. 

The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections 
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years.  The 
staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth 
and the unemployment rate as balanced.  On the upside, 
household spending and business investment could ex-
pand faster over the next few years than the staff pro-
jected, supported in part by the tax cuts enacted last year.  
On the downside, trade policies could move in a direc-
tion that would have significant negative effects on eco-
nomic growth.  Another possibility was that recent fiscal 

Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 7



policy actions could produce less of a boost to aggregate 
demand than assumed in the baseline projection, as the 
current tightness of resource utilization may result in 
smaller multiplier effects than would be typical at other 
points in the business cycle.  Risks to the inflation pro-
jection also were seen as balanced.  The upside risk that 
inflation could increase more than expected in an econ-
omy that was projected to move further above its poten-
tial was counterbalanced by the downside risk that 
longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than 
was assumed in the staff forecast. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and the 
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information 
received since the FOMC met in June indicated that the 
labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco-
nomic activity had been rising at a strong rate.  Job gains 
had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the 
unemployment rate had stayed low.  Household spend-
ing and business fixed investment had grown strongly.  
On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and core in-
flation, which excludes changes in food and energy 
prices, had remained near 2 percent.  Indicators of 
longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, 
on balance. 

Participants generally noted that economic growth in the 
second quarter had been strong; incoming data indicated 
considerable momentum in spending by households and 
businesses.  Several participants stressed the possibility 
that real GDP growth in the second quarter may have 
been boosted by transitory factors, including an outsized 
increase in U.S. exports.  For the second half of the year, 
participants generally expected that GDP growth would 
likely slow from its second-quarter rate but would still 
exceed that of potential output.  Participants noted a 
number of favorable economic factors that were sup-
porting above-trend GDP growth; these included a 
strong labor market, stimulative federal tax and spending 
policies, accommodative financial conditions, and con-
tinued high levels of household and business confidence.  
Participants generally viewed the risks to the economic 
outlook as roughly balanced. 

Reports from business contacts confirmed a robust pace 
of expansion in several sectors of the economy, includ-
ing energy, manufacturing, and services.  Crude oil pro-
duction was reported as having grown rapidly.  In con-
trast to other sectors, residential construction activity ap-
peared to have softened somewhat, possibly reflecting 
declining home affordability, higher mortgage rates, 

scarcity of available lots in certain cities, and delays in 
building approvals.  However, a couple of participants 
reported vibrancy in industrial and multifamily construc-
tion activity.  Business contacts in various sectors had 
cited labor shortages and other supply constraints as im-
pediments to production.  Furthermore, recent tariff in-
creases had put upward pressure on input prices.  Busi-
ness contacts in a few Districts reported that uncertainty 
regarding trade policy had led to some reductions or de-
lays in their investment spending.  Nonetheless, a num-
ber of participants indicated that most businesses con-
cerned about trade disputes had not yet cut back their 
capital expenditures or hiring but might do so if trade 
tensions were not resolved soon.  Several participants 
observed that the agricultural sector had been adversely 
affected by significant declines in crop and livestock 
prices over the intermeeting period.  A couple of partic-
ipants noted that this development likely partly flowed 
from trade tensions. 

Participants agreed that labor market conditions had 
strengthened further over the intermeeting period.  Pay-
rolls had grown strongly in June, and labor market tight-
ness was reflected in recent readings on rates of private-
sector job openings and quits and on job-to-job switch-
ing by workers.  Although the unemployment rate in-
creased slightly in June, this increase was accompanied 
by an uptick in the labor force participation rate. 

Many participants commented on the fact that measures 
of aggregate nominal wage growth had so far picked up 
only modestly.  Among the factors cited as containing 
the pickup in wage growth were low trend productivity 
growth, lags in the response of nominal wage growth to 
resource pressures, and improvements in the terms of 
employment that were not recorded in the wage data.  
Alternatively, the recent pace of nominal wage growth 
might indicate continued slack in the labor market.  
However, some participants expected a pickup in aggre-
gate nominal wage growth to occur before long, with a 
number of participants reporting that wage pressures in 
their Districts were rising or that firms now exhibited 
greater willingness to grant wage increases. 

Participants noted that both overall inflation and infla-
tion for items other than food and energy remained near 
2 percent on a 12-month basis.  A few participants ex-
pressed increased confidence that the recent return of 
inflation to near the Committee’s longer-term 2 percent 
objective would be sustained.  Several participants com-
mented that increases in the prices of particular goods, 
such as those induced by the tariff increases, would likely 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



be one source of short-term upward pressure on the in-
flation rate, although offsetting influences—including 
the negative effects that trade developments were having 
on agricultural prices—were also noted.  Reports from 
several Districts suggested that firms had greater scope 
than in the recent past to raise prices in response to 
strong demand or increases in input costs, including 
those associated with tariff increases and recent rises in 
fuel and freight expenses.  Many participants anticipated 
that, over the medium term, high levels of resource  
utilization and stable inflation expectations would keep 
inflation near 2 percent.  However, some participants 
observed that inflation in recent years had shown only a 
weak connection to measures of resource pressures or 
indicated that they would like to see further evidence 
that measures of underlying inflation or readings on in-
flation expectations were on course to attain levels con-
sistent with sustained achievement of the Committee’s 
symmetric 2 percent inflation objective.  Although a few 
participants observed that the trimmed mean measure of 
inflation calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal-
las was still below 2 percent, a couple noted forecasts 
that this measure would reach 2 percent by the end of 
the year.  Some participants raised the concern that a 
prolonged period in which the economy operated be-
yond potential could give rise to inflationary pressures 
or to financial imbalances that could eventually trigger 
an economic downturn. 

Participants commented on a number of risks and un-
certainties associated with their outlook for economic 
activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium 
term.  They generally continued to see fiscal policy and 
the strengthening of the labor market as supportive of 
economic growth in the near term.  Some noted larger 
or more persistent positive effects of these factors as an 
upside risk to the outlook.  A few participants indicated, 
however, that a faster-than-expected fading of the fiscal 
impetus or a greater-than-anticipated subsequent fiscal 
tightening constituted a downside risk.  In addition, all 
participants pointed to ongoing trade disagreements and 
proposed trade measures as an important source of un-
certainty and risks.  Participants observed that if a large-
scale and prolonged dispute over trade policies devel-
oped, there would likely be adverse effects on business 
sentiment, investment spending, and employment.  
Moreover, wide-ranging tariff increases would also re-
duce the purchasing power of U.S. households.  Further 
negative effects in such a scenario could include reduc-
tions in productivity and disruptions of supply chains.  
Other downside risks cited included the possibility of a 

significant weakening in the housing sector, a sharp in-
crease in oil prices, or a severe slowdown in EMEs. 

Participants remarked on the extent to which financial 
conditions remained supportive of economic expansion.  
Over the intermeeting period, only a small change in 
overall financial conditions occurred, with modest 
movements on net in equity prices and in the foreign 
exchange value of the dollar.  The yield curve had flat-
tened further over the intermeeting period. 

Participants who commented on financial stability noted 
that asset valuations remained elevated and corporate 
borrowing terms remained easy.  They also noted that 
regulatory changes introduced in the past decade had 
helped to reduce the susceptibility of the financial sector 
to runs and to strengthen the capital positions of banks 
and other financial institutions.  In discussing the capital 
positions of large banks, a few participants emphasized 
that financial stability risks could be reduced if these in-
stitutions further boosted their capital cushions while 
their profits are strong and the economic outlook is fa-
vorable; arguments for and against the activation of the 
countercyclical capital buffer as a means of further 
strengthening the capital positions of large banks were 
discussed in this context. 

In their consideration of monetary policy, participants 
discussed the implications of recent economic and finan-
cial developments for the economic outlook and the as-
sociated risks to that outlook.  Participants remarked on 
recent above-trend growth in real GDP and on indica-
tors of resource utilization.  Some commented that con-
sumer spending had been quite strong in the second 
quarter, confirming their impressions that the first-quar-
ter weakness had been temporary.  Several participants 
also pointed to the continued strength in business fixed 
investment, although the persistent weakness and the 
risk of a further slowdown in residential investment were 
also noted.  A few participants suggested there could still 
be some labor market slack, citing recent increases in la-
bor force participation rates relative to prevailing demo-
graphically driven downward trends; the participation 
rate of prime-age men, in particular, was still below its 
previous business cycle peak.  Other participants judged 
that labor market conditions were tight, pointing to 
other data, including job quits and openings rates, and 
anecdotes from contacts. 

Participants generally characterized inflation as running 
close to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent, and 
most of those who expressed a view indicated that recent 
readings on inflation had come in close to their expecta-
tions.  Consistent with their SEP submissions in June, 

Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 9



several participants remarked that inflation, measured on 
a 12-month basis, was likely to move modestly above the 
Committee’s objective for a time.  Others pointed to 
some indicators suggesting that long-term inflation ex-
pectations could be below levels consistent with the 
Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. 

Participants generally judged that the current stance of 
monetary policy remained accommodative, supporting 
strong labor market conditions and inflation of around 
2 percent.  Participants agreed that it would be appropri-
ate for the Committee to leave the target range for the 
federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting.   

With regard to the medium term, various participants in-
dicated that information gathered since the Committee 
met in June had not significantly altered their outlook for 
the U.S. economy.  Many participants suggested that if 
incoming data continued to support their current eco-
nomic outlook, it would likely soon be appropriate to 
take another step in removing policy accommodation.  
Participants generally expected that further gradual in-
creases in the target range for the federal funds rate 
would be consistent with a sustained expansion of eco-
nomic activity, strong labor market conditions, and in-
flation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec-
tive over the medium term.  Many participants reiterated 
that the actual path for the federal funds rate would ulti-
mately depend on the incoming data and on how those 
data affect the economic outlook. 

Participants discussed the economic forces and risks 
they saw as providing the rationale for gradual increases 
in the federal funds rate as well as scenarios that might 
cause them to depart from this expected path.  Among 
other factors, they pointed to uncertainty about the ap-
propriate level of the federal funds rate over the longer 
run and to constraints on the provision of monetary ac-
commodation during ELB episodes as reasons for pro-
ceeding gradually in the removal of accommodation.  
Some participants noted that stronger underlying mo-
mentum in the economy was an upside risk; most ex-
pressed the view that an escalation in international trade 
disputes was a potentially consequential downside risk 
for real activity.  Some participants suggested that, in the 
event of a major escalation in trade disputes, the com-
plex nature of trade issues, including the entire range of 
their effects on output and inflation, presented a chal-
lenge in determining the appropriate monetary policy re-
sponse. 

Participants also discussed the possible implications of a 
flattening in the term structure of market interest rates.  
Several participants cited statistical evidence for the 

United States that inversions of the yield curve have of-
ten preceded recessions.  They suggested that policy-
makers should pay close attention to the slope of the 
yield curve in assessing the economic and policy outlook.  
Other participants emphasized that inferring economic 
causality from statistical correlations was not appropri-
ate.  A number of global factors were seen as contrib-
uting to downward pressure on term premiums, includ-
ing central bank asset purchase programs and the strong 
worldwide demand for safe assets.  In such an environ-
ment, an inversion of the yield curve might not have the 
significance that the historical record would suggest;  the 
signal to be taken from the yield curve needed to be con-
sidered in the context of other economic and financial 
indicators. 

A couple of participants commented on issues related to 
the operating framework for the implementation of 
monetary policy, including, among other things, the im-
plications of changes in financial market regulations for 
the demand for reserves and for the size and composi-
tion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  These par-
ticipants judged that it would be important for the Com-
mittee to resume its discussion of operating frameworks 
before too long.  The Chairman suggested that the Com-
mittee would likely resume a discussion of operating 
frameworks in the fall. 

Many participants noted that it would likely be appropri-
ate in the not-too-distant future to revise the Commit-
tee’s characterization of the stance of monetary policy in 
its postmeeting statement.  They agreed that the state-
ment’s language that “the stance of monetary policy re-
mains accommodative” would, at some point fairly 
soon, no longer be appropriate.  Participants noted that 
the federal funds rate was moving closer to the range of 
estimates of its neutral level.  A number of participants 
emphasized the considerable uncertainty in estimates of 
the neutral rate of interest, stemming from sources such 
as fiscal policy and large-scale asset purchase programs.  
Against this background, continuing to provide an ex-
plicit assessment of the federal funds rate relative to its 
neutral level could convey a false sense of precision.   

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, members judged that information received since 
the FOMC met in June indicated that the labor market 
had continued to strengthen and that economic activity 
had been rising at a strong rate.  Job gains had been 
strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy-
ment rate had stayed low.  Household spending and 
business fixed investment had grown strongly.  On a 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for 
items other than food and energy remained near 2 per-
cent.  Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations 
were little changed, on balance. 

Policymakers viewed the recent data as indicating that 
the outlook for the economy was evolving about as they 
had expected.  Consequently, members expected that 
further gradual increases in the target range for the fed-
eral funds rate would be consistent with sustained ex-
pansion of economic activity, strong labor market con-
ditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 
2 percent objective over the medium term.  Members 
continued to judge that the risks to the economic out-
look appeared roughly balanced. 

After assessing the incoming data, current conditions, 
and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, 
and inflation, members agreed to maintain the target 
range for the federal funds rate at 1¾ to 2 percent.  They 
noted that the stance of monetary policy remained ac-
commodative, thereby supporting strong labor market 
conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. 

Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate 
would depend on their assessments of realized and ex-
pected economic conditions relative to the objectives of 
maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.  They re-
iterated that this assessment would take into account a 
wide range of information, including measures of labor 
market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and 
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and in-
ternational developments.  

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the 
following domestic policy directive, to be released at 
2:00 p.m.: 

“Effective August 2, 2018, the Federal Open 
Market Committee directs the Desk to under-
take open market operations as necessary to 
maintain the federal funds rate in a target range 
of 1¾ to 2 percent, including overnight reverse 
repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase 
operations with maturities of more than one day 
when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
ing rate of 1.75 percent, in amounts limited only 
by the value of Treasury securities held outright 
in the System Open Market Account that are 

available for such operations and by a per-coun-
terparty limit of $30 billion per day. 

The Committee directs the Desk to continue 
rolling over at auction the amount of principal 
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings 
of Treasury securities maturing during each cal-
endar month that exceeds $24 billion, and to re-
invest in agency mortgage-backed securities the 
amount of principal payments from the Federal 
Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency 
mortgage-backed securities received during 
each calendar month that exceeds $16 billion.  
Small deviations from these amounts for oper-
ational reasons are acceptable. 

The Committee also directs the Desk to engage 
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as 
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal 
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities 
transactions.” 

The vote also encompassed approval of the statement 
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal Open 
Market Committee met in June indicates that 
the labor market has continued to strengthen 
and that economic activity has been rising at a 
strong rate.  Job gains have been strong, on av-
erage, in recent months, and the unemployment 
rate has stayed low.  Household spending and 
business fixed investment have grown strongly.  
On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and 
inflation for items other than food and energy 
remain near 2 percent.  Indicators of longer-
term inflation expectations are little changed, on 
balance. 

Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment 
and price stability.  The Committee expects that 
further gradual increases in the target range for 
the federal funds rate will be consistent with 
sustained expansion of economic activity, 
strong labor market conditions, and inflation 
near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob-
jective over the medium term.  Risks to the eco-
nomic outlook appear roughly balanced. 

In view of realized and expected labor market 
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
cided to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1¾ to 2 percent.  The stance of 
monetary policy remains accommodative, 

Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 11



thereby supporting strong labor market condi-
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla-
tion. 

In determining the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal 
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized 
and expected economic conditions relative to its 
maximum employment objective and its sym-
metric 2 percent inflation objective.  This as-
sessment will take into account a wide range of 
information, including measures of labor mar-
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures 
and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
nancial and international developments.” 

Voting for this action:  Jerome H. Powell, John C. Wil-
liams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael 
Brainard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Ran-
dal K. Quarles. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

Ms. George voted as alternate member at this meeting. 

Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the 
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the 

Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in-
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un-
changed at 1.95 percent and voted unanimously to ap-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount 
rate) at the existing level of 2½ percent, effective Au-
gust 2, 2018.6  

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 25–
26, 2018.  The meeting adjourned at 9:45 a.m. on Au-
gust 1, 2018. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on July 3, 2018, the Com-
mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
mittee meeting held on June 12–13, 2018. 

 

 

 

_____________________________ 
James A. Clouse 

Secretary

 

                                                 
6 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of 
the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea-
sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such 
rates. 

Page 12                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee




